Story_ID: 621802
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Solomon Carson, Sr., B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, S-O-L-O-M-O-N, C-A-R-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September the 18th, 1951, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: All right.  And is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a neurosurgeon.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 7/12/2010 [July 12, 2010].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: And we're in my home in my living room.
Story_ID: 621803
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they'll only take a, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is vegetarian chili.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you're in the SDA, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Seventh-day Adventists.  And they are vegetarians for the most--
Speaker 2: I would say 50 to 60 percent are vegetarians.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.   And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is the Amalfi Coast [Italy].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, the what coast?
Speaker 2: Amalfi Coast in Italy.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-M-A-L-F-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That would probably come from the Bible.  And it would be Proverbs 3:5-6.
Speaker 1: And what are they, do you, do you remember?  Can you say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it says, "Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not unto your own understanding, in all your ways acknowledge Him and He will direct your paths."
Story_ID: 621804
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Carson III] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her name is Sonya, S-O-N-Y-A Carson [Sonya Copeland Carson].  It used to be Johnnie Carson before it became Sonya Carson.
Speaker 1: What was it actually?  It was John- Johnnie first?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--
Speaker 1: What's the story behind that change?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't like that because so many people confused her with (laughter) with the real Johnny Carson until they saw her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's spelled with I-E (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Copeland.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Unclear, because her birth records were destroyed in a fire, but we think it's the 24th of December 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Chattanooga [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were your ancestors doing?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I have a chart on the wall over there that traces them all the way back to my great-great-great-great-great-grandfather [sic. great-great-great-grandfather], John Ash, who was born in Africa in 1770.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about, about him that are passed down (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was, he was a slave.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He was captured and brought here.
Speaker 1: What part of Africa was he captured from?
Speaker 2: In--well, they did the DNA studies.  And it looks like, my people were probably from the Kenya, Tanzania area.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unusual in--
Speaker 2: It is unusual--
Speaker 1: Yeah, very.
Speaker 2: --'cause most slaves came from the other side.
Speaker 1: From West Africa, right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --rather than east?  Yeah.  So, is there, okay, so are there any stories that are passed down through the family about him at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The way I even found about it was 'African American Lives,' the series that Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] did.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they went back and did a lot of research, and I knew relatively little about my family before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they, did--was he a slave in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Was, yeah, our--John Ash was a slave, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Tennessee or probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Harris, Harris County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Harris County, Georgia, okay, okay.  So, okay.  Then as time went on, the family--you, your ancestors migrated to Tennessee, I guess, on that side?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which I don't think it's terribly far from here.  Harris County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there any ancestral stories by any of your ancestors through slavery or Reconstruction that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Not that were passed down but there are some stories, like I had two ancestors, a brother and a sister that were slaves.  And one was sold, and they vowed to each other that they would find each other someday, and after the emancipation, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that revealed through the Skip Gates--?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, that's a matter of public record now, and that's probably all on the library--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 621805
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Sonya Copeland Carson] side?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on her side, I never saw the grandfather [John Copeland].
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Ruby [Ruby Stanley Copeland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter)--tried to survive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they, were they sharecroppers or farmers or they--?
Speaker 2: Well, they lived in a rural area of Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a lot of children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, your mother was one of a lot of children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: How many were in her family?
Speaker 2: Well, we know specifically of fourteen but, apparently, there were several that were stillborn or that died shortly after birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she talk about growing up in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, she said, you know, she was passed around from home to home, lived with some of her older siblings.  She lived in lots of different places and wasn't really able to complete her education, dropped out in the third grade, got married when she was thirteen.
Speaker 1: Now what's the story behind that?
Speaker 2: Well, she was looking to escape.  And you know, my father [Robert Carson III] was also from Chattanooga, and he was one of fourteen children.  And he was much older than she was and promised her the moon.  They got married and moved to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then, you know, some years later, she found out that he was already married and had another family.
Speaker 1: Now, being married at thirteen is something that is very unusual today, but in those days, it wasn't as unusual as all that.
Speaker 2: It was unusual, but it wasn't as unusual--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as it is, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  I know the story of Jerry Lee Lewis or somebody marrying his thirteen year old cousin [Myra Gale Brown]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and other people from the '50s [1950s], that was, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --something that did happen.
Speaker 2: Especially in the, in the back hills--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --of Tennessee.
Story_ID: 621806
Speaker 1: So let, let me then turn to your father's side for a moment, then we'll get back to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --her [Carson's mother, Sonya Copeland Carson].  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Robert Solomon Carson, R-O-B-E-R-T, S-O-L-O-M-O-N, C-A-R-S-O-N [Robert Carson III].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I noticed that Solomon appears in your name and his.  Is there a story behind why there's a Solomon?
Speaker 2: I, well, I don't, I don't know where he got his from.  I got mine from him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December the 27th, I think it was around 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, about fourteen years' difference between your mother and your father's ages then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  Did Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] do research on that side, too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I, you know, remember them as a young child visiting and things like that, but I couldn't tell you any real stories about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there was no--okay.  But he was, was he born in Chattanooga [Tennessee] as well or in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from the Chattanooga also.
Speaker 1: And he was, himself, was a minister, right?
Speaker 2: He was a, yeah, he was a Baptist minister--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a factory worker in a Cadillac plant.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when he moved to Detroit [Michigan], he got a job in a Cadillac plant?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And they were, they were actually very successful.  He and my mother, they were able to acquire several properties, and probably were on their way to accumulating a fair amount of wealth because my mother, even though she didn't have much education, she's a very good manager.  And then, he kind of got into drugs and things, and he goofed, you know, messed everything up so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was his other family in Tennessee or in Detroit?
Speaker 2: No, Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he already had a family when he married her--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Tennessee.  And then, he brought, was he already living in Detroit?
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know how all that transpired.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's the upshot of it is that, okay.
Story_ID: 621807
Speaker 1: Now is there a story that, that your mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] passed down about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, she just said that, you know, he [Carson's father, Robert Carson III] was a dashing young man, you know, fancy dresser.  And he just promised her the world and, you know, she was looking to escape what was an untenable environment for her.  So she jumped at the opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what year were they married?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Well, she was born in '28 [1928], and she was thirteen, so that would have been about 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So they were married a while before you were born.  You were born in what, '51 [1951] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-one [1951].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, about ten years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you have a brother [Curtis Carson], too, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And when was he born, you said?
Speaker 2: In 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you, okay, all right.  Now when you think about your parents' personalities--now I don't know how well you knew your father, but when you consider their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you--and even what they look like--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I have no doubt that I take a lot after my mother.  But I'm sure there were some traits that came from my father, like, you know, he was calm, and I'm calm, although I wasn't always.  But I think mostly, I'm like her because she is one of those people who never gives up and, you know, never feels like she's the victim, and always feels like she can do something, no matter what the circumstances are.  And I pretty much adapted that same mindset.
Story_ID: 621808
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think some of my earliest vivid memories, I think, come from, you know, kindergarten [Fisher School, Detroit, Michigan], going to kindergarten, and sitting on the rug and singing songs, learning how to walk to school, and walk back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started school in Detroit [Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What side of town did you all live on in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Southwestern Detroit.
Speaker 1: It's al- always in southwestern Detroit?
Speaker 2: Or in Delray [Detroit, Michigan], part of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had moved to Boston [Massachusetts], and when we came back, you know, we couldn't afford to live over in Southwest Detroit [Detroit, Michigan].  We lived in Delray.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was the neighborhood like at Southwest Detroit when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: It was a nice neighborhood, I think.  I mean, I probably wouldn't think it was that nice now, but at that time, you know, they were little G.I. homes.  And, you know, they're small, nine hundred square feet, but, and they each had a little plot, a little yard, with a little grass in it.  And, so people were very, very proud of their, you know, little, little homes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in your household, it was your mother [Sonya Copeland Carson], father [Robert Carson III], at least until you were eight years old--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it was your mother and your father, your brother [Curtis Carson]--
Speaker 2: And myself.
Speaker 1: --and your, okay, okay.  And did anybody else live with you, any grandparents or cousins--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or any- anybody else?
Speaker 2: No, that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the household was just a nuclear family basically (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Story_ID: 621809
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  And I guess you could talk, talk about Boston [Massachusetts], too, as well as Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because you spent two years in Boston, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there--I mean, that was a distinctly different existence when we got to Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, maybe, maybe, yeah, so we'll just talk about one, and maybe talk about the other, and the difference between them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well, you know, Detroit, to me, it seemed kind of like an idyllic place.  Like I said, you know, everybody had their nice little yard and kept the grass mowed, and put their little flowers in, and tried to keep their property up because they were homeowners.  They weren't renting.  They actually owned the homes.  And, you know, my mother [Sonya Copeland Carson], you know, tried to make things pleasant and she, you know, she cooked, and cooked great chili.  Back in those times, we weren't vegetarians, so just regular chili, but it was good.  And she canned, she knew how to can things and, you know, I really remember my father [Robert Carson III] would come home.  I would always be looking for him, walking down the alley, and I'd go to meet him.  And we had a little garage, and it was a, it wasn't attached, it was a detached garage.  But still, it just seemed like a very nice existence, something that I longed for later on when we moved to Boston--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was extraordinarily different because, you know, we lived with my mother's older sister [Mattie Copeland Morris] and brother-in-law [Robert Morris, Sr.].  Typical tenement--large multi family dwelling, boarded up windows and doors, sirens and gangs, rats and roaches--the whole nine yards, lots of violence.  Both of my older cousins were killed.  I mean, it was just--
Speaker 1: Both of them were killed while you were there?
Speaker 2: One was killed when I was there.  One was killed after we left.  I mean it was just, it was just bad news.
Speaker 1: Is this--
Speaker 2: A lot of drug addicts and drug dealers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is this Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in that area.  And, you know, I surely can remember, you know, like sitting on the porch, and just looking at disheveled people, and watching the sun rise behind other houses, and it was an interesting place.
Story_ID: 621810
Speaker 1: Now did you have a lot of friends in Detroit [Michigan] when you were, you know, before you moved to Boston [Massachusetts], in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean, sort of average, I guess, for a kid.  And we certainly knew the people in the neighborhood and, you know, and the people at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you live in the same place in Boston the whole time or did you move around (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, we lived on 37 Stanwood [Street] the first time, and then we lived on 6 Glenway [Street] the second time.  In both cases, it was pretty bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did it affect your education any going, you know, going to school and--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it did because, you know, we went to a parochial school where you had, you know, four classes in one room, and one teacher, teaching all four, you know, grades at the same time.  And, you know, primarily, he taught you how to sing and learn lots of new songs.  But we really didn't get much in the way of academic training, so when we did move back to Detroit, I was pretty far behind.
Speaker 1: So, this was a Catholic school in Boston?
Speaker 2: No, it was the Adventist school [at Berea Seventh-day Adventist Church, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Seventh-day Adventist school.
Speaker 1: Oh, Seventh-day Adventist, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But not typical of Seventh-day Adventist schools by any stretch of the imagination.  It was, it was an inadequate educational facility.
Speaker 1: So, did you always go to SDA schools or--
Speaker 2: That was the only year.
Speaker 1: The only--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The rest of my schooling was public school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you all were in Boston for, for two years--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) straight, or did you--
Speaker 2: We came back briefly, and then returned.
Story_ID: 621811
Speaker 1: So it must have been tough on your mother [Sonya Copeland Carson].  That was a lost income when your father [Robert Carson III] left.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very difficult and, you know, she had to work two and three jobs at a time.  Sometimes we didn't see her for several days.
Speaker 1: So, it wasn't like he left and had money that he could send, but he was--
Speaker 2: Well, he was supposed to send the money.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You said he was on drugs and other things, so he probably--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, she used to, you know, take him to court.  And he said, "Okay, I'll pay you alimony," then he wouldn't pay.  And after a while, she just said, to for, forget about it.
Speaker 1: So, was he still working at Cadillac and, you know--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he did have money, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he could have paid if he wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you see much of him in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from time to time, we would see him, yeah.  He lived in a multi family dwelling with--he just had one room and I remember he used to love gold chains and necklaces and stuff like that, and he was into, you know, fancy clothes and, you know.  And, of course, he was into drugs and women and all these things, and, you know, in the long run, I guess it was probably better that we really didn't grow up in his influence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was church a big part of growing up?  You know, he was a Baptist minister, I guess, you, did you all go to his church in the early days?
Speaker 2: No, no, we went to the Adventist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And he went to it, too.  He went to the Adventist church on Saturday and the Baptist church on Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, your, it was your mother then that first developed an interest in the SDA [Seventh-day Adventist]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And did she develop that, once she, after she moved to Detroit [Michigan] or before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when she was in Detroit, and she was in the hospital for some reason.  And there was a woman named Mary Thomas [ph.] who started talking to her about the church, and that's how she got involved.
Story_ID: 621812
Speaker 1: So when you came back to Detroit [Michigan], you say you were sort of behind in your schooling, right.
Speaker 2: Markedly, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I read some place where, where either you said, or somebody said, you were the dumbest kid in Detroit or something or--
Speaker 2: Well, they--I was called the dummy, and we were having an argument one day about who was the dumbest kid in the school.  And, of course, I was tagged with that, but then someone tried to say, "Who's the dumbest person in the world?"  And I said, "I don't think that's correct."  They said, "Yes, it is--you are" (laughter).  That's probably what you heard.
Speaker 1: Now, we were--
Speaker 2: And, you know, to make it worse, you know, in Delray [Detroit, Michigan], where we lived, you know, it was very interesting the way it was divided up, you know, racially.  But we lived right on the edge of where it changed from black to white, so we were assigned to go to the white school.  And so, I was, you know, the only black kid in the class.  And so, you couple that with being the dummy (laughter), that was pretty bad.
Speaker 1: And so, the white kids were actually calling you the dumbest kid in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now what was the status of these white kids in Detroit?  Were they working class kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah, working class.  This is, was, this was, you know, lower middle class setting.
Speaker 1: And I didn't realize it before, but historians in Detroit have told me that just as black migrants, you know, came in Detroit for the jobs in the auto plants, you know, whites did, too, from Appalachia and--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --Kentucky, Tennessee, and other places.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Detroit was a very, very segregated city.
Speaker 1: You know, they--some of the same practices were imported, you know, from the South (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Story_ID: 621813
Speaker 1: So, you know, none of that did anything good for my self-esteem, needless to say.  And, you know, it was only the, the fact that, you know, my mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] was so concerned about the fact that we were doing--both my brother [Curtis Carson] and I were doing so poorly in school.  And she just didn't know what to do, and she prayed, and asked God to give her wisdom.  And, you know, in homes where she worked, and, you know, she noticed a lot of books, and she noticed the people, and these were very successful people, didn't do a lot of people watching.  And they did a lot of book reading, and that's, I think, where she came up with the idea of turning off the TV, and making us read books.  She said, "You're gonna be successful like those people."  And she would even take us out to the homes sometimes where she worked, and say, "Look at this neighborhood, look at these houses.  Now, look where we live."  And then, she'd say, "You know, you have a choice.  You can, you can choose which place you want to be in.  It's just a matter of whether you decide to prepare yourself or not."  And those things made an impression on me.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, you know, initially, when she said we could only watch two or three TV programs during the week, and had to spend all that rest of the time doing our homework and reading books, and submitting to her two book reports each week from the library.  And I thought that was cruel and unusual punishment.  But after a few weeks, I actually began to enjoy it because even though we were very, very poor, between the covers of those books, I could go anywhere, I could be anybody, I could do anything.  I began to know stuff that nobody else knew, and it was empowering.  And all of a sudden, those feelings of, you know, inadequacy and inferiority were starting to melt away.
Speaker 2: What were some of your favorite books in those days?
Speaker 1: They were animal books, you know, 'Chip: The Dam Builder' [Jim Kjelgaard], a book about a beaver.  'Call of the Wild' ['The Call of the Wild,' Jack London].  You know, I just loved those kinds of books.  I read all the animal books in the Detroit public libraries.  And then I went to plants, and then I went to rocks.
Speaker 2: Now, did you use a branch library, or did you go down to the Burton [Burton Historical Collection, Detroit, Michigan]?  I mean, to the--
Speaker 1: Initially, we used the branch library.  After we pretty much exhausted that, we started going out to the main library in downtown Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Well, Detroit is unique that the Detroit Institute of the Arts [sic. Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan] and the library and--
Speaker 1: Right, they're all right together there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All there together, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And if, I don't know if you saw the movie ['Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story'], but it had a scene of my brother and me in the Detroit, in the major branch of the Detroit public library downstairs.  It was really a beautiful building.
Story_ID: 621814
Speaker 1: We were talking about the cultural center, they call it in Detroit [Michigan], with the cultural institutions--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --including the big library downtown.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the Detroit Institute of Arts [Detroit, Michigan], Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], the Main Branch of the library [Detroit Public Library Main Branch, Detroit, Michigan]--those were my stomping grounds.  Those were places where I decided that I could really significantly augment my education because I had come to the conclusion that I probably was not going to get an adequate education if I just did what was expected of me which was not much.  And, you know, most of the teachers really couldn't teach very much, not that they weren't, you know, well versed in teaching, but because there's so many discipline problems.  They spent the whole day disciplining people, so they didn't get to teach the lesson, and that was particularly the case in biology.  I remember poor Mr. (Unclear).  He could never teach anything 'cause the kids were just so rowdy.  But I would go back after school to my teachers and ask them, "What were you planning to teach today?"  And they actually looked forward to me coming back 'cause they know somebody was going to learn something.  And I became the lab assistant in biology, chemistry, and physics, setting up the experiments and, of course, if I set them up, I had to know what was going to happen.  So, even though the lesson didn't actually get taught, I got to learn all the stuff I needed to learn.
Speaker 1: Now, I was, as you were saying that you, you know, we're talking about the turnaround in academics, you know, a lot of parents, you know, turn off the TV, and they try to tell their children to read books, but it don't work.  And when you said your mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] expected to see a book report, so she actually followed up on this?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And, of course, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You think that made a difference in--
Speaker 2: It made a big difference in the beginning.  We didn't know that she couldn't read.  You know, she would put little check marks, and underline, and highlight, and stuff.  But it made a difference in the beginning, but after a while I actually began to enjoy reading.  I began to enjoy knowing things.  It was empowering to me.  And, particularly, as I started reading stories about people, the book 'Up from Slavery,' about Booker T. Washington, you know, taught himself to read even though it was illegal, read everything in sight, became an advisor to presidents.  You know, those stories inspired me because everybody hates certain things.  Some people hate spiders.  Some people hate rats, snakes.  I hated poverty.  And as I was reading, it began to dawn on me that I didn't have to be poor--that that was a choice, and that it was completely within my powers to change my circumstances.  And that was just such a revelation to me, and I began to realize, you know, all I got to do is become extremely well educated.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you kind of made this turnaround?  You came back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About fourteen--
Speaker 1: I think, around when you were about ten when you were called the dumbest kid--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Detroit.  So you were about fourteen when you made your--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, recognizing that by the time I was twelve, I was at the top of the class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, the transition was fairly dramatic.  So, I was with the same kids in the seventh grade that I was with in the fifth grade, who thought I was stupid.  The same kids in the seventh grade were always coming to me for the answers.  It was, it was, it was a major, major transition.  And the kids were perfectly fine with it.  Some of the teachers were not so cool with it.
Speaker 1: Now, I read somewhere that the, some of the teachers held you up as example of you're letting this colored kid, this black kid, like outperform you?
Speaker 2: Well, there was--
Speaker 1: To encourage them to do better (laughter)?
Speaker 2: --there was, there was this scene in the movie ['Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story'], where in the eighth grade, we were having the awards ceremony for academic performance.  And, you know, I was this student with the highest academic performance.  And one of the teachers got up and, basically, told the white kids, they should be ashamed of themselves--says, you know, "Here's a boy from a single home, a boy of color, and you're letting him outperform you?  It's ridiculous."  And, you know, the kids, they were embarrassed, not because I had done better, but these kids knew me, you know, I was one of them.  They were rolling their eyes and, you know, pointing to her saying, "Is she crazy," you know.  And they were just embarrassed, you know, because of what she was saying.  They had no problem with it.
Story_ID: 621815
Speaker 1: Now, also, I mean that you, you still had some, some issues, though, from what I've read.  Now, I haven't seen the movie ['Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story']--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had some big issues.
Speaker 1: --and I'm probably one of the few people that hasn't seen the movie.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you were fourteen around the time that this was, this was, had to be around nineteen sixty (audiovisual disturbance)--
Speaker 2: Five [1965].
Speaker 1: --five [1965], '66 [1966].  Now this is approaching the riot years in Detroit [Michigan] and the urban unrest, and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did that have any effect on your attitude at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I was just, I just had a bad temper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of those people who thought they had a lot of rights and, therefore, people are always infringing upon my rights.  And, you know, I would become violent when people infringed on my rights.
Speaker 1: Now there was a story that you almost stabbed a friend of yours.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was changing a station that I was listening to, and I happened to have a large camping knife.  And, you know, I would become completely irrational, and I tried to stab him, I tried to kill him.  And, fortunately, he had on a large metal belt buckle under his clothing, and the knife blade struck it with such force that it broke.  And he, of course, fled in terror, but I was more terrified than he is.  I recognized I was trying to kill somebody, that I was completely 100 percent out of control.  And, you know, I locked myself in the bathroom, and I just, and I just fell on my knees and started praying, recognizing that had he not had that belt buckle on, I would have been on my way to jail or reform school.
Speaker 1: Now I also read that you tried to hit your mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] with a hammer or something at some point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was trying to get me to wear something--I didn't want to wear it.  I picked up a hammer and went to hit her in the head with it.  Fortunately, my brother [Curtis Carson] caught it from behind before it found its target, but I was completely irrational.  When I got mad, I didn't really care what the consequences was.  I just wanted to hurt somebody.
Speaker 1: And do you think that was a result of frustration of, like the social slippage you experienced when your father [Robert Carson III] left, and now you as a--
Speaker 2: I'm sure all of that probably played into it, but I think it's primarily because I was selfish.  You know, everything was about me, you know, people were infringing upon my rights.  People were in my space.  People were doing this and that to me.  They were changing my radio station.  And, you know, when, you know, the day of the stabbing, you know, as I was praying and just telling the Lord, I thought my life was going to end because I couldn't control the temper.  And I picked up the Bible, and just started reading, and there were all these verses about anger.  Like Proverbs 19:19, it says, there's no point getting an angry man out of trouble 'cause he's just going to get right back in it.  But then, there were encouraging verses like Proverbs 16:32--it says, mightier is the man who can control his temper than the man who can conquer a city.  And there were also a lot of verses about fools.  And as I was reading them, I said, "Wow, that sounds like me."  And, you know, I just, for the three hours that I was in that bathroom, I resolved that I wasn't going to be angry anymore because I realized that to get angry, to lash out at somebody, was not a sign of strength, but rather a sign of weakness.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, what made you decide to read about, read those passages in the Bible about anger?
Speaker 2: The Bible was just sitting there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, no- nobody said, "Hey, go read these passages.  They'll make you, you know, feel better" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think God probably told me to do it.  But, you know, that day represented a profound change in my life.  I've never been, had another outburst since that time.
Speaker 1: So, do you think that's really the root of anger management problems and self-centeredness?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's largely it.  Most angry people are self-centered people.  It's about them.  And once you learn how to step outside the circle, look at things from other people's view, everything isn't aimed at you.  And, actually, it becomes very difficult for people to make you angry once you do that.  It was this tremendous sense of empowerment that I had at that point.  So, then, I really, I was in really good shape then 'cause I had turned things around academically.  And now, once I had control of the temper, you know, I was unstoppable.
Speaker 1: Well, I know in everybody's life, somebody's going to test that whatever resolve you make.  Did you have, did you have your anger control problems tested--
Speaker 2: Oh, many times, many times, but it didn't work.
Speaker 1: Can you think of an instance where you--
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: --an instance where you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember when I was an intern, and our chief resident was a redneck from Georgia.  And, you know, he wanted me kicked out of the program.  So, he was trying to make me angry, so that I would react, so that he'd have grounds, you know, to report me.  He couldn't do it.  And everything he said, I would say, "Are you finished, are you finished now?  Good, 'cause I got work to do."  He couldn't make me angry.
Story_ID: 621816
Speaker 1: Now this is all taking place during your, I guess, the mid-years of high school as you're, you really now have, you feel like you have control of things?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I guess, when you're about fifteen, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, fourteen, fifteen, and then, you know, I joined the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And, you know, that was another major influence in my life.  You know, I got teased a lot because of my clothes.  Clothes were a big deal in Detroit [Michigan].  You had to have your sharkskins and your silks, and all of this stuff and--
Speaker 1: You know, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) silk and wool.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, we didn't have money for that, so I got teased a lot.  And one day I saw a guy in an ROTC uniform, had three diamonds on his shoulder.  He was a full colonel, the highest rank you could obtain--had all the ribbons and metals, and I was just blown away.  I said, "Wow, that's cooler than any of these things these guys wear."  I said, "I think I'm going to join the ROTC."  And, unfortunately, you know, I joined in the last half of the tenth grade, instead of the first half.  You're supposed to join in the first half, so you have six full semesters, but at least I was in, even though I joined late.  But by that time, you know, I was into my reading phase, into my high aspiration phase, so anything that I did, you know, I just felt, you know, I had to reach the top.  And so, I wanted to be a full colonel, even though I joined late, and no one had ever done that.  And I made it to full colonel after only four semesters, but I resolved that that was my goal.  I was going to become a full colonel somehow.  And, you know, I studied all the manuals.  I knew all the military strategies, the map reading, the guns, everything.  And after my first semester, I got promoted to sergeant.  And the fellow who was in charge of ROTC, you know, he knew I was very ambitious.  So, he said, "You know what, if I put you in charge of the second hour class, and you can do something with it, I'll promote you to second lieutenant."  And that would have been a big jump because that would have allowed me to sit for the field grade exam.  Well, that second hour class, they were just horrendous.  And the reason that they ran everybody out, you know, they were violent, they were just unruly, and, but I discovered very quickly that they had a great affinity for guns and knives.  And, so I said, "I bet we can use this to our advantage," and I got them involved with disassembling and reassembling rifles.  I said, "I bet you guys can become the fastest people in the city who can do this."  And then, with drills and with fancy drills, and all kinds of stuff, and long story short, they became the premiere unit in the school.  And so, I got promoted to second lieutenant after only my second semester.  And that allowed me to sit for the field grade exam which you have to be at least a second lieutenant.  You can be a first lieutenant, captain, major, lieutenant colonel.  And I got the highest score in the city, so I got promoted to lieutenant colonel.  And I still had another semester.  And I did the same thing the next year, and I got promoted to full colonel, and became the city executive officer for the City of Detroit.
Speaker 1: Now, you were at Southwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I got to go to Congressional Medal of Honor dinners, and to lead the front of the Memorial Day parade.  And I met General Westmoreland [William Westmoreland], who is charge of the [U.S.] Army at that time--all kinds of stuff.  I was offered a full scholarship to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  But then, I decided, it's not really what I want to do.  I really wanted to be a doctor.
Story_ID: 621817
Speaker 1: You graduated in '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --from Southwestern [Southwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan].  Can you remember, just looking at some of the things going on the national scene, do you remember what was going on when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, how--?
Speaker 2: I remember very vividly that day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, there were riots in our school.  And, you know, Southwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] was, you know, 80 percent black, and the black kids wanted to kill all the white kids.  And, you know, I was a, I was a lab assistant.  And I remember very distinctly, I was trying to hide the white kids in the lab, so they wouldn't get beat up.  But it was, it was a very turbulent time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--now I know you mentioned your mother's [Sonya Copeland Carson] influence and, you know, your own self-directed reading, but were there any individuals that served as a mentor, or a model, role model for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my biggest mentor is, quite frankly, with dead people, like Booker T. Washington.  You know, just reading his story told me that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you, is you.  It's not your environment that you live in.  It's not all these silly people around you telling you what you can't do.  And then, Joseph in the Bible, a huge mentor of mine, even though he was dead many centuries ago because he was sold into slavery by his own brothers, and he didn't become the victim.  He said, "Well, if I'm going to be a slave, I'll be the best slave there is."  And then, he becomes the head of the captain of the Egyptian guards' household, Potiphar's household.  Then Potiphar's first wife sees him, and said, "Well, he's a good looking dude, I want to deal with him," but he has principles and he, you know, he rebuffs her advances.  And she tells a lie on him, he gets thrown into jail.  He doesn't say, "Here I am trying to be a man of values and principles, and where do I end up, in jail?"  And he says, "No, if I'm going to be the prisoner, I'll be the best prisoner there is."  And he ends up with a responsible position in the jail, interprets dreams, and ends up as the prime minister of the most powerful nation in the world.  Those kinds of stories had a tremendous impact on me and made me realize, it doesn't really matter what anybody else says, it really doesn't matter.  It really depends on where you want to go, and how you want to get there.
Speaker 1: Now, had they started teaching African American history in the public schools in your school?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time.
Speaker 1: Not at that time, okay.  That's about the era that it started around '68 [1968], '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that had its big moment, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then and now, it's not taught as much as it was.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I just wanted--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't, we didn't get really any, any black history.
Story_ID: 621818
Speaker 1: Detroit [Michigan], in those days, was like a center for, you know, black consciousness movement, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you pay attention to any of that in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, remember, in '69 [1969], I left Detroit--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And went to New Haven [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: But it was going on in '67 [1967], '68 [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and there was a lot of consciousness going on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Black Panther movement [Black Panther Party], you know, May Day, where the Panthers threatened to burn down Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], a lot of activism, hippies, free love--the whole nine yards.  I mean, it was an enormously different place than what I was used to.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose Yale, how did you choose Yale?
Speaker 2: Well, I only had enough money to apply to one college and--
Speaker 1: So, there's a fee?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So one of my favorite TV programs was 'College Bowl.'  I don't know if you remember that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'GE College Bowl' ['The General Electric College Bowl'], right.
Speaker 2: 'GE College Bowl,' yeah, and I watched it religiously every week.  And I said, "Well, I'm going to apply to the college that wins the grand championship in 'College Bowl.'"  And that year, it was between Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale.  And Yale demolished Harvard, so I said, "Well, I'm going to apply to Yale."  It was the only school I applied to.  And, you know, I was so naive at that time, I didn't realize how stupid that was, but I got accepted with a scholarship so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you work in high school [Southwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan]?  Did you have a job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a science lab assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that paid you actually?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I read that you were, but I didn't know if that was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --actually a job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Could you straighten your tie? There's a button--
Speaker 2: That was my--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There you go.
Speaker 2: --that was my first job.
Story_ID: 621819
Speaker 1: How did your brother [Curtis Carson] do?  Did he change, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He became a, a very good student.  He was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], too.  He was a company commander.  He was a captain, and that inspired me, too.  And then, he went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] but--
Speaker 1: So, he'd already gone to the University of Michigan when you applied to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  And then, you know, the lottery came up, the draft.  And he got a very low number, so he knew he was going to be drafted.  So, he joined the [U.S.] Navy--he said, "At least, let me get the branch that I want."
Speaker 1: Now, what, there was a student deferment, I know, in those days, even though they had the lottery.  So did, what happened, was he then, off from the summer break or something or what happened then?
Speaker 2: No, the student deferment was enforced before the lottery.  But after the lottery, you would have to have some very compelling reason not to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we knew we didn't have any compelling reasons.  You have to have some major connections and things like that 'cause that was supposed to sort of get rid of the preferential treatment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your brother, he was just a couple of years older than you--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but did you have, did he have an influence on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because, you know, he was sort of the groundbreaker.  Yeah, he was, you know, became the company commander in ROTC.  And he worked in the science lab before I worked in the science lab, and I always looked up to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I'm glad I asked about him, so we get him in there, too.  So now, he, he, he went on to become an en- engineer?  Is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, and his name is Curtis [Curtis Carson], so--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: And his wife is a physician.
Story_ID: 621820
Speaker 1: So, Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] accepts you.  Now did they give you, they, they give you a full ride?
Speaker 2: You know, 90 plus percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, had you ever been to Connecticut--well, you'd been to Boston [Massachusetts], that's close, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not to Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'd never been on an airplane.  When I, when I flew off to Yale, that was the first time I'd ever been on an airplane.  I'd never been in a restaurant.  There were a whole lot of things I'd never done.  It was, it was like a revolution in my world.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Were you, how did, did you, were you self-conscious about not having done these things or, you know, when you got to Yale or around so many people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--
Speaker 1: --who do this all the time?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean, I was wild out, you know.  You would see all these people, you know, from all these famous families, and you'd see their kids (background noise), and you'd see people driving up in the limousines, and all kinds of stuff.  And, you know, it didn't intimidate me so much as it made me say, "You know, one day, that'll be me" (laughter).  That's the way I thought about it.
Speaker 1: Well, give us an example of who was in school with you that people would just know their name?
Speaker 2: Oh, like the automobile families of Detroit [Michigan], the, you know, people who own the rubber companies like, you know, Firestone [Firestone Tire and Rubber Company], and major stores, and store chains, and things like that so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what was your major?  Did you have a major right away (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was a psychology major.
Speaker 1: Now, why psychology?
Speaker 2: Because I intended to become a psychiatrist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I figured that would be the best major and--
Speaker 1: What inspired you, that--now, your work is, has involved the human head, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: The brain, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, the brain.  So, as a psychologist and as a psychiatrist and as a neurosurgeon--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like were you always interested in how people thought and behaved and--
Speaker 2: Not really.  The reason I wanted to be a psychiatrist is mercenary.  I--when I would see a psychiatrist on TV, they seemed like really rich people, you know.  They drove Jaguars and lived in the big, fancy mansions and had these big plush offices.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm thinking about the era.  We're about the same age.  I think the most famous TV psychiatrist was probably Bob Newhart from Bob Newhart's show ['The Bob Newhart Show'].
Speaker 2: Probably--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --but a lot of times when you would see the movies, and there would be a psychiatrist in it, and they always only dealt with very rich people.  And it just--I said, "You know, I think that will work well for me."  And, you know, I fully intended to become a psychiatrist when I got to medical school.  If you told me I was going to be something other than a psychiatrist, I'd have told you you were crazy.  But--
Speaker 1: So, it's purely mercenary?  You had no interest really in how people thought or--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I enjoyed it.  I enjoyed psychology, I enjoyed abnormal psychology.  I took classes from Anna Freud, Sigmund Freud's daughter, Erik Erikson--all these famous people.  And so, you know, I mean, it did appeal to me.  I was reading Psychology Today when I was in high school [Southwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan].  My brother [Curtis Carson] bought me a prescription [sic. subscription] because he knew I, I wanted to be a psychiatrist.  And I was the local shrink.  Everybody brought me their problems.  And I enjoyed it--it was great.
Story_ID: 621821
Speaker 1: But when I got to medical school, you know, I, I asked myself, "What are you really, really good at?"  Because I think God gives everybody special gifts and talents.  And I realized I had a lot of eye hand coordination and the ability to think in three dimensions.  And I was very careful.  I never knocked things over and said, "Oops," and I loved to dissect things, take things apart.  And I said, "You know, those are the kinds of skills that would make you into a terrific neurosurgeon.  Doesn't mean you wouldn't be a good psychiatrist--but you wouldn't be taking advantage of your special gifts and talents."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that's how I made the transition.  And, of course, at that time, there'd only ever been eight black neurosurgeons in the world.  And a lot of people thought that was really a strange choice for me.  But, to me, it felt as natural as anything could be.
Speaker 2: Now, did you meet any of those neurosurgeons when you--
Speaker 1: Not at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I saw a picture of one of them 'cause he had been at the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he had, he had died, but, you know, he was--they had his picture up.
Speaker 2: Well, you said, you know, since we've started this interview, that all your mentors were dead already and stuff.  But did you meet any live people that, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], that inspired you that, you know, as an undergraduate--any, any black folks over there that--
Speaker 1: Not really--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --no.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think who--I know the, I think, Julius Lester might have been there, or John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame], a historian.  I'm trying, just trying to think of people I know.
Speaker 1: If they were there, I didn't meet them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, you know, it wasn't, you know, I was just, I was just a different kind of person, I guess, in the sense that it really didn't matter to me what color a person was, as to whether they inspired me or not.  What inspired me was anybody who could, like take advantage of a situation, and really use it to their advantage to achieve what they're trying to achieve.  And people who sort of kept their eyes open all the time and looked for what should be obvious, but most people can't see.  Those, those kinds of people really inspired me and, and were the kind of people that I modeled myself after.
Story_ID: 621822
Speaker 1: And I just wanted to go back to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and then ask you--I'm not, you know, and I asked you about African Americans 'cause this is an African American project--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and we'd like to know the names of other people that are inspiring us.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, like who, then at Yale, inspired you, period?  I know you mentioned Anna Freud was a teacher, but was she inspirational or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, she's interesting, as were many of the other professors, Ruth Day [Ruth S. Day], Jay Braun, there were a lot of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Erikson [Erik Erikson], you said was there--
Speaker 2: Right, as a visiting professor.  Wasserman [Harry H. Wasserman], the chemistry professor, very funny guy, a very good teacher.  I guess you could say he was somewhat inspirational.  But, again, I drew my inspiration primarily from people that I read about.  That's really what got me going.  Reading, reading had a profound impact on my life.  And it's one of the reasons that we have, you know, the Reading Room project.  And we sponsor all these reading rooms in schools around the country because I recognize what that can actually do for a person.
Story_ID: 621823
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, in, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I mean, did you stay in contact with your brother [Curtis Carson] 'cause I think while I'm hearing--well, I'm, I'm, I'm thinking that you and brother're kind of partners in--well, not in crime, but in success in, in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.  We've always, always stayed in contact--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and throughout the years.  And, you know, he has daughters, and I have sons [Murray Carson, Benjamin Carson, Jr. and Rhoeyce Carson].  We both have a child that went to Yale and, you know, he's been very successful in his own right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of times when people ask my mother [Sonya Copeland Carson], "I bet you're really proud of your son."  She says, "I really am, and I'm proud of Benjamin [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], too."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 621824
Speaker 1: At Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], now as you were saying before we even got to the college about what an exciting a place Yale was, and the Panthers [Black Panther Party] there, and all the social activism going on.  Even Kingman Brewster [Kingman Brewster, Jr.] was a celebrity on talk shows and such.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember him being on 'The Dick Cavett Show.'
Speaker 2: He was quite a character.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, I mean, how did all that affect you or did it, did you pay--you paid attention to, I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah--
Speaker 1: --'cause you talked about it?
Speaker 2: I paid attention to it.  I was, I was mostly just wild out all the time, you know, all these people, and all the great things they did and, you know, there was, like this nebulous group of people called the Yale Corporation, you know, who's the board of trustees and, you know, everybody was like, "Wow, the Yale Corporation's in town," and all these kinds of things, and, you know, there were the secret societies and--
Speaker 1: Oh, we heard a lot about, well, that Skull and Bones.
Speaker 2: Skull and Bones, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: Did you encounter any, any of those members or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: --that you knew of, okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't.  And, and I never dreamed that I would one day be a member of the Yale Corporation.  I just never even thought that that would happen.  And I never dreamed that I would one day be receiving an honorary degree from Yale, but, you know, life takes strange turns.
Speaker 1: Now, when were you well known on campus or did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --just participate in activities or--
Speaker 2: I just, you know, low run of the mill nerd type person (laughter).  People--I was well known in certain circles, like the table soccer circle.  People who played foosball, they all knew who I was, 'cause I was very, very good at foosball.
Speaker 1: Hand eye coordination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you if you, if you had participated in the sports at all in high school [Southwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: That was the only sport--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was foosball in college.  In high school, you know, my extracurricular was band and--
Speaker 1: You played the baritone horn?
Speaker 2: I played baritone, and won a scholarship to Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan] which was no small feat.  I would have been the first person at my high school to ever do that.  And the band teacher, Mr. Doakes [Lemuel Doakes], who was an African American, told me not to take it, even though it would have been a big feather in his cap.
Speaker 1: Why did he--
Speaker 2: He said, he said, "Benny [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], you're going to be a great doctor one day. I don't want you to get diverted."  So, you know, he was, he was concerned about me.
Speaker 1: So, he had pegged you as a doctor in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you saw yourself as a psychologist or psychiatrist, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's a doctor, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, and he knew that was my aspiration.  And, and he knew that I was, you know, different, and I guess he, he thought I was going to be great.
Story_ID: 621825
Speaker 1: Your degree was in psy- psychology, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And that's a jumping off point to going to be a psychiatrist, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And you were just explaining to us how you--well, how did you choose Michigan [University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, because I was from Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I would get in state tuition, plus there were a lot of grants available, particularly for minorities.  And so, it was a very, plus it was one of the ten top medical schools, so I said, "Boy, you can't beat that with a stick."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, oh, now, you met your wife at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.   So, tell us about that.  Now, when did you all meet?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we met actually before she went to Yale, at a reception for incoming students in Grosse Pointe Farms, Michigan (laughter).  And I was an upperclassman, so I was invited, and I was coming to, to meet the new people who were coming, so we could tell something about what it was like, and that was the first time we ever met.  But it wasn't until a couple of years later that we actually, you know, hooked up because it turns out that we both wanted to come back home for Thanksgiving.  And the recruitment office would pay your way back home if you would visit some schools while you were home.  And so, we went together on Yale's dime and, you know, we were going on, eating and having a good time, and we discovered we kind of liked each other.  So, you know, Yale was responsible for that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I read some place that you all, that you were doing a lot of driving, and almost ran into something or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, on the way back from that recruitment trip, you know, we had both probably stayed up later than we should've, and we needed to get the car back to New Haven [Connecticut].  It was a rented car.  And so, you know, we were just going, you know, drive straight through.  And it was about Youngstown, Ohio that I fell asleep at the wheel--she was already asleep--going ninety miles an hour.  And I was awakened by the vibrations, as the car was going off the road, and heading off into a ravine.  And, you know, I woke up, and I grabbed the wheel, and I started turning it.  And, you know, the car started spinning, just spinning around and around.  And they say, you see your life flash before your eyes before you die--that's exactly what happened.  All these scenes from my life, and I said, "I'm going to die."  And the next thing I knew, the car was stopped, and on the, on the lane next to the shoulder.  And just in time for me to pull off before an eighteen wheeler came barreling through.  And Candy [Candy Carson] woke up--she said, "What happened?"  I said, "Go back to sleep" (laughter).  She said, "No, no, no, what happened?"  And I told her what happened, and then we just, we said, "The Lord spared our lives.  He's got something for us to do."  And that was our first kiss, and that's when we started going together.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And that was the 28th of November 1972, so, we always celebrate the 28th of each month.  We call it our monthaversary (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was the day that our lives were spared.
Speaker 1: Now, your wife is a musician, right?
Speaker 2: Correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a music and psychology major.
Speaker 2: Right.  And she was premed, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She plays the violin?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, she threatened to play for us while we were doing the interviews--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --while I remember.  And your sons play, too, I understand (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they all play instruments and, you know, as they were growing up.  Along with my wife, they had a string quartet called the Carson Four, and they were really quite, quite talented.  And they got to play in places, like Las Vegas [Nevada] and Puerto Rico, and a lot of places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when you go to the University of Michigan Medical School, you are married by then, right, or are you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I was a couple of years ahead of Candy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went there, and then we got married when she graduated from Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we got married halfway through medical school.
Story_ID: 621826
Speaker 1: So, you, you were going initially to become a psychiatrist--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but you had a revelation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Changed my mind at the end of my first year--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and decided that I was going to go the neurosurgery route.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, well--
Speaker 2: And then, you know, medical school [University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] was a little traumatic, too, be- because I did poorly on the first set of comprehensive exam, and I was sent to see my counselor.  And he looked at my record and he said, "You seem like an intelligent young man.  I bet there are a lot of things you could do outside of medicine."  And he tried to convince me to drop out of medical school, said I was not cut out for medicine, and that I was just going to torment myself and everyone else.  And they could get me into another discipline, so I would have, not have to waste a whole year, 'cause we were only six weeks into it.  And, needless to say, that was pretty devastating--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --'cause I, all my life, I had wanted to be a doctor.  I finally get into medical school, and the person, who's supposed to shepherd me through, tells me to drop out.  So, you know, I just went back to my apartment, and I prayed and I said, "Lord, you got to help me, you got to help me figure this out.  I'm obviously not going to get any help from the university."  And, you know, I just started thinking about what kind of courses I struggled with historically, what kind of courses I did well in, historically, and I realized that I did well in courses where I did a lot of reading.  And I struggled in courses where I listen to a lot of boring lectures, 'cause I get nothing out of lectures that I don't enjoy--nothing at all.  And there I was listening to eight hours' worth of boring lectures every day.  So, I just made an executive decision to skip the boring lectures, and to spend that time reading.  And the rest of medical school was a snap after that.
Speaker 1: And did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I, when I went back to my medical school years later as a commencement speaker, I was looking for that counselor 'cause I was going to tell him he wasn't cut out to be a counselor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, so attendance didn't factor in, I guess, your grade, I guess, does it?
Speaker 2: No, because we had something on the scribes, and they were paid to write the notes.  And you also had your syllabus, and you had your books.  So, between those things, you know, I was able to, I would get up at six in the morning, and I would read until eleven at night, and I think I got a much better education than everybody else.
Story_ID: 621827
Speaker 1: You seem to have a talent.  I mean, you've described it over and over again now, and I'm finally getting this.  You have a talent for sequestering yourself away and absorbing information.
Speaker 2: That probably is true.
Speaker 1: Now, and you've described this again and again now.  I'm finally saying, "Oh, yeah, he--,"--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --(laughter) "--he's good at this," so all right.  So, that's, yeah, so that's, that was your approach and it, you know, it's interesting to hear somebody say that because I've never heard anybody else describe--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, finishing the course like that.
Speaker 2: And basically, what you have to do is learn how you learn.  Everybody learns differently.  Some people get a lot out of the boring lectures.  Some people learn from discussion groups.  Some people learn by repetition.  You know, it really--what a successful student will identify early on how they learn, and then, they will try to funnel everything into their strength and steer away from their weaknesses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, 'cause most people would think that they would have to do it the way that, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.  Most people try to put themselves in somebody else's mold.  It doesn't work, or at least it doesn't work optimally.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you, when you, do you think that the public schools should really try more creative approaches with the students in school today (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I would prefer to help the students to recognize that their education is their responsibility.  You know, I spoke to a group of eight hundred students today that, you know, they come from all over, and trying to get them to understand that the responsibility for their education is with them.  They're the ones who are going to benefit from it--not somebody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if, and if they know that, then they will do what is necessary in order to get a good education, just like I did what was necessary.  You know, people will always do what they need to do when they are appropriately incentivized.  You know, you take a bum on the street who says, "I'm a bum on the street, I don't have any money, I don't have a car, I don't have anything, I can't do anything--poor me!"  You convince that bum that if he can meet you in Bismarck, North Dakota, two days from now, you'll give him a million dollars.  Guess what?
Speaker 1: He'll be there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He'll be there (laughter).  People can do what they want to do, no matter what the circumstances are, and they will find six hundred excuses for what they don't want to do.
Story_ID: 621828
Speaker 1: So, once you realize how you learn, you are more successful.  And now, was it readily apparent that you were a good surgeon?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, the chairman of the neurosurgery department at Michigan, Richard Schneider, a very, very famous neurosurgeon, told me, he said, "Benny [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], if you want to be a neurosurgeon, I guarantee you a spot in our training program," 'cause they want me to stay there.  So things had changed by that time obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how--explain the process of becoming a neurosurgeon.  What do you--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you do your general surgery internship.  And in those days, you had to do two years of general surgery.  And then you do several years of neurosurgery, usually five, six, or seven years of neurosurgery.  And then, you become board eligible, and then you have to pass certain exams before you can become board certified.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you will have already achieved an M.D. before you actually become a neuro- neurosurgeon?
Speaker 2: Right, before you become an intern.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, it's a long, it's a long process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else about the University of Michigan before we take you to Johns Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, there's lots of things but--
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: --you could, we could, you could talk about that for hours (laughter).  And suffice it to say, you know, I got a good education there and I, and I got redirected to where I wanted to go.  And the reason I didn't stay there is because, you know, Dr. Schneider was getting older.  And I knew that he would retire before I finished my training program.  And you never want to be in a training program when the chairman retires 'cause you don't know what's going to happen, and there can be such upheaval.  Sometimes it's very smooth.  As it turns out, it was smooth at Michigan, but I had no guarantee of that.  So, I said, "Well, let me apply to the place that's best known for neurosurgery," which, of course, was Johns Hopkins.  And they only took two people out of 125 applicants so, you know, it wasn't a really good chance that I was going to get in, but it worked out.
Story_ID: 621829
Speaker 1: Did it [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] meet your expectations?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I knew it was the place that I wanted to be 'cause I, you know, I applied to all the top programs.  And the atmosphere at Hopkins was just different than it was everywhere else.  Everybody wasn't sort of, like walking around, all puffed up--I am the greatest, you know.  And I just loved that and that's probably why I've been there for thirty-three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Johns Hopkins, there's--now, I have to ask this.  You may not--I know you know, you probably heard of the individual I'm asking about, but when you were at Johns Hopkins, did you ever hear anything about Vivien Thomas?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was still, he was still active when I came, so I had a lot of, I had a lot of conversation with him.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us who, tell the people watching this, who Vivien Thomas is and his story (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Vivien Thomas was actually a surgical technician, who worked with Alfred Blalock, who was a very, very famous cardiothoracic surgeon.  And, you know, was given credit for the blue baby operation and all kinds of innovations in cardiothoracic surgery.  But, in fact, Vivien Thomas, an African American surgical technician, was the one who worked out all the techniques in the laboratory to the point that Blalock would actually call him into the operating room when he got into trouble to show him what to do.  And, you know, he never really got his just due until late in life when Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] honored him with an honorary doctorate degree, and hung his picture right up next to Alfred Blalock in the Blalock Building.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, there's a movie about that, just as there's a movie about you ['Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story']--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --called 'Something the Lord Made' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: Mos Def, who plays Vivien Thomas.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Of course, Cuba Gooding [Cuba Gooding, Jr.] played you in your movie.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: But is there, was there any kind of a mentorship relationship between the two of you?
Speaker 2: No, no, we would just see each other in passing but, you know, I was, I was very aware of who he was.
Speaker 1: Before you met him?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nope, but when I came to Hopkins 'cause people would talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the general surgery department, they talked about him, and everybody admired him.
Speaker 1: About how old was he when you got to Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: He was probably late sixties or early seventies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, he has, he's, has he passed away or is he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he passed away, I think, in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I came there in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd ask about him, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It seems to me when you think about his story, that's kind of a tragedy of credentialism, you know, in a way.  I mean, you know, we all need credentials, or we would be subject to all kind of people saying they can do things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  But, I mean, his story is an interesting story because there are many stories like his that never got told.  You know, many slaves, for instance, were tremendous technicians and inventors, but did they ever get credit for anything they did?  Of course not.  And he would have gone down the same track, but I think, you know, people like Blalock, even though they were still steeped in a lot of the old traditions of the time, recognized that, you know, when you have somebody of that extreme talent, you can't just grab all the credit for yourself.
Speaker 1: So some credit is certainly due to Blalock for--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: I think the movie depicts him as doing something awful, and then realizing it and trying to go back and repair it, or even about three or four times he does this.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: He's a, he's a southern man, you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly--
Speaker 1: --of his time.
Story_ID: 621830
Speaker 1: So, it was a time of learning.  You know, I, I never really got upset with people.  You know, when I came to Johns Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] in '77 [1977], and I would go on the wards with my scrubs on.  Invariably, someone would say, "I'm sorry, but Mr. Jordan is ready to be taken to the OR [operating room]," yeah, assuming that I was an orderly.  But I would just say, "Well, I'm sorry, he's not ready.  I'm Dr. Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.]."  And they'd turn about eighteen shades of red, and I'd say, "You don't need to be embarrassed."  And I'd be very nice, and I would have a friend for life.  They'd do anything for me after that.  But I realized that they weren't being mean, they weren't being racist.  They were just doing and acting out of what they'd always seen.  In their life, every black man who came on the wards with scrubs on, was an orderly, so why would they think something different?  And that's kind of the way I looked at life in general.  I never really got upset about a lot of stuff.  And, you know, my mother [Sonya Copeland Carson] had a great philosophy.  She would say, "If you walk into an auditorium full of bigoted, racist people," she says, "you don't have a problem.  They have the problem because they're going to cringe, and wonder where you're going to sit.  And you can sit anywhere you want."  And that's kind of the way I live my life.  I just said, "You know, I got more important things to deal with than somebody's silly ideals.  I'm not going to get caught up in that.  I have too many important things to do."
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you do recognize that you, that these things are happening to you, but you, your attitude is different (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I choose not to dwell on them.  I choose to dwell on something that's going to be useful.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Just one more question about Vivien Thomas before we get off of that 'cause he's such an interesting character in history.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did he make any attempt or any special attempt to talk to the young surgeons?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, absolutely.
Speaker 2: I mean, the black surgeons especially?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, absolutely--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I mean, that's how I initially got to know him 'cause, you know, he saw me.  And there weren't very many of us around at that time (laughter), so, you know, he made a special point to get to know me.
Speaker 2: Did he encourage you or was there anything that he said that you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, just, in general, you know, about, you know, making sure that you are very good at what you do, which I had already determined that I was going to do, but it's good to hear it.
Story_ID: 621831
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges at Johns Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] in terms of--was it just, was it more of internal, just developing your own--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --craft?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, you know, Johns Hopkins is a, is a, as you know, the number one hospital in the nation.  And you had a lot of awfully smart people there doing amazing things, so it would be quite a challenge to distinguish yourself amongst a group like that.  And I'm not sure I really set out to distinguish myself.  I just sort of set out to do the best that I could do and, and to never be satisfied, and fully recognizing that I personally felt that God had His hand on me.  I always felt that He had things for me to do, that He was using me in different ways, not only to bring people health, but also to inspire people.  I've always felt that sense of responsibility.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, during this time, are you real active in the church as you're, even as you're--
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't, I wasn't as an intern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because, you know, I got one weekend off that year (laughter), so I didn't get to go to church that often.  In fact, my wife [Candy Carson] would go to church and about six months into the year, the minister of the church actually came to the hospital because nobody at the church believed her.  She says, "My husband's a doctor.  He's a, he's an intern at Johns Hopkins."  Nobody believed her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he actually came to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They thought she was delusional (laughter).
Story_ID: 621832
Speaker 1: So, can you describe, I guess, the first time you actually performed a brain surgery?
Speaker 2: I probably can't.  I don't know when the first time actually was.  I remember the first time I got to do an operation, but it wasn't brain surgery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was prostate surgery and, you know, I was being talked through it as, as an intern.  And I certainly remember the first time I saw someone take a scalpel, and open someone's belly.  And I remember feeling a little queasy at seeing the blood.  And I really never had liked the sight of blood.  Some people think that's really a strange thing for a surgeon, but I always said, "Would you rather have a surgeon who likes the sight of blood?"  That puts it into perspective for them pretty quickly.
