Story_ID: 4648
Speaker 1: Say and spell your name and tell us when and where this picture was taken.
Speaker 2: I am William C. Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L, born in Chicago, Illinois on May 25, 1950, and this is a picture of me somewhere in that first eleven months.  I might have been eleven months old in this shot here.
Speaker 1: [William C. Campbell as an 11 month old in 1951.  Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4649
Speaker 1: This is the first picture of me holding a microphone, actually, that could be a rattle, but I think it was a microphone.  I was getting ready for a career in broadcasting.
Speaker 2: [Bill Campbell as a baby holding a rattle or his "first michrophone." MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Photo courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4650
Speaker 1: We had a number of family members that were talented photographers.  I think that it was either an uncle or cousin who set this up in my stylish duds sitting on the drum, which actually was the drum that I kept all my toys in, so this must have been around three or four years old.
Speaker 2: [ Bill Campbell, age 3 or 4, sitting atop a drum. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4651
Speaker 1: I guess from a very early age, I aspired to be on television, some way or the other.  I was five years old and one my favorite shows on television, a local show, was called the "Angel Casey" show [Playhouse with Angel Casey- Chicago, Illinois children's television show], and each week she would showcase a picture that was sent in by one of her young viewers.  And I sent this picture, actually, to Buffalo Bob Smith from the "Howdy Doody" show, my rendition of it, and it won and I just, I could remember as almost as if today, "From Chicago, Bill Campbell, five years old, from the South Side is our week's featured artist", so that was my first actual foray into the world of television was drawing that picture and having been selected.
Speaker 2: [Photo 4 -Drawing by Bill Campbell, age 5, which won an award on local television program, "Playhouse with Angel Casey." MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color drawing. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4652
Speaker 1: That is young Bill about the age of five, getting ready to go to kindergarten and very determined about his studies.
Speaker 2: [Photo 5- Bill Campbell, age 5, in kindergarten. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4653
Speaker 1: This is a class picture of my preschool, actually right before kindergarten.  Our teacher was Mrs. Mobley.  She ran it.  It was called the "Progressive Institute" and it was housed in the Greater St. John Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] at 48th and Michigan, right next to the house I grew up in, in my early years.  And there I was spiffy and as clean as the board of health.
Speaker 2: [Photo 6 Bill Campbell in preschool at St. John Baptist Church. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4654
Speaker 1: Well, that was my fifth grade teacher's name, and then I open it, and I read the letter and it was from her.
Speaker 2: And this is fifth grade, here?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's Bill in the center, just point to him, with the bowtie is Bill.
Speaker 1: Dead center.
Speaker 2: [ Bill Campbell, age 10 or 11, at the Bennett School,Chicago, Illinois in 5th grade. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4655
Speaker 1: This is the Christmas, Christmas play that we did every year at Bennett Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] at 101st and Prairie and this year is my fifth grade, I was a fifth grader.  I was a prince and I brought a gift, a box of jewels, for my gift.  But it was a huge production.  We started working on it right after Halloween.
Speaker 2: [Photo 8 Bill Campbell in his Bennett elementary school Christmas play in the 5th grade. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4656
Speaker 1: That's me in third grade, I'm 8 years old. I do wear bow ties alot!
Speaker 2: [ Bill Campbell, age 8 in the 3rd grade at Bennett Elementary [Chicago, Illinois]. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4657
Speaker 1: That's a young Bill, I think, you know, trying to get a job in the Sears catalog or something.  I couldn't have a real puppy dog, but that's the next best thing.
Speaker 2: [Photo 10 Bill poses with a stuffed animal. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4658
Speaker 1: This is Bill playing in his college jazz group, Black Dada Nihilismus Plus One, playing tenor sax an--this is the beginning of a career in jazz that continues to today, with an afro.
Speaker 2: [Photo 11- Bill Campbell at Carleton College [Northfield Minnesota] playing with his jazz ensemble. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4659
Speaker 1: This is just another shot of Bill from the same group at the time,
Speaker 2: Right  Yes.
Speaker 1: [Photo 12 Bill in a more direct shot, playing with his Carleton College  [Northfield, Minnesota] jazz ensemble. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4660
Speaker 1: This is, gosh, probably about 1983, [1982] '82, around in there, with my mom and my dad and my brother, Kevin.
Speaker 2: From left to right, that's Mom, Dad, Bill and Kevin.
Speaker 1: [Photo 13- Bill poses with his parents and younger brother Kevin in the early 1980s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4661
Speaker 1: The buckaroos.  This is my brother, Kevin, and I riding off into the sunset on our trusty steeds.  This is '56 [1956], so Kevin was a year old and I was six.
Speaker 2: [Photo 14- Bill and younger brother Kevin ride into the sunset on thier trusty steeds in 1956. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4662
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my two sisters, Sheila on the left and Judy on the right.  This is 1973, right after my family moved from Chicago [Illinois] to Houston [Texas], and they're scoping out the new digs, and they're not happy because they didn't want to move.
Speaker 2: [Photo 15- Picture of Bill Campbell's sisters- left to right,Sheila and Judy, in 1973. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4663
Speaker 1: This is a shot of Bill and the boys, all my nephews hanging out on the back porch.
Speaker 2: [Photo 16- Bill Campbell jokes around with his 5 nephews. Photo courtesy of Bill Campbell. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4664
Speaker 1: That's Uncle Bill and his nieces and nephews watching himself on T.V. doing a documentary on the Walt Disney Movie, "A Bug's Life."
Speaker 2: [Photo 17- Bill Campbell sits with several nieces and nephews as they watch him narrate a documentary on the Disney film, "A Bug's Life." MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4665
Speaker 1: I just love my nieces and nephews.  Here, I'm with my nephew, Matthew, on the left, and two of my nieces, Emily and Marissa.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This was in 19--, this was about three or four years ago, so I say '93, '94, no, '97, '98.
Speaker 2: [ Bill with his nephew Matthew and nieces Emily and Marissa in 1997 or 1998. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4666
Speaker 1: I have had an opportunity to interview some incredible people in my career and a lot of celebrities and one of my absolute favorites was Ms. Nancy Wilson.  This was in, oh, I think this was in 19--, 1993.
Speaker 2: [Photo 19- Bill Campbell poses with singer Nancy Wilson after an interviewin 1993. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4667
Speaker 1: This was a photograph of an ad shot by noted photographer, Mark Hauser, for Joe and Jean Silverberg, the owners of Bigsby & Kruthers, and it was an ad in their favorite soup book.  And I guess I was looking up to myself.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This had to be, gosh, this must've been 1988, '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: H-A-U-S-E-R?
Speaker 1: H-A-U-S-E-R.
Speaker 2: [Photo 20 Bill Campbell poses in a photo taken by noted photographer Mark Hauser for Joe and Jean Silverberg, owners of clothing store Bigsby and Kruthers. Picture taken for advertisement in a soup cook book?  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w picture. Courtesy of Bill Campbell.]
Story_ID: 4668
Speaker 1: I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, your birth date and today's date.
Speaker 2: Is today the 3rd?
Speaker 1: Yes.  May 3rd.
Speaker 2: My name is William Conrad Campbell.  William, the traditional spelling, Conrad, C-O-N-R-A-D, Campbell, is just like the soup, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L, "Mmm, mmm good.  Today is the 3rd of May, and I was born on May 25, 1950.
Speaker 1: And today's date?  We said that.  I want you to state your profession and the location of where you are.
Speaker 2: I am a broadcast journalist and a broadcast consultant and an author-to-be.  And we are taping this interview at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, 60616.
Story_ID: 4669
Speaker 1: Now I ask five questions of everyone.  They're sort of "People" magazine-ish, there's no real, I mean just short answers.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Good food.  I really appreciate good food.  I've had opportunities to taste cuisine from all over the world, literally and just well-prepared food-- food that is prepared with love, stands out all the time.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?  Blue.
Speaker 2: Oh, good, we got blue behind you.  Oh, sorry.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Since I just got back, I'd have to say Paris.
Speaker 2: You just got back from Paris?
Speaker 1: Just got back, three weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's nice.  How long have you been back?
Speaker 1: Three or four weeks ago.
Speaker 2: How long were you there?  For a week.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: October.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Positive on purpose.
Story_ID: 4670
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we're gonna get started.  And I want to ask you first about your mother, Iva Campbell, who was born in Wilberforce, Ohio, right?
Speaker 2: [Nods].
Speaker 1: And I want you to tell me what you can about her and her family's background.
Speaker 2: Well, you can see me getting a little emotional because my mom passed just two and a half years ago, and, actually, three and a half years ago, and she was an incredible woman, Iva Burnett Turner Campbell.  She was born in Wilberforce [Ohio], the daughter of Cyrus Conrad Turner, and Mildred Burnett Turner.  My grandparents divorced early and mom was kind of moved amongst relatives because she was, she was left with my grandfather and my grandmother took the eldest daughter with her, so mom kind of moved around as a child, was an incredible artist.  Just a spirit of life and, you know. With her passing, her transition, I experienced for the very first time what heartache was.  And when my father passed away in 1987, in '86 [1986], I experienced profound sadness and that was a deep experience. But mom's passing was one of heartache, where my heart literally ached and she is probably the person who I attribute my desire to be positive on purpose too, by her being, by her actions, by everything that she did in life.  She exhibited the power of being positive because her childhood was pretty rough.  When you move from aunt to aunt and then with your dad and then summers with your mom, and it was rough.  And back in those days, which was, you know, the early '30s [1930s], that kind of thing in a black home, a divorce, was pretty unusual. So, it was tough on her.  And she moved to Chicago when she was in her late teens, and lived in Englewood with her older sister at that point, who got married, and began as a student at the Chicago Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago].
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting, so she was, did she ever talk about her, how the arts, you know, why she was attracted to the arts?
Speaker 2: She just, she had talent as an artist and as a youngster.  She was very talented at the Art Institute, her contemporaries there were, in fact, I got a picture of her in my office that was taken by Gordon Parks, who was one her classmates.  But she always had a flair.  She was a milliner, she designed hats, she oil painted.  She- she did it all.  And my grandfather, I should also mention, was a trainer of horses.  He trained quarter horses and horses that raced in races like the Kentucky Derby and the other races and the Triple Crown, so she came from a background of, kind of a freedom of spirit and doing the unusual.  My grandfather trained one of the winners of the Kentucky Derby, a horse named "Golden Boy."
Story_ID: 4671
Speaker 1: Now was there any relationship with your mother's side of the family at Wilberforce University or it would have been just--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandfather was one of the well-known citizens of Wilberforce and was very active in supporting the university.
Speaker 1: So, were you aware of that?  I know that I saw that in, you know, in your background, that, you know, that your family, you had done some research, in your family background.
Speaker 2: Right.  Grandpa, I was eight when grandpa passed, and I didn't get to know him very well at all.  Nor did I get to know my grandmother enough.  It's interesting, on my father's side of the family, I didn't get to know my grandmother at all because she was killed in, in an auto accident when my father was thirteen, so, and my grandfather never remarried.  So, the only grandparent I really got to know was my grandfather, my paternal grandfather.
Story_ID: 4672
Speaker 1: Now, your father, why don't we go to him.  What kind of person was he?  How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: Well, it's so, it's so wonderful because mom was the artist and dad was the scientist.  So, you know, I got whatever turns out when you blend the two of those together.  It's kind of the left brain and the right brain, so I have a little bit of both.  But my father was an exceptional man.  I often share the story that because of his chosen profession as a chemist, he graduated with honors from the University of Chicago in Organic Chemistry.  He got his master's in Organic Chemistry from the University of Chicago with honors and the only job that he could get then in the early '50s [1950s] was as a clerk in a pawn shop on 47th and Calumet.  He was a man with incredible talent, just smarts all over the place. And because of the color of his skin, to support his family, he worked in a pawn shop.  The first job that he got in his field, with a company that he stayed with his entire career and his entire life, was with Woodco Chemical Corporation over on South Kilbourn Avenue, and with his degrees and all of that, he was hired as a lab assistant.  And he washed test tubes and beakers and assisted the other chemists who were far, far beneath him in terms of skill and ability. But when he passed away in 1986, he was Senior Vice President of Research and Development for that same company.  But the road was a very difficult one.  A man of tremendous fortitude, absolutely authentic, of impeccable character.
Story_ID: 4673
Speaker 1: Did he talk about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not much.  He, his childhood was a tough one because, as I mentioned, he was the oldest of five children, and because he was the oldest, he had to help my grandfather raise the other kids.  So responsibility for him, at the age of thirteen, when most kids are looking at, you know, going to their teenage years-- and he was just faced with a lot of responsibilities and a lot of challenges.  So, he was very, very pragmatic about all that he did and, of course, he met my mom and saw the other part of life.  I remember the story I hear about him not growing up.  But, you know, in his, his early twenties when they first met, that he was so taken by my mother, as he was smoking a cigarette, he picked it up and put the lit end in his mouth. And, of course that, you know, just endeared him to mom and the rest was history.
Speaker 1: Now how did he end up?  Did he talk about his love of the science, I mean his background was sort of amazing in many ways.  And I'm just saying, why was he attracted to that?  Did he talk about that process?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a carpenter and general contractor and that aspect of the facts and figures, and just the scientific approach, I think fascinated me.  He did incredibly well- obviously - in high school in chemistry. But of course, at that time, that's a period that you could say was comparable to what we're going through now in the digital and the computer age and the internet age. As far as young people having their attention captured by chemistry was the wave of the future. And he was responsible in his work at Woodco developing many of the plastic products that today that we just take for granted, bottles, foam rubber, all those types of things were products that he did the research on and they evolved to things that are just common for us today.  But he always had that drive, that sense of creation from the scientific side of things and mom's creation was from the artistic.
Story_ID: 4674
Speaker 1: Did his father encourage education, because he was from, you said, East Chicago [Indiana], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  All of his siblings have done incredible things.  My uncle Wendell Campbell was a very highly regarded and respected architect.  And my aunt Dorothy has just had a program for gifted children named in her honor at Michigan State University.  And, you know, the kids, the Campbell kids as they were known in Chicago, all excelled in their own right.  And so, that was the expectation that my grandfather, I think, stated and it lived. And I think the kids, really thinking in terms of honoring their mother decided that they would be the best that they could be.  And all strove for excellence.
Story_ID: 4675
Speaker 1: So, I want to ask about now your siblings.  Can you state their order?  You know, where do you fit in the chain?
Speaker 2: I'm the big brother ( laughing).  You're the oldest?  I'm the oldest.  And my brother, Kevin Scott Campbell, is five years younger than I am.  My sister, Sheila Burnett Campbell (Savanah?), is seven years my junior and lives in Houston, Texas, as does the baby of the family, Judith Michelle Campbell, who is ten years younger than I am, and lives in Houston as well.
Speaker 1: So did you just follow Sheila down there, that's what I was--
Speaker 2: What happened, I graduated from Carleton College in Northfield, Minnesota in 1972 in June. And in October, and I was living at home with my family on the South Side and then dad came home one evening, and announced to the family that his company was moving their operation from Chicago to Houston, Texas. And that was going to happen the following spring, the spring of 1973.  So, it was in '72 [1972] that he made the announcement.  So, unlike most kids who graduated from college and moved away from home, I graduated and homebmoved away from me.  So, that's how the family ended up relocating in Houston, Texas in '73 [1973].
Story_ID: 4676
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to your parents?  How did they meet?  I mean you told the story.
Speaker 2: My, my aunt Dorothy, I believe, and my uncle, some of dad's first cousins had met mom and thought she was a really sweet, young woman and that dad would probably like her and they were right because he was really, he fashioned himself as being suave and debonair, but he was very shy. And, hence, the cigarette in the mouth backwards.  I mean you can't get much more uncool than burning your lip when you first meet somebody.  But that's how, that's how it was, and they were just an incredible, incredible couple.  They really created an environment of love in our home, and we were all nurtured in that environment just unconditionally.  I mean that's where we learned about unconditional love, and, you know, both of them were doing their own thing.  I mean the spheres really professionally, in terms of career, just did not mesh, but what they brought to it was a love of each other and a love of life and a love of family and that's (smiles)...
Story_ID: 4677
Speaker 1: Now I'd like you to share some of your earliest memories that you have.  Like two or three memories that you have.
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought you meant from when I was two or three.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Actually, I do.  I remember we lived at 4835 South Michigan, which was right next door to Greater St. John's Baptist Church, and four doors down from the hall branch library of the Chicago Public Library, where Sharla Mae Rollins was the children's library, and mom would take me there. And Sharla Mae Rollins is the mother of Dora Saunders, who for years has been with Johnson Publishing Company, and has been my play aunt. And so I grew up loving to read, because I was doing pre-reading things when I wastwo years old.  Mom would take me down to the corner to the hall branch for the children's story hour and Mrs. Rollins would read to us stories, and I remember sitting there doing that.  I remember as a child, when the folks got a new refrigerator. My excitement was not because we got a new refrigerator but because of the huge box that it came in that we put on the back of our porch on the third floor. And mom carved windows out and turned it into a bus and then it got turned into a house.  And my cousins all lived-- my great-aunt Clara Langston owned the building and it was a six-flat, so all my aunts and uncles and cousins on dad's side lived in the building.  So, we got to just come and go from apartment to apartment.  So, those days I lived there until 1957 when we moved out further south into the '90s [90th street, far south side].  See, that's, those are a couple of very early childhood memories.  I remember I showed the picture earlier that I had drawn of Buffalo Bill from the "Howdy Doody" show [national childrens television show]that I sent to the "Angel Casey" show, which was a local television show [childrens television show on Chicago], and it was the first time that I'd ever been on television.  That was about when I was four years old.  And each week, Angel Casey would select a picture that one of her young viewers had sent to her and she picked mine and there it was on camera and, you know, "Bill Campbell, from South Michigan Avenue is this week's Angel Casey winner".  So, you know, that was kind of cool.  And I really, the idea that my name was mentioned on television, I mean the very early days of television, it was kind of, maybe a foretelling of things to come.
Story_ID: 4678
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you would say about your family life that you want to sort of discuss or, you know, being the oldest?
Speaker 2: Being the oldest, you know, my brother and two sisters might disagree.  I kind of doubt it, but we had fun.  I mean we, and we grew up loving each other.  As the oldest brother, though, I did do some mind-control stuff.  My favorite was playing dead.  You know, I just would drop dead, and they would just burst into tears, and I'd say "I'm back."  We'd do stuff like that.  But we'd go out in the backyard and build these huge snow forts and, you know, I would build, I built a car out of crates that I would ride my sisters around in.  We had, we had fun-- we had, I mean, we were-- mom and dad, in their own ways, from their own disciplines, really encouraged us to use our minds, our imaginations and to be creative.  So, we all, you know- my brother is an architect,  my sister, Sheila, is an author, is a poet-- founded a human service agency in Houston called "People in Partnership".  My baby sister, Judy, is a pediatrician- an M.D. doing pediatric research.  And, you know, it's kind of split.  My sister, Sheila, who is the creative one and myself and then Sheila- I mean Judy and Kevin, who were both scientists.  So, it  kind of just evenly got distributed amazingly in the family, but we had a wonderful childhood.  We grew up really loving each other and I was a great boss, I mean big brother (laughs).
Story_ID: 4679
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask, what you were like as a youngster.  Were you mischievous?  Were you quiet?  Were you well behaved?  You know, were you polite?  You know, I mean what was the young Bill Campbell like?
Speaker 2: I was a nerd ( laughs).  No, actually, as I look back, I was kind of quiet, but I was fun.  And I really respected people and, you know, but I wasn't, we had a group of us right in the freshman year of high school really, because that kind of defines where we were.  We weren't the popular kids, but we were the kids who were fun to be around.  And, you know, we were kind of square, but that was alright because we hung with each other and we didn't care, you know, because we had fun.  And it was kind of like that in elementary school as well.  You know, we played on the block and, you know, rode our bike. But, you know, I was the paperboy and I'd go around and I always got nice tips from my customers.  I mean my parents' values, the values that we were taught of respect and honoring people and honesty and politeness and cheerfulness, you know, all that kind of good stuff, that people, you know, don't look at as incredible tools to great living today a lot.
Story_ID: 4680
Speaker 1: Especially, this is portrayed in the media, I mean being polite.  And as we just see in everyday life, those are wonderful tools.  It keeps me positive on the inside because being that way doesn't give me room to accumulate gunk, and, you know, just negative stuff is repelled because it's not something that I embrace because I've grown up knowing that by taking care, on the show that I do, "Chicagoing," on ABC here, remember that it is inside job.  You decide to make it a great week.  Because it is, it's an inside job, it has nothing to do, whatever happens in my life, I'm responsible for and I'm responsible for it because I can choose to either react to things that happen to me or respond to them.  If I respond to them, I'm being my authentic self and that's positive.  And, you know, I am positive on purpose because that's the way I choose to be in life.  I don't have to be negative by default.
Story_ID: 4681
Speaker 1: Now do you remember when your parents moved from south, from South King Drive to Michigan  (meaning South Michigan Avenue) ? [Martin Luther King Drive which at that time was named South Parkway ]
Speaker 2: To Michigan [South Michigan Avenue], right.  In 1957.  How was that move?
Speaker 1: Ooh, that was deep!  That was another defining moment for me.  1957, I mean, the Civil Rights Movement was like underway, and we lived at 9707 South Forest Avenue which was between Prairie-- and between Prairie and Calumet, just right before you get into Roseland.  The neighborhood was being sliced into two.  It was quickly turning from white to black because of the panic peddlers and white flight that was going on.  Homeowners were afraid that black people moving into the community would devastate the community, which just wasn't true.  I mean it was a story of Lorraine Hansberry's "Raisin in the Sun." We moved onto the block.  When we moved there, there were probably five or six black families living there.  The following year or two, I don't remember the exact year, I need to check it out, but the Chicago City Council and the forces-that-be decided that the Dan Ryan Expressway was going to make an eastern turn at 99th Street and go over to the Calumet Expressway and divide our neighborhood in half, the width of the Dan Ryan.  And we called-- we called it the "Mason Dixon Line" as kids.  Because we had to cross the construction zone- bulldozed. I mean houses that were either, the people were moving, literally, moving their houses to save them, further south because the black folks were moving-- the negroes were moving into the neighborhood.  I have to share this story with you that just capsulizes what happened back in the late '50s [1950s] and early to mid '60s [1960s], and Roseland Heights and Roseland.  And all my classmates, and I've got pictures of them, you look at the class picture, they're black kids, and Asian kids and white kids, and we're all, and these were my buddies.  We were cool,  we were friendly.  We had big fun, but at 3:15, I had to go across the "Mason Dixon Line" -- the Dan Ryan Expressway. And my white friends went to their homes.  We didn't get to play with each other after school.  We didn't get to visit each other on weekends, but we were friends.  We didn't know what to make of it.  I mean when you're 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 years old, it was just-- but I had the opportunity of growing up in a diverse elementary school.  Five years ago, I walked into a computer store in Evanston where I now live, and I get goose bumps talking about it. I was talking to the owner of the store, Nabih's, and a guy walked in and he said "You're Bill Campbell from Channel 7, aren't you?"  I said "Hi, how ya doing?"  And I continued to talk to Nabih, and he just stood there.  And he said "I bet you don't recognize me."  And I looked at him and said "I don't know.  You look familiar, but I'm sorry I don't.  You know, I've met a lot of people."  He said "Bill, I'm Chip Nelson.  We went to Bennett together."  And we hugged and we stood there in Nabih's Computer Store for two hours talking about what each of us had missed about the other's life growing up in school together but not being able to play together as grammar school kids because of the complexion of our skin.  And we found out we both had bullies in the neighborhood, our respective neighborhood, named "Willy" and we kind of just reconnected what 30 years earlier wasn't possible to do, standing there in that store. And the lesson that that taught me was how I was cheated out of a very important part of my childhood for reasons no stronger than that of hate, that I didn't have in my heart but somebody else did, and it ruled what my childhood would be like, and the same thing for Chip Nelson.  He didn't get to know me either.
Story_ID: 4682
Speaker 1: Now how was Bennett Elementary School?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was awesome,  it was an awesome school.  I've gotta share this story.  This story, I mean, it was a very-- I had a, I just had a very blessed childhood,  it's just richly blessed.  This Christmas, I get a Christmas card at the station and the envelope is addressed from Mrs. Jean Hanson.  And I said to my associate producer, I said "You know, I had an elementary school teacher named Jean Hanson." And I opened the card up and it said "Dear Mr. Campbell, so often on Sunday morning I watch your show 'Chicagoing' and I just wondered if perhaps that smiling face that I see on Sunday is the same one that I saw in my fifth grade class"  And it was from her.  And, you know, I really get emotional about that because here, that is thirty years later, 1960, had to be 1961 [with great emotion].  And she's watching.  She says " Well, I watch the show every week".  And I called her and, you know, she's in her eighties, late eighties, but she remembered me from Bennett Elementary School.  And you ask about the kind of school it was, Lucille Lightfoot, Maude Waits(?), McNone Hattenbach(?), gosh, all of the teachers, in this changing environment-- in this crucible of young minds where the neighborhood is just going through all these convulsions... A lot of times we'd get chased home by some of the bad kids in the white neighborhood that didn't want us there past 3:30.  We had fifteen minutes to get from 101st and Prairie across the "Mason-Dixon Line."  But it was, it was a rich childhood.  Mom was involved with the P.T.A.  Parents, in spite of their children not being able to play together after school, came together at P.T.A. -- had bake sales together, you know, took groups of kids to museums and stuff.  It was an incredibly rich experience. Unfortunately, that negativity, that hatred, the issue of race, permeated everything that we did, and we had to accommodate that reality.
Story_ID: 4683
Speaker 1: So, what was some of the messaging that was going on, you know, at that time, you know, from your parents to your, because you remember when you were saying when you first moved there, you know, that civil rights was just getting started.  So this is the time?
Speaker 2: Well, while I was in the school, President Kennedy was assassinated.  That was unthinkable.  I mean we were watching things going on in the South, the dogs and the hoses, and so many people were struck with this fear of not wanting to move and make too many changes.  At the same time having this quiet respect and this quiet honor and instilling values to be the very best that you can be and know that you are because other people won't always recognize or reward you for that and that really is secondary as long as you know that that's what really counts.  The color of your skin truly has no bearing, if the content of your character, as Dr. King said, is sterling.  Who can tell me that I am not all that I am, if I know that I am for the right reasons?  So, those were the kind of messages that we were getting in our homes, in my neighbor's homes, I mean it was more of those neighborhoods that if Doug Jones' mom saw me doing something that I shouldn't be doing, on my way home, I'd catch it at the Jones' house. And by the time I got to the Campbell house, I knew what was in store for me because parents cared.  Parents, you know, we hear people say "Oh, we don't want to get involved in the neighborhood or community."  People then really got involved in their children's lives.  I mean, and, of course, there have been so many other factors that are involved, with the need for two-income families and the divorce rates and all of those things, but the basic values of honesty, of respect, of being kind and doing to someone what you want them to do to you, those were just fundamental.
Speaker 1: When your parents moved, did they say why they moved?
Speaker 2: Because dad finally had gotten a job that would give him an opportunity to purchase his own home for his family and that was his dream.  That was the dream like the "Raisin in the Sun," [seminal play written by Lorraine Hansberry] you know, a place where we can call our own.  And was this, what was the area called that you were in?  Roseland Heights.  Roseland Heights?  Okay.  It was bounded by 95th Street on the north and by 99th Street on the south, by King Drive, it was South Park back then, and Michigan- Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 4684
Speaker 1: Now what were your interests that were developing, you know, at this time?
Speaker 2: I was, as a young, I was a-- I was a magician.  I used to do magic shows for the kids in the neighborhood and make some money.  I was an entrepreneur.  I had two paper routes.  I was- I wrote.  I played the clarinet.  I was mayor of Bennett School in my eighth grade year.  It was incredible.  It was an incredible experience to be in that time of such huge social change in this country and kind of ride it and develop along with it and then get deposited.  When I went to high school, the high school, John Marshall Harland High School was built to, I believe, placate blacks and keep them from moving further south to Fenger  [Christian Fenger School, now Academy], which was all white at that time, and it was an excellent, excellent, excellent school.  It was college preparatory.  Vernon Miller was the assistant principal who would stand in the hallway and say "Young men and women, this is Harland High School.  That behavior is not acceptable."  And there was a sense of pride.  I was, I-- I, my interest, I always was interested in something theatrical or in radio.  I was a C.B.-- I had a citizen's band and Ham radio as a child, but the big thing for me occurred in 1967.  I was a junior in high school, and I had been the editorial director for the "Harland Verdict" high school paper and I knew that senior year, I wanted to be the editor and chief.  The "Perry White" [ editor of the "Daily Planet" in Superman comics] of Harland High School.  I wanted to be the editor.  Well, there were a couple of other students, Wanda Bolton, was one of them, one of my dear friends- one of my dear friends in high school. We just, you know, we did, we worked on the newspaper and the yearbook, but both of us wanted to be editor of the paper.  I knew that I had to do something that would be getting, attention getting.  And I figured if I could interview someone famous for during that summer break between junior year and senior year, that coming back in the fall, handing this interview with a celebrity over to our teacher who was the, you know, who was the advisor for the paper, would be a cinch.  It just happened that that summer, Bill Cosby was appearing at the Civic Stage-- the Civic Auditorium right next to the Civic Opera House.  And I said, "Boy, if I could interview Bill Cosby", who, "I Spy" [popular 1960s television show with integrated cast] was the rage then and his albums, you know, were just platinum selling hits.  "If I could Bill Cosby, I mean there was no doubt who the editor of the paper was going to be."  And, as, as-- as fate would have it, I called my cousin, Danny Elliott, up and I said "Danny.  I got two tickets for Bill Cosby at the Civic Theater.  One of them is for you if you agree to be my photographer."  Because every reporter had to have a photographer.  So, he agreed.  He's like "Yeah, right Bill."  I said "Listen.  This is what we're gonna do.  We're gonna go down and we're gonna find out where the stage door is and then we're gonna knock on the door."  I was the shyest kid in my class.  I really was.  You asked me earlier, how I would describe myself, I was very shy, and this was totally out of character for me, but I wanted that job with a passion and this was how I was going to do it.
Story_ID: 4685
Speaker 1: So we get down to the Civic Theater, and we go in and I asked the Andy Frain usher[ Chicago based crowd control company], you know, "Where is the stage door?"  He said "well, you have to go back outside and go north a couple of doors and you'll see this alley.  Go down the alley.  You'll find it."  So, we went out and went down and found the alley, and get to the stage door.  Where that idea came from, I think it was from watching cartoons, you know, because you see the stage door, "Spin and Marty," [popular 1950s Walt Disney serial on the Mickey Mouse Club TV show] and, yeah, I don't know.  We knocked on the door.  This huge guard answered and he says "Can I help you?"  I said "I'm Bill Campbell from the 'Harland High School Verdict'.  I'm here to interview Bill Cosby."  He laughed.  He said "Yeah.  Okay." ( laughing)  I said "I'm serious, sir."  He said "Well, let me get the producer".  He shuts the door and we're standing there and my cousin, Dan, he's like "you're crazy.  We're not gonna get in there.  We're gonna miss the show," blah, blah, blah.  The door opens.  The producer was Daddy-O Daylie.  Daddy-O was Chicago's premiere jazz d.j,  he's my hero.  I didn't know he was the producer of the show.  Forget Bill Cosby (laughing).  I was like, but I'm looking at Daddy-O, and I said "Daddy-O", or "Mr. Daylie, this is what we'd like to do."  He said "Well, son, I'm very sorry, but Mr. Cosby flew in from L.A. this afternoon.  He's got two shows to do tonight.  I don't think I could help you out."  And I think the look of disappointment on my face registered 25 on the Richter scale.  And Daddy-O said "Well, you know what?  Why don't you fellows come back tomorrow and I'll see what I can do?"  So, we went and we watched the show that night.  My cousin, Danny, is like "Yeah.  We're not gonna get an interview", blah, blah, blah.  I was like "But I got to meet Daddy-O," and that was gonna be cool.  Well, the next night, I came back down.  I knocked on the door, the guard answered.  He said "Mr. Daylie is expecting to you." He went and got Daddy-O.  Daddy-O took us.  He had two folding chairs sitting in the wings.  We got to watch Cosby about 12 feet away from us.  We saw the entire show.  Afterwards, he came over and Daddy-O introduced us.  He took us into the dressing room.  I got this wonderful interview.  Danny was just snapping pictures, snapping pictures.  And he said "Well, I gotta get ready for my next show." We were just like, "uh, uh."  We thanked him and thanked Daddy-O.  Daddy-O does it to this day, and I do hope I have an opportunity to thank him-- changed the course of my life that Sunday afternoon in August in 1967.  I went home and typed up the interview.  Danny put the film in Walgreen's [ drugstore].  We went there Wednesday to pick it up.  The envelope was as thin as a piece of lettuce.  And it was only at that moment, that my dear cousin- God rest his soul, he's not with us anymore.  Danny said "Bill, I have to tell you.  I forgot to take the lens cap off."  So, there was not one picture recorded, but I submitted the interview and I was named co-editor of the "Harland Verdict" with my friend, Wanda.  So, I got my wish.  And that began my career in journalism and it showed me being shy was something that I didn't have to be if I didn't want to,  if I didn't choose to be shy.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story.  You, I'll tell you, because we just found Daddy-O Daylie.  I'll tell you that story during the break.
Speaker 1: I would really love to share that story with him.  But Daddy-O, because of his kindness, because I don't know why, he said, he decided "well, here's a young man, who's 17 years old.  Let me see if I can do this, and work it out for him."  And it changed my life.  It's because of that, I chose the career that I do.
Story_ID: 4686
Speaker 1: Now how did you end up getting tickets to the Bill Cosby, I mean to show anyway?
Speaker 2: I went to Sears on 79th Street and Ticketmaster or whatever it was called back then, and plopped down thirty bucks.  I think the tickets were fifteen bucks each.  Because I had my paper route, so, you know, I had, I had-- I had paper (laughing).
Speaker 1: So what did your parents think of this whole experience?
Speaker 2: They, my parents were so cool.  They treated it as "Oh, okay.  That's very nice, son.  That's wonderful."  But it wasn't a big deal.  So, I kind of developed "Okay. This is cool.  This is supposed to happen.  It wasn't a big deal." But it was a huge deal and as I look back on it, fast forward, the year 1986, somewhere, somewhere '87 [1987], '86 [1986], a young woman named Oprah Winfrey moves to Chicago, starts a T.V. show, and actually at this time, she was hosting "A.M. Chicago" and the studios were on the 12th floor, and Oprah and I, you know, we talked because her office was just right across from mine and we get together, and Bill Cosby was a guest on her show.  So, this was '60 [1960], this was what?  '67 [1967], twenty years.  I was one of five African-American editorial directors on television stations throughout the country and I went up to the studio and as soon as they went off the air, because at that time Oprah was live on "A.M. Chicago", and Bill Cosby was coming down the hall.  And I said "Excuse, Mr. Cosby, I'd like to share something with you."  He said "Sure, what's up?"  And I told him that story, and I said, I said "I just wanted to thank you because of your kindness, back in 1967, you changed the course of my life and this is the first opportunity that I've had to thank you and I just wanted to express that."  And he said "Yeah.  okay."  He said "What do you want me to do for you now?"  as only Bill Cosby could say (laughing).  But, you know, it was like, "Hey, you've done, you've done more than enough."  And Daddy-O, because I mean if it weren't for Daddy-O, none of that would've happened.  So, I owe Daddy-O Daylie -- Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie -- a tremendous debt of gratitude.  Because he was my hero, I mean I would listen, oh, gosh, "Daddy's Jazz Patio" , "For those who live it, love it, and those who make their living of it, swing surely yours, Daddy-O Daylie."  He's my hero.
Story_ID: 4687
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  So you go back to your senior year, you were co-editor.  Were you disappointed that you were co-editor?
Speaker 2: No.  Because it was, I mean, it was cool.  I mean it was great.  I mean Wanda was my friend and that was a diplomatic way to handle the situation and it was the first time that it ever happened in history, and it was cool.
Speaker 1: So, now, what, what things are formulating in you?  You definitely decide you want to be a journalist?
Speaker 2: That was, that was it.  I'm like, "I'm seventeen years old."  I mean, I did get a little big head, "I interviewed Bill Cosby, you know, I'm the dude."  But, you know, it was kind of playful 'cause for me, it was like it was a goof that I had the temerity to knock on the stage door and do that it was pretty wild.  But what it really said to me and showed me is that if I decide there's something that I want to do, all I gotta do is take the first step and the universe just opens up to me.  If it's God's will for this to happen, and I believe that God's will, in part for me, is to truly express myself fully and be all that I can be as his creation on this planet.  What's gonna stop me?  Somebody telling me I'm black or I'm too short or I'm not smart enough, or, you know, I got demonstrated proof that it's possible and those kind of things have happened throughout my life.
Story_ID: 4688
Speaker 1: How did the decision come about with Carleton College?  How did that, it wasn't an issue whether college, that was no problem.
Speaker 2: Right.  I was planning to go Oberlin [College, Oberlin Ohio] where my cousin, Ruth, was a graduate-- was the first black woman to graduate with the honors that she received.  And I was looking at Dartmouth [College, Hanover,New Hampshire] and Williams College [Williamstown] out in Massachusetts, and I was on a program that the Ford Foundation [philanthropic organization] founded here in Chicago [Illinois] that brought people from the North Shore [affluent north suburban lakefront community] together with kids from the schools in the inner city.  It was also during that summer in 1967 when I met Bill Cosby [comedian], and one of the projects that we, we'd do projects each week that some government agency or civic organization wanted a group of teenagers to do, and that's how we got know each other and to share.  One of these was a survey, and I-- we were in the Gold Coast [affluentNorth side residential/retail neighborhood of Chicago].  We were in Carl Sandburg Village [affluent apartment community on the North side of Chicago], and we going door-to-door doing these short surveys, and I knocked on the door of Attorney Goldfarb, was his name.  And I told him what we were about and could we interview him and he was showering up.  He had shaving cream on his face and a towel thrown over his shoulder.  And we sat down and gave the interview.  And he said, "Alright, young man, what college are you planning on going to?"  And I told him " Oberlin" and he said "Have you ever considered Carleton College?  It's an excellent school in Northfield, Minnesota." And I said, "I never heard of it."  And he said "Well, you should investigate it because I think that would be a great place for you to look into."  So, when the group of students with our teacher advisors convene for lunch at noon, you know, we kind of do briefing.  And, you know, I said "Well, I know I interviewed a very interesting attorney who suggested that I go to Carleton College."  And Joyce Lanahan(?), who at the time was a teacher at DuSable High School said "That's my alma mater." And she connected me with the folks that were involved with admissions and scholarships. And one of my other buddies, Doug Jones, whom I had mentioned earlier, also heard about it, in Carleton, ended up-- he was a year ahead of me, so he ended up going to Carleton along with Robert Holden?, Bob Holden?, who was president of their senior class, and so, I had two buddies who went to Carleton and the financial aid package was very attractive.  And, you know, I never heard of Northfield, Minnesota, but Northfield is a very famous town.  It is a town where the Jesse James' gang met their demise during the Northfield- the Great Northfield, Minnesota raid.  And, also, it's an excellent school, but that's how I ended up at Carleton.
Story_ID: 4689
Speaker 1: So it was called "Harvard of the West?"
Speaker 2: Harvard [University] of the Midwest [ref. to Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.]
Speaker 1: Midwest.
Speaker 2: You drive into the Town of Northfield.  There's a sign there that says "Welcome to Northfield, Minnesota. Population at this time is like 9,751- "Town of Cows, Colleges and Contentment."  And I'm saying it was a great, great school.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1970, no, 1968.  Carleton College [Northfield, Minnesota] was the reason why, in 1969, I had the opportunity of a lifetime to go to Paris [France] for the very first time and also to spend six months-- nearly six months, living in a very small remote village in the bush of Cote D'Ivoire, the Ivory Coast [West Africa], where I lived for eight months.  I got to spend two months hitchhiking around Europe with my backpack and my saxophone playing with some jazz luminaries, whom I just thought were cats to hang out with at the time.  And it just, it was incredible.  Carleton afforded me the opportunity of a lifetime.  And I enjoyed every minute of it.  I recently returned to Paris  after 32 years because Paris was an interesting place for me.  At the end of the experience that I had in West Africa, I got very sick and I ended up going to Paris where the group of students moved to spend their last two weeks of this eight-month experience and I was actually in the Canary Islands.  We had spent the time in this village, Donanday (ph.)  And we can talk about that experience.  But Paris rings so importantly in my experience because at the beginning of the trip, I got a "Dear Bill" letter from my college sweetheart.  I'm sitting out on the steps of the Royal Palace.  They're across from the Eiffel Tower, across the center from the Eiffel Tower, sitting on this bench, reading this letter, and we were supposed to meet, after my experience in West Africa, again in Paris, in late fall, and she told me she was getting married and marrying somebody during the summer.  So, I was just devastated.  So that was, that was the beginning in the spring in Paris.
Story_ID: 4690
Speaker 1: That November I got really sick.  We were in the Canary Islands, after spending the six months or so in the Ivory Coast [Africa], just for a week of relaxation and going back to Paris [France].  I got really sick.  I went to a doctor,  the diagnosis was food poisoning.  And the next day I was flying to Paris for two weeks. And en route to Paris, we had to refuel in Marseilles [France] and the flight crew had radioed ahead to Marseilles to have a doctor standing by to take a very ill patient off the plane. And they took me off the plane, and the doctor examined me.  He said, "You don't have food poisoning.  Your appendix has been ruptured for at least four days and you need to have immediate surgery."  And I said, "I want to go to Paris."  And they're like,"You're crazy.  You won't make it." And I could only remember my father telling me, this is the only thing about World War II, his experience in World War II, that I remember, he said, "I was so glad I didn't get shot or wounded because I really didn't want French doctors operating on me."  That's all I could think of, you know, it's like--why he said that, I don't know. I guess during the war there was a reputation or something like that.  But I said "I want to go to an American hospital in Paris," and they put me back on the plane and I flew, and I had a near-death experience.  I almost died,  I went into cardiac arrest on the operating table.  So much poison had infected my entire abdominal cavity from a ruptured appendix-- that means that your intestine is basically just spilling into your abdomen and it was too much for my heart to take. But I remember going, you know, this was 1969 and near-death experiences, as people talk about them today, you know, their pretty common and it's no big deal, but back then for a nineteen year old traveling through this tunnel and ending up, a part of this light. And I really don't have the words to describe what this experience was like other than it was incredibly peaceful and joyful, even though I was going someplace else and my body wasn't going with me.  And I remember being, getting to this point where I was just a part of this light and hearing a voice or just knowing.  It said "Bill, it is not time. You have to go back."  And the next thing I knew, I was looking at my body on the operating table and they were pulling these paddles off.  And the next thing, in consciousness I remember, was explaining this whole story to my doctors, about a day after surgery, two days after surgery.  And they said, "well, you know that you had a lot of acetone in your system, and you know, you were under a lot of anesthesia, and it just didn't happen."  I'm like "no,  I remember this and I remember the details" and they told me "No" and I just stuffed it away. I did not remember these things that I'm telling you until 1997.  That whole part of my life was just gone.  Because I figured that the doctors were right.  I was watching a movie in 1967 at the McClurg [Court] Theater [Chicago, Illinois] and I went with a friend.  We got there really late and the only seats were in the very front row, so we're sitting there in the front row looking up at the screen like this, and I don't know if you saw the movie "Contact", but the movie with Jodie Foster, there's a scene where she's traveling through the time-space continuum.  How it was portrayed was a tunnel of light at the end.  And I'm sitting there and tears just start, just flying out of my eyes.  I'm like "That's where I was."  And, you know, thirty years of forgotten history came back to me and I remembered all of those things that occurred, and it was just an incredible experience. But, you know, Carleton College [Northfield, Minnesota] gave me that experience.  And four months later, my mom passed.  And I equated where I was going in a very peaceful and joyful way.  I said "Oh, okay, my mom was cool.  It's alright. It's alright."
Story_ID: 4691
Speaker 1: That's what I was going to ask you, that's why I was jotting down there about near death because I was wondering if you had what people say that happens.  That's sort of amazing.  It is.  That didn't freak you out at nineteen?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just glad to be alive.  You know.  And after the doctor said "You were just hallucinating." I said, "Okay."  I shoved it away and put it away in my memory bank.  But it's when I saw this movie that all of those memories returned.  And, of course, then I went out and bought books by Ray Moody [Dr. Ray Moody, author of "Life after Life"] and a number of other-- Betty Eady [author of "Embraced by the Light"], people who had written and documented near-death experiences voluminously.  So, now, but I mean in '69 [1969] , if you tell somebody, they'd say "Nah, that's a little weird."  But, you know, it was a legitimate real thing that happened to me.  But I said "You know, God always knows when to time things."  And had it not been for remembering and reconnecting, you know, the sadness that I felt with mom, the heartache that we talked about. That was-- I mean, that was a part of being human, but I had another dimension that I was able to share with my brother and my two sisters that helped make it a little easier for them to deal with. So that was, you know, that was kind of a cool experience how the gift of a Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota] education just keeps on giving, you know, thirty years later.
Story_ID: 4692
Speaker 1: Now what I'm curious about is one, you came from an urban environment and I'm just wondering, you know, here you are in sort of this lily white environment, though you went to, you know, mixed schools.  Was that different?  You know, you're from a city.  You know, this is a little town.  Was there anything different? But it is the '60s [1960s], too.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's late '60s [1960s]  or early '70s [1970s]. The tension was shifting from civil rights/ black power movement into the war.  My folks always taught me that I was a citizen of the world.  And the experience, I mean, here I was a nineteen year old college-- and just completed my freshman year, you know, or sophomore year. I had the nerve, the unmitigated gall, a little black boy from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]to take his saxophone and a backpack and hitchhike around Europe by myself?  That all goes back to Bill Cosby [comedian] and Daddy-O Daylie [radio personality]. I mean, the shy kid before that experience wouldn't have even thought about that.  But I felt comfortable with who I was and that I had, I had the ability and the desire and the curiosity to find out what was going on in Europe. So my recent trip back to Paris [France], I went with my girlfriend and we went to that bench that I read this.  And I said, "that was the bench."  It was still there,  it's got a couple of coats of paint on it.  And she took a picture of me on the bench and then she walked over and she kicked it.  It was sort of poetic justice.  But I, I-- my memories of Paris were of a broken heart and almost a non-beating heart, and I went back because she was a full heart.  It was cool.
Story_ID: 4693
Speaker 1: That's sweet.  That's nice.  Now, what program was this at Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota] that you would do this in your sophomore year?
Speaker 2: It was one we invented ! Well everybody--  Well, listen.  This is the late '60s [ 1960s].  Carleton had a Japan program, it had an Israel program,  it had a France program.  It had a program for every place, probably Antarctica.  It did not have an Africa program. The black student or students organized for unity and liberation, so we said "we should have a program that focuses on Africa" and we crafted the program.  We had a professor, Elhanan Hagolani [PhD], who is a noted anthropologist, and had studied in this village and in the region, and had done work in there, anthropological work, so he became our sponsor and we raised the money and that's how we got there.
Speaker 1: That was Emmett ( unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Emmett was on the program.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He told me the story once about Carleton, what, and he has the same mentor right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Elhanan Hagolani.  Ask him about the one student who didn't almost make it back because we joked about one of us getting sent back in a pine box.  I didn't know it was going to be me or I came that close to it.
Speaker 1: Now the sax, though, see last we talked, you weren't playing sax when you were young.  But when did you pick up the sax?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, I played-- I started in, at Bennett School playing clarinet. And when I went to [John Marshall] Harland High School, I played in the band and I played the bass clarinet because that was the only way I could play with the concert band.  Because there were enough clarinetists plus I thought that the bass clarinet was very cool.  But somehow in my senior year, I would take home an alto sax on weekends just to fool around with. And when I got to college, one of those kids, one of those little rich kids, Adam Winter, lived across the hall from me.  He had an organ and a saxophone and he was focused on the organ and he just let me borrow his tenor saxophone and we started gigging.  The name of our group was "Black DaDa Nihilismus."  It was a poem by Le Roi Jones [ aka Amiri Baraka].  "Black DaDa Nihilismus."  And the guy in the picture playing the trumpet, Peter Hecker(?),  was Plus One.  We had one white trumpet player, so that was the name of the group and we later changed our name as personnel changed to the "Mohohani 817 Express."  And Mohohani is a Sioux Indian phrase that we were told meant "today is a beautiful day to die".  And we came up with the brilliant name in the band at 8:17 so that's how it became the 817 Express.
Story_ID: 4694
Speaker 1: Now what was it about music that you liked?  I mean why did you end up playing the saxophone.  Did people form you?
Speaker 2: John Coltrane is like my hero.  Nat Adderley-- not Nat, [Julian] Cannonball Adderley was--Yusef Lateef, gosh, Ornette Coleman.  They were just-- the saxophone that sound was just, did it for me, plus it was cool.  Guys would play saxophone were cool,  and I was really into being cool.  Ted Cursen(?) was one of the musicians in Paris [France] that I got to play with along with Hank Mobley, who was an expatriate.  In fact, there's a place called La Chat Qui Pecher off of [Place] St-Michel on Rue de la Huchette and it was a cave and you'd go down all these stairs and it was about 2:00 in the morning.  I'd go down and Archie Shepp, Hank Mobley and Ted Cursen (ph.) and the George Arvanitis Trio were playing, and I had my saxophone with me.  And I sat in with these guys and I had no idea.  I mean, I knew the names, but, you know, a college kid, I came to find, I was at the Jazz Record Mart [Chicago, Illinois], gosh, this was maybe fifteen years ago.  And I'm flipping through the records and I see Hank Mobley.  "Oh, wow, yeah, I played with him in Paris" and I turned it over and turned out that this album was recorded the day, I mean, that morning, that day that I was sitting and playing with him called the "Flip."  Recorded in Paris, France with the George Arvanitis Trio.  I said, "This is too wild."  And, you know, it's like thirty or twenty-eight years later, I'm like, I had no idea who I was hanging out with (laughing).  But the saxophone and when I started working at Channel 7 [Chicago, Illinois WLS-ABC affiliate], three of us, four of us actually, George Han (ph.) and Mike Wall (ph.), who were both directors, and Steve Mize (ph.), who was an audio technician and cameraman, we were all just kind of talking and taping editorials about playing in college jazz bands.  I said, "Why don't we get together and see what will happen?", and so we started getting together on Sunday afternoons and started a group called (unclear) which is Ethiopian for the great striped horse because we graduated from having one white member to having a blended band, so we were the "Zebras"-- so we were the "Great Striped Horse."  We still get together.
Story_ID: 4695
Speaker 1: Now how did that year change you, you know, that year that you spent?  And besides you had a near death experience.  I mean because you had two more years, usually people take their junior year abroad.  And what education?  I mean, you weren't going to school during this time, this was sort of life experience?
Speaker 2: It was life experience.  We lived in a village.  I followed a group that called themselves the "First Pianists".  They played bylophones, which is like a xylophone and they claim that their ancestors created the instrument, the percussive instrument, that today we know as the piano.  And I studied with them.  It was all experimental.  We lived in this village.  We did projects in this village.  It was total submersion in French because it was a former French colony and I had two semesters of college French and that was it, and it was "plop."  And we had to make it and that was the experience and it was really rare for someone as young as I and Mark Burelli and Sherry Lott (ph.) and Leon (unclear).  There were about five of the eleven of us that were not juniors or seniors.  But it was, what that experience did for me, I'm still unfolding.  I'm still getting lessons from that.  I started writing poetry on that trip.  I discovered my first poems were in Versailles Gardens [Versailles, France] mourning the loss of the love of my life, but it started me writing poetry which is something I still do today.  It taught me that I had that voice.  It taught me that I could things that were just unthinkable for--none of my contemporaries, I don't think thought about traveling around Europe solo hitchhiking in 1969.  I was sitting and washing my clothes in a little laundromat in Paris, France when the first astronauts put their feet on the moon.  And I didn't, I couldn't hear anything in English.  It was all in French and I hadn't gotten to the village of Donnanay (ph.), yet, so I was just operating off of those two semesters of college French.  But that experience and to be able to go back there, you know, thirty-two years later this April, and to visit that laundromat and go to that jazz cave and compare what life was like then to what it's like now and just to really recognize how tremendously blessed I've been but how all of those things were setting me up to do what I was to do later in my life.  And the Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota] experience, was, I mean I was not the best student.  I mean this was the '60s [1960s] and it was, you know, a time of revolution-- the Civil Rights Revolution [Movement], the Women's Movement, the war in Vietnam.  It was about recognizing the groups of people coming together for a good purpose can literally change the course of history.  Powerful times.
Story_ID: 4696
Speaker 1: So did school seem irrelevant when you got back?  Were you like, how were you changed?
Speaker 2: I was, well, first of all, it took me about three months, to fully just get over the surgery and almost dying because I lost a tremendous amount of weight and I was down to about 115 lbs. And the draft was very much a part, an active part of my life in the Vietnam War.  I had several buddies that had been killed in Vietnam War while I had been in Africa.  And my draft number there was a lottery and I was like I was 353 out of 354 which pretty much guaranteed that I wasn't gonna have to serve in the Vietnam War.  But, you know, all of those issues were going on.  It was an incredible-- I mean we learned, that was the beginning of the speeding up of time, I think, in our culture and our world. Things started moving really, I mean it wasn't "Ozzie & Harriett" kind of stuff [ref. to 1952-1956 TV show.] Things started quickly moving.  And I was a bit of an activist.  You know, I was, I was-- school was part of the experience that I was going through at that time.  You know, it was an important part and I got B's and C's but I'd get A's.  But I learned and the kinds of things that we were studying that was when you could design your own major and my major was Urban Studies.  Figure that out in the cornfields of Minnesota, I'm an urban studies major, but it worked.  When I graduated from Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota], my first job was, I probably had the longest title in city government at that time.  I was staff assistant to the administrative assistant to the mayor of the city of Chicago [Illinois].  And that was one heck of a-- that kind of wrapped around my business card, but that was what I did.  I was hired by Irwin A. France, who was the administrative assistant to Mayor Richard J. Daley and I was his staff assistant and I worked with him for a number of years.  In that capacity, I later moved into the role of a program specialist and that's really when I began shifting into the communications area.  I was a speech writer and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 4697
Speaker 1: That was a pretty good job to get out like that, you know, and working for Irwin France must have been an experience too?
Speaker 2: It was, and Irwin was a friend of our family's.  He was on the Trustee Board of the Parker(?) Congressional Church with my father and he was, obviously politically connected.  And what had happened, and this is an interesting story--all through, well, my junior and senior year of high school, I worked in the mailroom at Illinois Bell, which was the predecesor of Ameritech.  That was the job that I had preparing for college.  And because of the Civil Rights Movement, Illinois Bell was one of those forward-thinking companies who decided that they would begin programs preparing young black students to move into management roles in the company as they went on to college and graduated.  The experience I had for Illinois Bell [telephone company] was absolutely fabulous.  You know, I was in the frame room,  I was in switching,  I was in the garage,  I moved into different operations. And the last job I had there, I encountered a supervisor who believed that I was not telling the truth about a situation.  I had been asked to take phone equipment out of people's homes who had not paid their phone bills, and I worked in the Superior garage which the Superior District included downtown, the Gold Coast, Old Town, part of Lincoln Park and Cabrini Green [Homes, public housing project] [ all Chicago, Illinois North side neighborhoods]  I got sent to take phone out of Cabrini Green . And I was in the building actually where [Mayor] Jane Byrne had moved into when she lived there briefly [in the 1980s].  And I was taking-- this was my very first day on the job. And I was confronted by a group of young men who suggested that I might want to leave and, not as politely as that.  And I ran down the stairs because the elevator wasn't coming.  I got about four phones in my arms.  I threw them up in the phone truck, got in the truck.  They gave me the raggiest truck in the garage and it was a standard shift, and I was learning how to drive it that day.  And these guys were banging on the car.  I made it back to the garage and I told the supervisor I said "Look, this is a big district. Cabrini Green is not the only community here."  I told him what happened.  I said, "I'm here only before Thanksgiving and New Year's to help raise, you know, earn a little money before going back to college.  I am not here to die or get my butt whipped and I really appreciate being sent to another district because I am the only black employee in this garage.  It's pretty obvious what's going on."  So, anyway, long story short, I got reassigned to other duties and spent those four weeks or so and it was over.  That summer after completing my junior year, I came back to the phone company as I always did, and applied to 25 West Randolph and the personnel person said, "I'm sorry.  We can't offer you a job."  I said "Why?  You know, I'm doing this program."  She said that your previous supervisor said, "That under no conditions rehire this employee."  I said, "What?"  And then she said, "Well, the explanation is that you were insubordinate and that you lied about being attacked."  And an investigation was held and he subsequently was disciplined.  But, in the meantime, I needed a summer job and I didn't have time to wait, so my dad talked with Irwin and he hired me.  So I was an intern for the "Model Cities" program that summer.
Story_ID: 4698
Speaker 1: So what would you say you learned out of that whole experience, because you spent three years there?
Speaker 2: I really learned how systems worked, political systems worked, social systems worked, how business systems worked.  Chicago has just been an incredible experience of learning how people can come together to accomplish great things or can decide not to deal with obvious issues and, as, so you get the whole scope of human endeavor represented in things that happen or do not happen in this town.  I've had the good fortune of working in City Hall.  I mean my friends through I was nuts.  I mean in 1972 after the riots in '68 [1968], you're going to work for Richard J. Daley?  And my response was "I'm working, first of all in the "Model Cities" program and I'm working in the War on Poverty program and, you know, my issue is social change." And that's how, how it turned out.  I was at Model Cities (unclear) that entire time.  I saw some incredible things, good things happen in the city.  I saw some incredibly dynamic politics going on.  But I got a good idea of what politics, government and social issues were all about, and that was, but I still had this burning passion to be a journalist, and I didn't care whether it was going to be radio or television. I wanted to do it and I-- you know, just was trying my best to get. But see, what I learned, I learned that God has his own agenda and his own time table and those-- that's probably the most important lesson, because I was banging my head up against the wall trying to move somewhere else and not completely being in the present.  I decided, however, that "Model Cities" in the city was limiting my growth and I decided that I wanted to work for a civil rights organization.
Story_ID: 4699
Speaker 1: and I applied and I was hired to serve as a program specialist at the Chicago Urban League and they also made me urban communications coordinator and director of communications of P.R., but before I, and that experience was another, as I look back, the progression was just so profound for me because here I was working for an organization like the Chicago Urban League, with its accomplishment or its mission, but I still wanted to be in T.V. or radio.  It didn't matter.  And I hosted a program on WSBN, or WLUP for the Urban League called "Urban Update" and it was great.  I got to interview luminaries in the area including some people that are more infamous and famous including David Duke, who at the time was, you know, the head of the KKK [ Ku Klux Klan].  And I just, I really had this desire to move into broadcasting and was doing everything I could and not focusing as much energy and attention as I should or could have on what was happening in the moment.  Well, the most profound thing occurred.  I had a dream and in the dream was a message, "Bill, if God wants you to be a broadcaster, you will be. But you are not serving your employer by not focusing on what you were hired to do.  You need to do your job."  And it was one of those dreams where I woke up 3:00 a.m. in the morning and I got the message and I made a decision that I will not pursue a career in broadcasting. That I will focus my time and attention and energy in doing the best job that I could.  Now I wasn't' doing a bad job but my head was in the inimitable words of Horace  Grant- formerly of the Chicago Bulls, "My head was else place."  You know, I was not focused on what I was doing.
Story_ID: 4700
Speaker 1: Two weeks after making that very decided and profound decision, I got a phone call from a former Urban League co-worker named Sheila Tucker.  Sheila was the director of community affairs for WLS TV [Channel 7], and she calls and she says "Bill, Elizabeth Barks, our editorial director, has just announced that she's resigning.  You should apply for her job as editorial director."  I said "Sheila, that is so thoughtful of you.  Thank you so much, but two weeks ago, I decided that, you know, I wasn't going to pursue a career in broadcasting.  I'm really going to focus on what I'm doing here, but thank you."  She said "Well, Bill, you know, all of our engineers and technicians are on strike, and there aren't going to be any decisions made for hiring new employees until our labor situation is settled.  Why don't you send a letter and a resume.  It's probably gonna be a number of months."  I said "Well, I guess, since it's nothing definite." So, I sent a letter and resume, this was in April of 1977.  And I totally forgot about it, went along doing my job, having a wonderful time.  I just really-- things were popping, we were doing some exciting things at the Urban League.  And November, one day I went home after work and there was a letter from Channel 7, I'm like "This is weird.  How did they get my home address and why are they sending me mail at home?"  So, I opened it and it was from Phil Boyer who was the Vice President and General Manager apologizing for not responding to my letter of inquiry about the position of editorial director, but because of the strike situation, budget preparation that this was the first opportunity he had to begin interviewing candidates so please call his office to schedule an appointment.  I'm like,"Oh, wow."  I completely put it out of my mind,  I never even thought about it.  I called and scheduled an appointment and went down and met with him for an hour and by the time I could drive back to 45th and Michigan, there was a message from him. And the message was to call him immediately, which I did, and he said "Bill, I'm having lunch tomorrow with Jim Compton.  I'd like to let him know I'm hiring you away."  And that was how I was made an offer to join Channel 7.
Story_ID: 4701
Speaker 1: So this was a grand occasion here?  Yeah, it was pretty...  It was let go, let God in many ways.
Speaker 2: That was the profound lesson that I learned.  So that has started really what has been like a twenty-two, twenty-three-year career
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And let's talk about that.  Was it all that you thought when you started?
Speaker 2: Nothing is ever like it was.  We, I mean, we had fun.  I mean had an incredible opportunity in community service.  In broadcasting, in a very unique job at a fabulous station, I mean a station that has enjoyed a reputation of excellence and popularity and has, in my watch, garnered the privileged position of being known as Chicago's community station, genuinely.  And that's just something that I can't, I can't wrap words around it.  This is such a high honor and privilege for me to do that and have fun.  And meet incredible people and hope to make a difference in lives. Now, I know I've been some place for twenty-three years and I've had some kind of impact when, you know, adults come up to me now and look at me and say,"You know what, Mr. Campbell?  I grew up watching you."  ( laughing).  And you know-- it's like-- because I still think of myself as somewhere back there, in the five years, the initial five years-- but what a gift, I mean what a tremendous gift to have hopefully a positive impact, a positive impression on people. And I mean to me-- to Bill Cosby, again, I get to say thank you to him.  To meeting Oprah Winfrey, you know, to interview -to get a TV show-- the last talk show, on one of the first three networks, a conversation show on the town that started me, that was a high privilege and I'm just very grateful.
Story_ID: 4702
Speaker 1: Now how did the talk show come about?  Because you hosted and that wasn't there at the beginning was it?
Speaker 2: What happened was I was editorial director from '78 [ 1978] to August of 1988.  I was honored and really blessed with the privilege of recieving a William Bennett Fellowship in Broadcast Journalism in the University of Chicago.  So, the last editorial was in August of '88 [1988], and then I took nine months and went to the University of Chicago and I had several job offers to do something else, but I decided I wanted to go back to Channel 7, and they no longer were doing editorials. So I was given the opportunity to continue as Director of Community Services. But Joe Ahern, President and General Manager, asked if I would take the spirit and philosophy of the editorials which we always take on location, we weren't  just in the studio pontificating them.  We were focused on an issue, we went to where the issue occurred and we used the city as a living set to demonstrate what was going on out there.  So "Chicagoing" was born.  He gave me the opportunity to come up with the idea for the show at 3:00 in the morning, "Chicagoing" pops into my head.  And we've been on the air, this June eleventh, it will be twelve years.
Speaker 1: So you came up with the name and everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's our jazz group that plays the theme song.
Story_ID: 4703
Speaker 1: So now the jazz group got started, were you playing like while you were at the city?  Not at all.
Speaker 2: Not at all?
Speaker 1: It really started, I still have my horns but they're gathering dust, but that was when the four of us got together after taping an editorial and said, "let's get together on Sunday afternoons and jam." That made it for us, just kind of started happening.  Everyone knew a friend that used to play and it just evolved from there.
Speaker 2: Now were you rehearsed at all?  Because you were actively playing?  You were actively playing?
Speaker 1: Oh, we were all over the place.  But we'd rehearse on a couple of days a week and all day Sunday and we would do things that were unusual. We would do the Heartland, we'd play host games, we called it (Slimeleg?) (laughing) and different spots around the Loop.  We did a lot of benefits around the Loop, a lot of benefits, and it was really for the joy of it.  All of the other players were engaged in their occupation, so it was truly for the love of music and entertaining people that we did this.  We kind of slowed down a little bit now, but we're getting back together in the summer.
Story_ID: 4704
Speaker 1: So in many ways, experience at WLS, it almost was a family environment in many ways?
Speaker 2: It really was.  It really was.  The industry has changed a lot since then.  Because I mean when I got there, we were still shooting film for some stories, which was, you know, kind of an amazing thing when you look at it now.  But there was a family atmosphere-- a lot of respect, love, cameraderie. I mean my heroes, Russ Ewing and Vernon Jarrett and Harry Porterfield-- you know, Bob Petty, I mean these are the icons of, of the business, you know, right there at that station.  Oprah, you know-- I mean-- begins here incredible career, you know with an office across the hall from me.  It was very enriching and-- you know, I've really been blessed over the years and hopefully have been able to share something and give something to our communities and, I mean, for me, it is such a thrill to be able to go to any community in the city and people embrace me.  And they talk to me like you know, they know me, and you know, it's a big kick, to walk into a store, oh, gosh, where was I ?  Albany Park, I was in a store, we were out shooting, and a lady was shopping, and she walks up and she says, "You look just like that guy Bill Campbell on TV." And the lady behind the cashier says, "Yeah, that's him."  And she says, "No, he's not,  he's too short."  And then she made me show her my driver's license.  And she's like "Well, we love you."  You know, that for me is the highest compliment that I can ever get.
Story_ID: 4705
Speaker 1: Now what did you want to do with the show when you, I mean what is the mission of "Chicagoing"?
Speaker 2: The mission of "Chicagoing" has been to focus on things that are positive that are happening in this town and in this community , in this broader community, and it has been a tremendous gift to be able to do that week in and week out and never run out of ideas because there are always positive things going on.  If we deal with the hard issue, we deal with the difficult issue.  We approach it from the perspective of those who were coming up with solutions.  You know, that's what we look for, the solutions, so that's positive.  People that had, this week tape Carol Lawrence [member of the Carol Burnett Show cast], I mean the acclaimed star of stage, film and television, who's from Melrose Park, and we had a blast just talking about her experience growing up and performing in nightclubs in downtown Chicago at the age of twelve, and you know, developing her craft. Talking to Dan Akroyd who was in Second City, I mean, Aaron Freeman-- and the list goes on of just people, places and things that define this city as what it is.  And it's probably the best place on earth.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you-- is your show the longest running?
Speaker 2: (Pause)  Because common ground, it's been all over the place but it is no more.  We've been continued.  I don't' know if we're the longest--(simultaneous) "Common Ground," might [ public affairs show on CBS- WBBM-TV Channel 2, hosted by Warner Saunders] but I'm not--  That started with?  That started with Warner [ Saunders, a HistoryMaker.].
Speaker 1: (Pause)
Speaker 2: You know Warner, Warner and I , when I was at "Model Cities".  We both applied for direct--
Story_ID: 4706
Speaker 1: Now do you, let's just talk a little about journalism in the African-American community, you know, because you've had the advantage of having your own show, you know, it's been a community show, some people say that's not real news, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't call it community affairs.  I say that it's a program of conversation about issues that affect all of us.  And it's universal.  It's not a black show.  It's not a-- we can talk about anything.  Which is why "Chicagoing" can be a verb, it can be a noun.  It's just the beingness of us that live in this area.  And I really credit and thank the management of Channel 7 for keeping us on the air and doing it because when you're the last guy out there.  Now there are shows, Wanda Wells has her show on Fox. But when I talk ABC, CBS and NBC that started these programs back in the '60s [1960s].  Because at that time, the FCC had a mandate that stations-- before deregulation do these types of things.  So, our station has stuck with that mission because they recognize that in addition for being good for the community, it is good for the station because it's good business.
Story_ID: 4707
Speaker 1: Now with, I mean, but you actually position your show as a Chicago show.  The others were more, I'm not race based, but they were focused towards
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they were focused towards--  That was Joe wanted, Joe Ahern, when he offered me that opportunity. And it really, it really made my mind up in terms of what I wanted to do and continuing my career to come with a show that would speak to all communities and my-- I said to him, I said "Joe, I don't want to be stuck in the public affairs ghetto, Sunday morning 5 [a.m.] to 7 [a.m.]." Of course, now that's really, you know, stations have expanded news at those times, so they've become more valuable. But the commitment was to do a show that would speak to everyone and just because I happen to be African American, you know, that's a plus, you know, that's icing on the cake. But I'm Bill Campbell and over the eleven years that we did editorials, we were focused on issues of importance to the greater Chicago area and that's what I really want us to be able to do with the show.  We initially started out with at least 90 percent of the show as being shot on location and, of course, because of the cost and so forth over the years has brought us inside, but the basic mission is still there which is to present positive television at that time.
Story_ID: 4708
Speaker 1: Now what are your views of African Americans, you know, in the field of broadcast journalism?  We're at a point where they have less and less opportunities really for lots of people and I'm just wondering what your thoughts are about that whole, you know, subject?
Speaker 2: (break and pause)  I think broadcasters have an ever increasing responsibility to view what we put on the air in ways that go beyond our ability to run profitable businesses. And I believe that in many cases broadcasters are doing that. I feel, however, that there are so many things that can be done and the opportunity that exists is for owners of corporations to really seize those opportunities and say, "Wow what we put on the air really reflects not what we put on the air, but what we become."  What we see, the images and voices that we see.  If they are hopeless, if they are negative-- if they are about a drug culture all the time or about crime all the time, those messages are potent and powerful and they become self-fulfilling prophecies. So the challenge, the opportunity, is to truly take the medium the gift that it is. The airways, I mean-- it is a sacred trust.  Being the messenger is hugely, hugely, hugely --
Speaker 1: [cut off]
Story_ID: 4709
Speaker 1: So go on.  But you've been part of being a perpetrator?  Yeah, but I've also had the--
Speaker 2: But you've been a part of the institution-
Speaker 1: I've been a part of institution and have been in a position of being able to be that lone voice out there crying and hoping to set by example the possibilities that can be.  Don't know how long that will continue.  It could become one of things "Well, you now, we've gotta look at the bottom line and this is costing too much money and we could buy a strip show and put it in and 'Chicagoing' ends".  But I'm not looking forward to that any time soon and I  will be about the business of positive productions because I feel it's a responsibility, you know, it's just not cool to have your own T.V. show.  It's like you have a choice you can either do something that make a difference in a positive way, you can be benign or you can do something that's destructive.  I just wish there were more voices that were committed to doing things that are positive.
Story_ID: 4710
Speaker 1: Now you're at an interesting point in your life, you made some shifts in all directions and starting a new, a new track.  You have talked about even being a consultant.
Speaker 2: Two years ago, in 19--, actually almost three years ago now. In '98 [1998], I decided that at some point in the future or I was guided to know that some time in the future, I was going to have to make a decision about whether or not I wanted to continue at Channel 7.  Because there were some burning things that I wanted to do.  One was to write a book, one was to start a consulting business that has its focus work to connect people with their humanity.  Because I think in today's world we're so disconnected from our humanity.  Because of things that we see on T.V. and read in the papers and see on the internet and experience in our day-to-day lives.  There needs to be conscious decisions made by businesses, by individuals, by communities to reconnect with that humanity. To acknowledge that there is a disconnection and seek ways of accomplishing that.  So, that pulled me into thinking about what I wanted to do and I said, "Well, you know, I've got to do it."  And this time, I'm not fighting God I said, "Okay, I got the message. You want me to clear an opportunity for something to happen.  I kind of have a sense of what that is, but you know I really love doing 'Chicagoing'. "  I was like, "Okay, see if you can have your cake and eat it too."  So I went to my general manager and said, "I'd like to change my relationship with the station, but I want to stay connected and I wanted to stay involved and I want to be part of the family because it meant a lot to me and I think I've made a contribution." And she agreed that I would do that. So now I'm off as president of Campbell Quest, Ltd., and I'm working on my book and I'm getting some projects launched and I'm keeping some space open to find out what "The Boss" has for me.
Story_ID: 4711
Speaker 1: Spirituality is really important in your life, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Essential.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that's important?
Speaker 2: Because I recognize as that story of my trip to wherever we going when we leave here and back and having it kind of stored away in the vacuum packed container for thirty years and then having that come back to me at a time when it was very deeply moving and sad. But at the same time I was in the middle of a divorce and my life was just completely discombobulated.  I recognize that from way, way, way back from having my picture pop up on the "Angel Casey" show to my experiences in high school and the near-death experience. There's been a theme that God has been doing for me what I couldn't do for myself and there have been all these miracles in my life,  all I needed to do was to recognize them. And once I connected to death, I said "I'm a spiritual being have a human experience," and my job is to bring joy to others' lives and to be appreciative and grateful for what I receive.  And then I look back to mom and dad were teaching me.  These are the fundamental things: the values, honesty, love, trusting and being the best that you can be.
Story_ID: 4712
Speaker 1: Now what are your hopes for the future, Bill? What do you want to, I mean you're young?
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: No, there-- eighty or ninety year olds ( laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's young !! What does the future hold for me?  I am waiting for the adventure to unfold.  I truly am.  I look at each day as a gift and I kind of live within twenty-four hour-- I do plan, but I'm not attached to outcomes.  I also do, I have a personal coaching practice which I began four years ago and part of what I coach my clients on is, is going for your dreams and having dreams because folks who don't dream, don't have them come true.  And I said, one of the biggest things is modeling, for my clients what I expect them to do.  I said "I've got this dream. I can't sit on it.  I'm getting all these indications that it's time for me to move forward.  And while I don't have the 'security' of a job, I've got a wonderful opportunity to do God's work and that's what my dream-- what I do is and as long as I'm doing that and I ain't getting fired, I'm okay.
Speaker 1: And what -- (off camera talk and laughter)
Speaker 2: I hope that my legacy has been that I have been of love and service.  That I made a difference.  That I made a difference in somebody's life.
Speaker 1: What would your mother say if she saw you at this point?
Speaker 2: I'm proud of you son.
