Story_ID: 604220
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is James Edward Causey [HistoryMaker James Causey].  James, J-A-M-E-S, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Causey, C-A-U-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 8/1/1969 [August 1, 1969].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, 8/1/1969, and my--I was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm an editorial writer for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is oh-one--I'm sorry, November 17th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel building [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Story_ID: 604221
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warm up kind of questions we ask, management compels us to ask these, there are five of them and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food, yes, pizza.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Shouldn't I be good?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's by Gerald McClellan, a former boxer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 604222
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James D. Causey] side, but, but one at a time.  I'm gonna start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name is Otha, O-T-H-A, Tobias, T-O-B-A-I-S [sic.], Tobias.  And her--after she married my father her last name is Causey, like mine, C-A-U-S-E-Y [Otha Tobias Causey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in McComb, Mississippi.  Octo- her birthday is October 25th, 1938.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what do you know about your mother's side, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, this is what--this is what I can tell you about my mother.  My mother is one of ten siblings.  Her father, Marion Tobias, was a longtime Baptist minister in Mississippi, in McComb, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now, how--how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Marion Tobias, M-E-A-R-N [sic.], Tobias, T-O-B-A-I-S [sic.].  And he was a longtime Baptist minister.  She--like I said, my mother had ten siblings.  And her mother, go by Big Mama [Pearleana Tobias], her mother raised--she was a homemaker and she raised the kids and basically taught them, you know, got them ready for school and things like that and got them prepared for church, which church was very big on my mother's--in my mother's family.  All the siblings had to participate in the church because you either sang in the choir, you were a usher or in--and they went to church like three to five nights a week to keep the church going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were saying off camera before we started that your grandfather had to take care of several churches and how that worked, you were describing how that worked?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  In Mississippi the way it worked back during those times is my, my grandfather he, he ran a church and his main church was in McComb.  But he also had a church in Liberty, Mississippi which was not too far away.  I'm not sure of the distance, but not too far away.  And he ran another church in between Liberty and McComb.  And the way that they did it is like, he would have fellowship at a different church every Sunday.  And on the third or fourth Sunday, all the churches would meet together at one of the three churches.  And that way you were able to build on membership and it was different for everybody to get around because of transportation issues, but it will be a way that everybody can meet in fellowship at least once a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now are there any stories about your family, you know past your grandfather?  I mean where they came from and what?
Speaker 2: Well I, I do know this, my mother spent a lot of time with her grandmother.  Just because, you know, it was such a big family that my gr- my mother's--my mo- my grandmother--my great-grandmother, that she would've been my great-grandmother, she basically helped raise my mother, my mother stayed with her.  And I know what she did, she cleaned houses for a living, she was like a--like a maid or--and she would go around and clean houses for white women and, and things like that.  Like a nanny, helped take care of their kids and stuff like that.  And my mother would see firsthand how she would do this.  And my mother said that sh- her--my great-grandmother would tell her that, you know, "You could always do better than this."  'Cause my mother used to see how she used to struggle cleaning walls, scrubbing floors and taking care of people's kids and things like that.  And, and she always told my mother that she could do more than that, so I know that part about her.  Going much past that I'm not too familiar with.
Story_ID: 604223
Speaker 1: --There any stories in the family passed down about slavery or about life, you know, before?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  I, I can tell you that I know that my [maternal] great-great-grandmother's husband was killed because he supposedly, you know, I don't know how the whole story goes, it's, it's several ways of how the story went, but he got into it with a--with a guy in town and some guys came and, and some white men came and got him out of the house and they found him--found him like a week later dead.  And that--that's something that's been talked about a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this would put him back in--this is great-great-grandmother's husband, this would be oh imagine about turn of the century or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yes, in your family some of the stories indicate that times were rough in those days?
Speaker 2: Times were extremely rough.  Yeah, my mother [Otha Tobias Causey] even talked about how, you know, they lived off the land in, you know, hand me downs, you know, they didn't, my, my, my grandmother [Pearleana Tobias] made their clothes.  The kids worked, you know, not only did they go to school, but they re- required to work the land.  They had to get out their plant seeds, they had to pick their own food.  They had to do all of this stuff.  And the siblings cared for other siblings.  The older siblings helped take care of the younger siblings.  They slept two and three to a bed.  It was rough, it was rough.  They, they had to struggle to make ends meet, you know.  Being a minister of three churches sounds, you know, in these days it sounds big, but back then, you know, it was small memberships, people didn't have a lot of money and churches were not just, you know, it was used to spread the word of God, but at the same time it was like used to talk about social issues and, and everything else.  And it was also a time of fellowship, you know, where people would, you know, when they would meet once a month, you know, members would put together whatever they could in a meal basket and bring it and everybody would eat in fellowship.  So it, it wasn't like when you think about churches today, these megachurches, and when you're saying a person has several churches it's, it's big, but back then it was mostly used for fellowship and connection.  So, yeah, times were very rough.  You know, I--my mother even tells this story about how a house fire, how they lost everything in a house fire and how, you know, they had to wear the same--they really just had the clothes on their back and they lived like that for a long time.  And how they were made fun of by some kids in school and stuff like that.  But it, it was tough, it was very rough.
Speaker 1: So in--I take it from that story that if something happened to you there was no relief coming because nobody else had anything much more, I guess there was no?
Speaker 2: No, basically it was up to family to take care of family.  No insurance, not any of that stuff.  You know, the things that you think about today, no they didn't have any of that.  It was up to family to take care of family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your, your mother was born towards the end of the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wanna make a point of that.  So now did she--did, did your mother's family own any land or anything?
Speaker 2: Actually that--that's interesting, the land that my mother lived on when she was a kid in McComb [Mississippi], that's the land that they still stay on today.  The original house that they lived in a fire destroyed it and they replaced it with something of what will be equivalent to a little bit better than a shack.  That still was a home.  And that land today is where--my mother's baby sister still lives on that land.  She has a, a trailer on that land.  Her--one of my mother's brothers, he stay--stays right like literally next door, he has a trailer on that land. And that's something that they'll never let go of.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it--they still have it.
Speaker 1: They still, yeah, they're still hanging on to it, so that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, and they always said that someone will always live on that land with a--with a Tobias name.
Story_ID: 604224
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Otha Tobias Causey] have a chance to go to school in, in?
Speaker 2: My mother graduated from high school there and after she graduated, her younger sister--let me go back.  After my mother graduated, she got a job just cleaning homes and, and things like that, being sort of a nanny.  Couldn't really find work.  Her baby si- her younger sister moved to Chicago [Illinois] to live with an auntie who basically said, you know, if you--, "If you go to school you can stay here and get a job and you can just pay me a little rent.  Just don't have any babies.  You follow my rules and you can stay with me until you, you know, make it on your own."  So my--Dorothea Gilmore is my mother's--Dorothea Tobias [Dorothea Tobias Gilmore (ph.)], at that time, was my mother's younger sister.  She moved to Chicago and she convinced my mother to leave that work alone and come stay in Chicago with her and big auntie.  And my mother, it took her a while but she finally decided to do it.  And my mother said that they lived on Chicago's South Side.  And my mother went to school, she went to night school, she wanted to become a nurse.  And she worked in a restaurant as a waitress.  And you know, just think you going from McComb, Mississippi, a really, really small, southern town, I mean where they have dirt roads and things like that to moving to Chicago's South Side.  That is like a different worldview.  My mother said she was scared at first.  She didn't--the only person she knew was her sister and her big auntie.  Going to school for her was a big deal, but it was something that was required if you stayed there with big auntie.  But just--it was a fast pace for my mother.  She was scared.  But she started to get the hang of it and started to like it.  And she said, you know, the main thing she'd heard all these stories about how women were getting robbed and raped, and everything so she was just, you know, virtue was the main thing, you know, being a--a daughter of a minister [Causey's maternal grandfather, Marion Tobias] was the main thing you could hold on to.  So she just said I went to school, I went to work and I came right back home, and that's all I did.  And a--
Speaker 1: So this is right out of high school, right?  She's like eighteen I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right out of sch- yeah, very young, very young.  A little scared, a little intim- a lot intimidated.  And she made it work, she made it work.  She loved Chicago.  She started to love it.  And she would say to this day, nobody's ever messed with her.  Some of the greatest--but she said she met Muhammad Ali in Chicago.  She says she remembers going to a fight in Chicago to see Muhammad Ali, and I don't remember what fight it was.  And she said they were running a little late, her and her date were gonna go to--see Ali fight and she said that by the time she, they, they got there, people were coming out.  And she was like, "Well what's going on?" You know, they's like, "Well the fight is over," you know, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was this the Liston [Sonny Liston] fight in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what fight that was, I, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she said the fight was over, she missed it.  But she still--she said, you know, that--that was--she had the chance to see him though in person because he was like on the street and stuff like that.  It was a, a time of great change too.  It was like, you know, it, it was a big difference, but it was more progressive than the South, you know.  Even though, you know, there was a lot of stuff going on in, in the North, you know, and it was like televised and things like that.  Compared to the South, it was still progression.  So it was--it was--it was different for my mom.  She, she--it, it got her out of the South and she vowed that she would not go back no matter how tough things got.
Story_ID: 604225
Speaker 1: Did she [Causey's mother, Otha Tobias Causey] meet your father [James D. Causey] in, in Mississippi or in?
Speaker 2: She met my father in Mississippi.  This is--this is how the story goes, and, and it varies on who tells it, but--if my father tells it or if my mother tells it.  My father--my mother came from a large family, ten siblings.  My father was an only child by his mother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney], but my father's--my, my real--my father's real father [David Causey] went on to remarry two and three times and my father has a lot of siblings.  I mean he has about fifteen siblings.  Just so you know, my father just turned seventy-one and he's the oldest brother, but he has--I have an uncle, my broth- my father's youngest brother [Isaac Causey] is two years older than me.  So it's--you see the age gap.  And that--but this is how the met.  My father worked at a sawmill part time.  And it was like a good little job at the time.  And he was working there and my mother's father worked there, too.  And they became good friends.  He sort of, you know, they--my father respected him because he was a minister as well.  And he liked my father 'cause he--he said my father had a nice demeanor about himself.  He pretty much kept to himself.  And he--my father stayed clean.  He liked nice clothes and, and just really stayed clean.  And he ask--he talked to my father and he said, "You know, are you know--are you seeing anyone or anything like that."  And my father said no and he wanted to know--he told my father, "Well I have some daughters, maybe you could come up to the house one day and meet them," or something like that.  And my father lived in Gloster [Mississippi], they lived in McComb [Mississippi] and which is about roughly thirty minutes away, as they're really close towns.  And so my father drove up one Saturday and he met with my mother's, mother's father and they were talking and stuff like that.  And my--and my grandfather got the girls to come out and everybody and my father--met everybody.  And so my father started coming up there every Saturday, you know.  And he would like hang out with my mother's brothers and things like that.  And my mother said, "I wonder why this guy is coming up here every week, you know.  I know he's like, you know, that's kind of like a long drive to come up here just hang out with my brothers and didn't even stay like twenty minutes or thirty minutes and then leave."  And my father said he always liked my mother.  So one day all the girls came out and my grandfather said, "Well which one of these girls you like?" And my father picked my mother.
Speaker 1: He actually said which one?
Speaker 2: "Which one of these girls you like? You sniff--." Quote (air quotes), "You sniffing around here, which one of these girls do you like?"  And my father chose my mother.  And my mother's like, "Whoa," she didn't really have any i- idea that he liked her and so my father started courting my mother and courting back then meant that if you went out on a date, you had to take chaperones.  And so my father would take my mother out.  If he took her out to eat, if he took her to get an ice cream cone or something like that, he had to take my--two of her brothers as well and treat them as well.  So my father did that for a while.  And after gradu- you know, they dated for a while and you know, after graduation, you know, Vietnam came calling and my father went to service.  And not Vietnam, sorry, Korea [Korean War], Korea came calling, and my father went to--went off to service.  And he served in Korea and that's when my mother moved to Chicago [Illinois].  So it was--it was great change back then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he--all right.  So he went in the [U.S.] Army.  She was--he was in the Army when she moved to, okay, all right, okay.  So I guess we'll, we'll pick up and, and get them back together again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But now, all this--let me go back, now what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My--on my--
Speaker 1: On your mother's side, yeah?
Speaker 2: Marion Tobias.
Speaker 1: Marion Tobias.  And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother name is, let me--let me break it down like this.  Mearan Tobias, did I spell that right, M-E-A-R-A-N [sic.], Tobias.
Speaker 1: Yeah, R-I-N [sic.], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And my mother's name is--she goes by (air quotes), she likes to be referred to her as Big Mama [Pearleana Tobias].  But her--I'm having a mental block right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, well--
Speaker 2: Ruth Tobi- Ruth Tobias [sic.].
Story_ID: 604226
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James David, D-A-V-I-D, Causey [James D. Causey], C-A-U-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his father's name is David Causey.
Speaker 1: And what--what's your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's date of birth is--his place of birth is Gloster, Mississippi.  And his date of birth is 10/05/38--'36 [1936], 10/05/36 [October 5, 1936], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now wh- what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well Causey is supposedly a freeman's name.  That's, that's the lineage of the name, I know it mens- means freeman.  My father's father, James D--David Causey, I know that he, he was sort of like a--he, he got around.  He was--he was like--he, he moved around a lot.  He stayed with my, my grandmother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney] for a short period of time.  He left them when my father was three or four.  Remarried several times, had a lot of kids, a lot of children.  But really tall, light-skinned guy, fair skin, really he was--he was--appeared to be mixed.  He was classified as a (air quotes) good looking guy.  Fair skinned and very debonair, debonair type character.  I've only met him twice in his life.  Very tall, well built, very graceful guy.  But he, he had a liking for women, but other than that, he really kept to himself.  The times I met him he was very quiet, very quiet.  I don't really know a whole lot about the Causey side of the family until I got much older.
Story_ID: 604227
Speaker 1: I'll tell you a story about how--I didn't even realize my father even had any siblings--half, half siblings until I was at a journalism convention in New York [New York] in 1985.  I was at the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] convention in--at actually it was 1987, journalism convention in New York.  And I was rec- they were gonna give me an award for upcoming journalist--a college journalist, it was a scholarship, a two thousand five hundred dollar scholarship in Harlem, New York at the Apollo Theater.  And I remember checking into my hotel and I had my name tag and it said Causey [HistoryMaker James Causey].  And this guy that I swear he looks--looked just like my father, old pictures of my father, came up to me and said, "Hey wh- what's your last name?" I said, "Causey."  And he said, "You know, my people's last name is Causey."  And I said, "Oh yeah?" And he said, "Who--who's your people?"  And I said, "Well my father's name is James Causey [James D. Causey]."  He said, "What's your--what's his father's name?" I said, "David Causey."  He said, "We're related," he said--he said, "my name is Isaac Causey."  I said, "I never heard of no Isaac Causey."  And really, I didn't know my father even had any siblings.  And I said, "I never heard of any Isaac Causey."  And you know, this is New York, I'm thinking, I don't know this guy.  He said, "No really, I, I think we're related."  And so I, I called my father, I got up to my room.  I said, "Dad, do you have any brothers or sisters?"  He said, "Yeah I do--I have some half brothers and sisters, but I'm not familiar with them, I don't know them that well."  And I said, "Well I think I found your brother."  He said, "What?"  I said, "Here, I'll put him on the phone with you."  And they got to talking and talking, and my father was so excited, he just like, was like enthusiastic, Isaac was enthusiastic, and Isaac was at the time--this is really funny.  He was looking for a job.  He was living in Jackson, Mississippi, and he was at this journalism convention 'cause he was looking for a job.  At this convention, he found a job working for the Virgin Islands Daily News, (laughter).  So he got a job there working in sports.  And Isaac is the baby of the family.  He's the youngest one.  Remember I, I think I told you earlier that, off camera, that I have a uncle that's like two years older than me, it's Isaac Causey.  And he's like the historian of the family.  I mean, this guy knows every--who--he does the family tree and all this kind of stuff.  He plans our family reunions and all this--all this things.  He brought everybody together.  As a matter of fact, just last year we did a family reunion cruise, which, which was the first time we did that, we went to Mexico, and a lot of people came and that was really wonderful to see us all together.  But getting back to New York, Isaac didn't have a place to stay, so I just met this guy, realized that he's my uncle so I said, "Well, you know, I won a scholarship and they're paying for my hotel room, I got an extra bed, you wanna stay with me?"  And he stayed with me during that time.  And just--it was just a--stars just aligned up perfectly and it was just perfect.
Story_ID: 604228
Speaker 1: He got a job working in--for the Virgin Islands Daily News.  And we kept in contact.  We stayed in contact and we said that we eventually get together.  Anyway, hurricane, the huge hurricane went through, through the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and tore it up, just destroyed it.  And Isaac [Causey's paternal uncle, Isaac Causey] called me, I'll never forget this.  I got a call and he said, "I, I need some help," you know, "I like lost everything, you know, it--it's really--it's devastation over here."  And I said, "Well what do you want me to do?"  And he said, "Will you come visit and you know, kind of help me out a little bit."  I'm like, "Whoa that's, that's a lot to ask, you know," but he didn't--the other family members couldn't really come.  So I said, "Yeah, I guess I'll do it."  I look up a ticket, tickets are really cheap because of the hurricane.  I go over there and I stay with him for about a week and a half, and it was the best experience in my life, you know, you know.  Just so you know, Virgin Islands is a mo- island that's roughly nine and a half miles long and three miles wide.  And that island was--
Speaker 2: Which one was he on?
Speaker 1: St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he, he owned a home there and his home really withstood pretty well.  You know, he turned out being better off than other people, but there was no power, no electricity, no nothing.  And so you know, you think going to the Virgin Islands, you going--I didn't realize it was gonna be that bad, but it was pretty bad.  But I helped him out a lot.  We used the newspaper as a place to--it didn't lose electricity, so we used the newspaper as a place to shower, wash up and things like that.  And all the people th- from there would come to the newspaper just for rations and things like that because that was like the drop off point.  It was a great time.  And I, I started learning more about, you know, other siblings that my father [James D. Causey] had that he never met before while I was over there because we would spend the night just talking by candlelight, very deep, very deep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's really a fortuitous kind of meeting, you know, that doesn't happen all the time, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It does not happen and--
Story_ID: 604229
Speaker 1: I guess at one point were there any stories from your father's side about slavery or those days.  So, you say that their name actually means--
Speaker 2: Freeman.
Speaker 1: Free--or, or was is it that everybody down with that name they know was free, or wasn't a slave or how, how'd that work?
Speaker 2: That's--everybody with that name supposedly was never a slave.  Now, you know, I haven't done any history on it or the background on it to know if that's true.  But according to Isaac [Causey's paternal uncle, Isaac Causey], our family historian, he said that is the case.  So it's something that they're very proud of.  I don't--I don't--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well there were free men of color in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And then these other southern states even before the Civil War.  It's one of the anomalies, you know, of life down there.  'Cause you couldn't really do anything (laughter), you could do some things, it was better than being a slave, but you couldn't w- you weren't a citizen though even in that situation.  So, so are there any, any stories about what life was like--now di- did they own their own land down there too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's funny because my parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] just came--they, they went--they, they live in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] now, but they were just in Mississippi for--two weeks ago and they spent some time down there because the house that my father grew up in [in Gloster, Mississippi], they're renting the house out now and doing some--and so they went to go check on the house and stuff like that.  When my father, my [paternal] grandfather [David Causey] left my grandmother she remarried a man by the name of Orelous Pinkney.  Orelous Pinkney was a--I, I guess he would be a little bit more than a handyman.  He was very good with working, working on land, but he was also a carpenter.  He, he built his own home, served in World War II [WWII].  A very--a short guy, not very tall, about 5'7" and a half, 5'8".  But he saw my grandmother in town walking with, with my father who was about three years old.  And he started--he noticed her and he started questioning people about like, "Who's that woman, who this woman?" And they started saying well, you know, "That's Ruth Pinkney [Ruth Anderson Pinkney], you know, her husband was David Causey, you know, he left her and--," Ruth Causey, I'm sorry, "and her husband left her."  And he said, "I'm gonna make that woman my wife."  So he started to court my grandmother and he, he, he said the moment he met her and talked to her he knew that she was gonna be the one.  He built the house and the house that is standing today is the house he built originally.  And they lived in that house, it was just them and I will I go--my parents would send me down there every summer to help them out on the--on the farm.  They roughly owned like twenty-five acres of land, grew timber.  My grandfather we--I consider him my grandfather because he like, he was there.  He raised hogs, cows, milking cows, bulls, horses, and all kinds of things like that.  And so they lived off the land, so he would--they had cabbage, raised beans, snap beans, corn, things of that nature, and milk.  My grandmother, I remember, she used to churn milk and, and milk cows and things like that, and she ran a little store in the back of the house and--because people couldn't really afford to go to the store.  She would sell like a pound of butter that was like that thick (gesture) and she used to put it in this old fancy thing after she would churn it and I would help--I had to help churn it too when I was down there (makes sound) (gesture).  I remember doing that.  And she would make this butter and she would sell it for like, you know, ten cents to people.
Story_ID: 604230
Speaker 1: They had chickens, so she would sell eggs and people would buy stuff on, would either barter, 'cause that was big too, like you know, "I don't have the money to buy this, but I could do this for you."  And it was a lot of bartering going on.  Or people would buy stuff on credit and then pay when they got paid, paid my [paternal] grandmother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney] when they got paid.  So they did a lot of that too.  That was just interesting to see how that worked, how my, you know, we would do all of this stuff and I was--and I would only get to see it in the summer time.  So we would do all of this stuff and you know, and just see the progress from it all.  It was--it was really unique.  That was my first, you know, my, my fa- grandfather and my grandmother were the first entrepreneurs I ever knew in my life.  Because they lived off the land, they sold stuff, then they were entrepreneurs.  And it was just--it was really ingenious to see how that all worked.  They never--even though, you know--you know, they, they would say that they were poor, but I didn't feel like they were poor (laughter) 'cause they had everything that you would think they needed.  And it, it wa- it was a wonderful--I had some great experiences going down there [Gloster, Mississippi] every summer that I spent time with them.  So that was--that was fantastic.  My grandmother's and I'm sorry I can't think of my grand- or my great-grandmother's name [Minda Anderson] on my grandmother's side, but I know she was part Cherokee Indian [Native American].  And I--there's this picture of he--of her, she has this dark skin and her face is sunken in, and she has these deep set eyes.  But this long black hair and it's, it's just gorgeous.  It's a black and white picture.  And it's like the only picture I ever--that I ever saw of my great-grandmother on my grandmother's side.  But really her skin would just look, look flawless.  I remember that picture, it was quite a picture to see.  On Orelous Pinkney, his family I, I really didn't know them that well.  Like I said, he's my step-grandfather, but I know a lot of his relatives made the Great Migration to Chicago [Illinois].  He had a--his brother, he had two brothers that lived in Chicago, so and they had kids.  I think they worked for a--they worked for some kind of factory in--in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he chose to stay in the South.
Story_ID: 604231
Speaker 1: So your father [James D. Causey] was raised in Gloster [Mississippi] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gloster.
Speaker 1: --basically.  And was he able to fin- finish school in Gloster too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Did he have any particular stories to tell about things that happened when he grew up?
Speaker 2: My father doesn't really like to talk about his experiences in the South that much.  He, he, he considers them to be, a lot of the time, really bad.  He always talks about going back home though--you know, he's been in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] since, since he got out of the [U.S. military] service.  But he always wanted to--he always talks about one day going back home.  And he wants to be buried back home too in--in Mississippi.  He doesn't want to be buried here.  That's one thing that they talk about as they get older, they really talk about that a lot.  My--Dorothea Gilmore [Dorothea Tobias Gilmore (ph.)], the o- when my mother's sister got that--her to move to Chicago [Illinois], well she passed away on Thanksgiving Day four years ago.  We buried her back home in Mississippi.  And my mother [Otha Tobias Causey] wants to be buried back home too.  So that's funny how people make the Great Migration north but when they die, they still wanna be buried in the South.  That's kind of--
Speaker 1: Well it's interesting that they wanna go back, and so many people don't wanna ever go back and you know, that we've interviewed.  But, but there are some that still maintain land and that connection, and your family seems to really, you know, treasure their land and their connection.
Speaker 2: Land means a lot to, to my--to my parents and my father, you know, and it's--well, Orelous Pinkney, his, you know, he owned like twenty-five acres of land, twenty-five to thirty-five acres, but he sold some to his relatives.  And so his house is here and down the road his sister, she had a, a house there that he had built for her, and then so if you take in all of that land, it's probably like a good fifty acres.  My father and my mother they pay the taxes on everything still and they still go down there and check on it.  And it's all this timber on it too.  You know, they get people to plant seeds and things like that, so it's a ton of timber and they had the timber cut down, that helps, you know, pay to keep up the house fixed up and things like that.  So, it's, it's rich with timber.  It's, it's a beautiful place too, I mean once you, you know, it's, it's a place when you look up you can see, see the stars and not be disturbed by all the hustle and bustle of the city, you know.  So it's, it's still wonderful.
Speaker 1: So what they call the Piney Woods [Pine Belt, Mississippi]? Deep in the Piney Woods, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  And they--
Story_ID: 604232
Speaker 1: Where they got the red dirt and stuff like that, you know.  I don't know if you know a lot about this red dirt, but when my father [James D. Causey] goes to the South, there's some people that believe this red dirt, which looks red, has healing principles.  And so they give him gallon buckets, empty gallon buckets and they tell him to bring back some of that red dirt.  And some of these people they like, like eat the dirt and it's--I know it sounds crazy, but you know, a lot of people believe it has a lot of healing, healing principles to it.  So my father brings back this red dirt for people 'cause there's a lot of people up here that still believe in that, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's a story I heard when I was a child, about you know, my neighbor is from Mississippi would go back and bring that dirt up.  And pregnant women would eat it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And that sort of thing, yeah.  So it's--
Speaker 1: Yes, it's like what is th- you know, but it's a lot of little stories like that that people do, so.  But my father, like I said, they just went down there to check on the land. He brought back some red dirt with him and people have been coming to the house to get it.  So it's--I, I don't know.  I don't think I've ever had it (laughter).
Speaker 2: So they maintained that connection.  I know there are stores in Chicago [Illinois], Mississippi stores on the West Side and some further south, out way, way South Side that have like products of Mississippi or sorghum and red dirt, and all kind of things, you know, that come out of Mississippi that you can't get in northern stores or--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  And you, you know what's funny about that, a lot of people, you know, they hear the stories and I guess they try all these other drugs and things over the counter and, and prescribed drugs and I guess they feel that this stuff isn't working.  So if it worked for their parents and their parents' parents, so then I think people get to the point where like, "Why not try it," you know.  And I don't know, (laughter), I, I think, you know, a lot can be said for it because, you know, like I said people have been coming to the house to get it.
Story_ID: 604233
Speaker 1: Now are there any other cultural traditions out of Mississippi that they cling to, like are there stories or songs and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Superstitions.
Speaker 1: --yeah, ghost stories or stuff?
Speaker 2: Super-yeah. Oh yeah, you know.  When growing up in that house, it was just like, "Don't sweep after like seven o'clock, don't have a broom go across your shoes that brings you bad luck."  My [paternal] grandmother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney] was huge on superstition.  Like when there wa- like if anytime it was thundering and lightning, when she would--the lightning would flash, she'd be like (makes noise), she would freeze like this and tell you, she want you--she would demand you to freeze no matter what.  So if you hear like--so as soon as the lightning flash, you gotta like (gesture), she would like literally stop and get quiet until the thunder sound and then she would go on and move around.  It's just little things like that that are so, you know, "Whoa, what is this grandma?"  Yeah, she still believed that when it was lightning you unplug everything in the house, unplug everything and be quiet.  She would just sit there and, and just sit there, and in almost complete darkness, it was amazing.  My mother [Otha Tobias Causey] and father [James D. Causey] knows all these little things better.  You know, another thing you take fruit and like you--like an orange or something like that--I'm probably, I'm probably telling too much.  But you like for good luck you take a piece of fruit that has never been--that was picked from a tree, well all fruit--it, it can't be fruit from a store basically.  You take a orange or a pear or something like that and you put it in a corner or you put it someplace and just let it dry out, and it's supposed to take in all the negative energy that's in the house.  And you know, it's funny because sometime I will be walking through my apartment and my--after my mother had came over and I'm like, what is this orange doing right--there's an orange over here, what is this, you know (laughter).  Stuff like that.  Tape a penny over the entrance way and it brings you good luck.  It's just little things like that, and it just, you know, it passes on, you know.  But the penny over the entrance way is a good one too.  I think it's supposed to bring you prosperity in, in future earnings.  So it, you know, over the doorway to the main entrance, my mother has a penny taped over the door.  So, little things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you for that--that's a, that's a--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --no, no those are interesting things that--
Story_ID: 604234
Speaker 1: What about music or was the blues a part of growing up or any other kind of music in the, down there?  Too religious (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, my parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] are religious, very religious.  I mean I--that was not big with them.  It was always religious tunes.  I, I think if you look, if you were to say what's in their iPod, even though they don't have iPods, it would be Mighty Clouds of Joy, you know, old Southern Baptist hymns and things of that nature.  But very little of anything else, you know.  It's all, all church music.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they would draw like a hard line between the sacred and the secular in terms of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it's funny now, because my mother is, you know, she'll watch MTV [Music Television; MTV] now, (laughter), you know, so she's, she's a little different.  She knows what else is out there.  She's not just like this is all religion, all the time.  But at the same time, you know, sh- she's happiest when she's listening to gospel music, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 604235
Speaker 1: What particular things were your father [James D. Causey]--was your father interested in when he was growing up, as he--we know he worked in a sawmill before he went to the [U.S.] Army, but?
Speaker 2: Well my father is--he was very good with his hands.  My father is the neighborhood fix it guy.  He loves cars.  Always--my father has always had nice cars.  He drives a 2007 Lincoln Town Car now.  So he's always been in a nice big cars.  I--and I think it comes from the fact that, you know, I'm trying to be psychoanalyzing this now, but I think back--you know, not having a lot growing up, I think he's always believed that if you could have a nice car that means so much, like he--he's caught up in that.  But he's, he's, he's very good at fixing things.  And he's not a--he doesn't need a book, you know.  He's the kind of guy like you, you, you could bring your car to him with a diagnosis like, "I'm smelling oil when I turn the heat on."  And he said, "Oh you probably have a gasket problem, when was the last time you did this or did that."  And everybody from his church, people from the neighborhood, they all bring us--their cars to him for all these problems.  And he puts CV [constant velocity] boots, you name it, he does it all.  He does everything on a car.  He's in there fixing it and stuff and he cuts them incredible deals.  I mean, a third of the price of what a dealership would charge.  So, but he's very good with his hands and fixing things.  He's into church.  He's--he was a deacon at Union Hill Missionary Baptist Church [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  So he's in the church and fixing cars, and stuff like that.  And right now he loves playing the lottery, I don't know what that's about, but he loves playing his little lottery tickets.  So playing pick three and pick four, and he's pretty lucky on that.
Story_ID: 604236
Speaker 1: Did he [Causey's father, James D. Causey] talk about his experiences in the [U.S.] Army?  Now he, he went in around--I'm calculating here, if your mother [Otha Tobias Causey]  came out of high school in '56 [1956], she'd been eighteen in '56 [1956], would he--did he go in what '57 [1957] or '58 [1958] or something or?
Speaker 2: It was--it was around that time.  He served like four and a half years.
Speaker 1: I know the war, the Korean War wasn't going on, but they were still sending people to Korea?
Speaker 2: They were still sending people to Korea, yeah.  He talks about that experience.  He didn't like being on a, a ship, he didn't like that.  He didn't like a lot of the things.  He got hurt over there, he actually got his feet messed up pretty bad.
Speaker 1: Well what happened?
Speaker 2: The--like this fungus or something like that that he got.  So he's had--he's had a number of surgeries on his feet from, from that.  There's a lot of guys had a lot of--I don't know if it was an Agent Orange or whatever toxic things that they were using, but a lot of men got their feet messed up over there and that's, that's been a problem with him for the longest.  He's always had problems out of his feet since, since his Army days.  And so he's had a number of surgeries, a number of surgeries, one where they removed his toenails and, and scraped it and did all that kind of stuff to remove all these different kinds of fungus that he--that he got, so.  You know, his, his experience over there, com- he had some combat, of course, but he doesn't talk about it a lot.  He, he still goes to the shooting range and things like that, so you know, he's, you know, he's goo- good with a--with a gun.  But you know, it wasn't the best times to be over there, you know.  It was--it's like the forgotten war and that's how it's kind of looked at, you know.
Speaker 1: Really didn't have a hot war going in Kor- Korea when he was ov- went over if I'm calculating it right unless he went earlier, you know?
Speaker 2: No, it's just--it's--
Speaker 1: But they were doing like guard--border patrol stuff along the--whatever that parallel is that divides North and South Korea [38th parallel]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But he, he really doesn't talk about it that much.  He, he spent some--like I said he was happy to get out (laughter), I know that much.  And when he got out, he, you know, he went back south and didn't really find much as far as employment was concerned.
Speaker 1: This would be like, what 1959 or '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, some--I'm imagining somewhere in there.  And he spent some time there.
Speaker 1: What he spent two, two years in the Army or, or longer? Or?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure.
Story_ID: 604237
Speaker 1: So I guess what we were trying to get them back together again, yeah, 'cause she's in--your mother's [Otha Tobias Causey] in Chicago [Illinois] right at this point?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And he [Causey's father, James D. Causey] comes out of the [U.S. military] service, he goes back to Mississippi, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  The thing with my mother, when she went to Chicago, she didn't go right after high school, she didn't go.  She spent some time in Mississippi, maybe a couple of year before she went to Chicago.  Once he got out of Korea, he went back to Mississippi, spent some time down there just trying to find odds and end jobs, didn't really find anything.  Then he--relatives convinced him to move to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] for a better life.  They were working at jobs like A.O. Smith [A.O. Smith Corporation], they were working--which was--they were making, at one time, A.O. Smith was making frames for GM cars [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], and that was huge.  It's located right on the northwest side.  They were working at Miller Brewing Company [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  They were working at Pabst Brewing Company.  At the time, Pabst was huge.  Schlitz was here, Schlitz Brewing Company [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company].  So they were getting jobs working at these breweries because, you know, you--you can always make a decent living off of that.  And so they were starting to form fam- you know, they were getting married, having kids.  And so my father came up and he really didn't wanna do the brewery type work, and he decided to enroll at the Milwaukee Area Technical College [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to become a welder, and worked with cars and doing things like that.  When he did that, he discovered that my mother was in Chicago and wasn't that far away.  So what he would do, he got in contact with her and he would go visit over the weekend.  He would take the Greyhound bus to Chicago and he would have to take the last Greyhound bus coming back.  And he asked my mother to marry him and she said no at first 'cause he didn't even have a--have a house or apartment 'cause he was living with relatives, basically being the babysitter and going to school.  And she said, you know, I--you know, "I don't think this is the time because, you know, you're trying to get established, you don't even--you know, you're still living with relatives, what am I gonna do, get married and we move in with your relatives, you know, we can't do that."  So he put the pedal to the metal, he got him an apartment, got furniture, everything.  My mother said she never even visited Milwaukee and he told her that, you know, I, I got everything and will you marry me.  And they got married in Chicago.  Her--my mother's mother [Pearleana Tobias], father [Marion Tobias] came up.  My father's mother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney] and stepfather [Orelous Pinkney] came up and along wi- other relatives and they got married in Chicago at my mother's church at the time.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: Well I'm thirty-nine and I came--they got married--I came two years after they got married, so that's thirty-seven years ago.
Speaker 1: That's 1967, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 604238
Speaker 1: She said that they got married, came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], drove to Milwaukee that night and she said she was in Milwaukee a week and a half and she said, you know, I--tried to find a job so she caught the bus, she was to stand on the bus stop to go down to Karl Ratzsch's restaurant [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to try to get a job.  Karl Ratzsch was this fa- fancy restaurant and my mother [Otha Tobias Causey] had, you know remember, she had did a lot of maid type work working when she was in the--in the South.  So she thought she could get a job down there.  So she's living on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] all this time and nothing ever happened to her.  On a bus stop in Milwaukee after like a week and a half here, she gets robbed on the bus stop by a guy with a gun.  Said, "Give me your purse."  I was like oh my god, I can't believe I'm getting robbed.  And she got robbed.  She said that that was like a sour point for her.  You know, just a newlywed, just got married, first week in Milwaukee and you're getting robbed on a bus stop after nobody every messed with her on the South Side of Chicago.  So welcome to Milwaukee, welcome to the Midwest.  So she came back home.  My father [James D. Causey] was upset.  They go looking for whoever it was.  They filed a police report, nothing was ever found.  Best thing that happened from this, she still goes to her job interview and gets the job anyway after she tells them that story, you know, "I got robbed today, but I'm still here."  And so she was the salad maker and she did things like that for the restaurant, and she really liked it down there.  It was a restaurant that a lot of the--a lot of people that, you know, had money would go to.  And she's--she enjoyed that work for a while, but she always wanted to do more.  So, she ended up getting a nice job offer working at Koss Corporation [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], a stereo headphone place.  And she worked on the assembly line and then she became a little manager out there.  And she worked that job for quite some time, fourteen, fifteen years, and she really liked doing that too.  Meanwhile, my father, you know, became a welder.  He worked for Safway production and steel [Safway Steel Products, Inc.].  So he became a welder for over twenty years.  And he worked at Safeway until--making scaffolding and things of th- of that nature until the company folded up and moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  So and that's pretty much their employment history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother worked at Koss and she got a job working in the hospital because, you know, she went to school to become a nurse, but she didn't quite finish up college to do that.  But she worked in the hospital in dietary assistant and things like that.
Story_ID: 604239
Speaker 1: Now do you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: No brothers, no sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None. Yeah, only child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, so, so you're born in 1969, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember, this is a crazy story.  I--the, the apartment where my father [James D. Causey] li- got my mother [Otha Tobias Causey]--you know, when she said, "You gotta get married and get a house."  We had--our landlord was this man named Mr. Crowdy [ph.].  And Mr. Crowdy had--my mother would help--he never ran up on our rent ever.  I think he only charged my mother like--my mother and father ninety dollars a month.  Never went up on the rent for--because my mother used to help him care for his mother.  And I remember when I was younger, I used to--my mother used to go down there and help give her baths and things of that nature and he just said, you know, "You help me take care of her and you don't ever have to worry about anything."  And I remember going down there and--with my mother and seeing how my mother would care for this woman, and I was like, "Man mom, you should've become a nurse."  'Cause she was just so good and patient with this woman.  And Mr. Crowdy was an older man and he couldn't really do it by himself.  He was single and it was a lot for him to care for her.  And my mother--this lady ended up, she died in my mother's arms.  I--I'll never forget that.  My mother wouldn't let me come downstairs that day, and she passed away.  She was very sick, she died of cancer.  But I remember in the house, this--this guy--he was southern too, he was from the South, and he knew my mother's people.  It's funny because--it's about connections.  He knew my mother's father [Marion Tobias] real well and he used to make collard greens every--twice a week and the whole house would just smell, you know, when he would make these collard greens.  And he would always make collard greens and bring, bring some up for my mother and father to eat, and I don't know, even to this day I still love them.  And I remember eating collard greens, we would always do that like twice a week.  And it was--it was--and I don't know if it was the Canadian bacon or whatever he put in it to make it give that potent smell, but that was--that was kind of cool too.  We grew up on--I grew up on 9th [Street] and Keefe [Avenue], which was a really--it was a rough neighborhood.  There were some homeowners, but at the same time it was--it was a l- it was an area that's, you know, Milwaukee [Wisconsin] is considered one of the most segregated cities in the nation, and you know, I didn't really see any white people (laughter), you know, except for a teacher or two.
Story_ID: 604240
Speaker 1: We're talking about growing up.  Wha- what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights that I remember the most is, you know, growing up on 9th [Street] and Keefe [Avenue] is playing with the neighborhood kids.  I mean, there was so many of them.  And just, just a whole association with neighborhood kids, and with my--because I was the only child my cousins became like my best friends.  And it was time where, you know, did a lot of sleepovers, they would sleepover at my house, I would sleepover at their house.  My parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] were, you know, they were older when they had me so they, they would like to go out on Friday nights and stuff like that, Saturday nights, and I remember they'd used to go see this guy named Dr. Bop [Hoyt Locke].  He was like a famous Milwaukee [Wisconsin] deejay, Dr. Bop.  And they would really get dressed up to go see him, I mean, 'cause he was like the guy to go see.  And a lot of people from Milwaukee will probably remember him.  And Dr. Bop was like, well he was like one of the first men or first black men that I knew that really have a really, really nice, nice house.  If I'm not mistaken, he lived over by where the stadium was built, not too far from there, and not a lot of black people lived over there at that time.  And I remember going to a--well he ha- he hosted this one party and I remember my parents--I--I'll show you a picture of it, they had this tuxedo for me.  I was like, that was like my first tux and I must've been about five or six years old.  So it was like real, real cool.  I remember my--other memories I have is, you know, my parents always wanted me to have more than they ever had.  And sometime they went overboard.  I mean they sent me to school with a briefcase when I was like younger and like kids didn't take briefcases.  I had a briefcase with my name, James Edward Causey [HistoryMaker James Causey] and my address written on the side of it.  It's like, "Mom, I won't get--I don't wanna get beat up," (laughter).  And I'd be walking to school with my briefcase.  I would use to go to school in slacks and suspenders while other kids had jeans.  I remember during sleep time how most kids had towels laid out, my mother had this bubble rug for me.  I was like, "Ma you're going too far," (laughter).  But they always wanted me to have more.  And they always treated me as an adult too and, and that's one thing that made it so different.  I never really had babysitters to a certain point.  I mean, they, they--I was a latchkey kid.  I think being an only child lent itself to, to that where you know, they gave me a key.  They taught me how to cook early on.  I think I was--I had my key when I was like six or seven and I let myself in and out of the house.  Taught me how to boil a egg and fry a egg, and fix baloney sandwiches and all this kind of stuff with the stove.  So they, they--it was a lot of trust there being an only child.  And, and they both worked, I mean, they--both my parents, I remember my mother always had like two jobs and my father when he was working at Safway [Safway Steel Products, Inc.] he was working a lot.  And so I kind of like--I was home a lot by myself and you know, that story, you know, free time is the devil's playground.  I, I, I didn't get into trouble either, it was because I never wanted to let them down.  And so I wasn't spoiled or anything like that, but I can never remember wanting for anything.  And I think when I was--after like fifth grade or sixth grade, I don't think my parents really asked to see my report cards anymore.  They knew I did good.  You know, I was always on the honor roll, dean's list, things like that.  They never really said, you know, "How you're doing in this class?"  I, I never struggled in school at all.  So they just--it was a lot of trust there.  So they treated me as a adult from as, as long as I can remember.
Story_ID: 604241
Speaker 1: What did you do when you were by yourself, did you--did you watch te- television or read or?
Speaker 2: I, I did a lot of reading.  A lot of--I didn't do a lot of television watching.  A lot of imaginative games.  I played with my to- some of my toys.  I remember I used to play with my little Hot Wheels and not, you know, I didn't play with my Hot Wheels like just pushing them along, I would set them up strategically like formulate football plays, like they were playing football against each other.  More imaginative then just looking at a Hot Wheel as just a car.  I lined them up like they were people and they were blocking.  Like I would have like the dump truck on the offensive line and have like the little hot rod at the--at the running back position and stuff like that.  So I--it was more imaginative.  I know it sounds really weird, but that's what I would do and I would set them up and run plays and it was just really different.  I was a different kind of kid when it came to stuff like that.  And that would keep me busy for hours, hours.  And I would do things like, you know, try to impress my parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey], I would learn the capital of every state, you know, with flashcards.  They were big on flashcards, they we--she would always buy me like things.  Know my--she wanted me to know all my time tables, 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 54, 63, 72, 81 and to know them like that.  And I would just like repeat the stuff to them when she got home.  And she was like, "Whoa, that's pretty good," you know.  "I want you to know your twelves, twelve times, your twelves and your nines, your eights by the time--by this time tomorrow."  And, and I would just study that stuff.  And you know, it kept me busy, but I, I wasn't really much of a TV watcher or anything like that.
Speaker 1: You said you had--you had your cousins close by too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would come by and spend some time with me.  But it was mostly, I spent a lot of time alone.  Come up--like I said come up with imaginative games and, and you know, all my bike, bike riding in the neighborhood [in Milwaukee, Wisconsin] or doing whatever.  You know, because they were not there, so I kind of like had a freedom and I would like, sprin- you know, ex- you know, expand a little bit more, venture out a little bit more and stuff like that.  But I was always involved in athletics as well.  So that kept me busy as--kept me very busy.
Story_ID: 604242
Speaker 1: What was your first in- involvement in, in organized sports?
Speaker 2: There's several.  There, there was football, soccer and boxing (laughter).  So a- I was--I tried to be an all-world athlete.  You know, in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I was on the track team.  I was high jumper, I did relay four by 100 relay, I was on the relay team.  So I did a lot of that.  I was also on the football team, I was a defensive back.  I was on soccer team, I played fullback on soccer.  So I, you know, both sports were in the fall, but I play--participated on the varsity level on both sports.  I was--I was also involved in the yearbook committee, a newspaper committee, everything.  I was just involved in so many things.  You know, it was never a time where after high school I came straight home because it  was usually something I was involved in after school.
Story_ID: 604243
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first school?  What was the, your first grade school?
Speaker 2: The first school was LaFollette [Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] it was on--off of Keefe Avenue.
Speaker 1: Is that a name for a Fighting Bob LaFollette [Robert M. LaFollette], the politician from-oh, oh okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, exactly.  A lot of people don't know that.  But LaFollette was my first school and that's when we lived on 9th [Street] and Keefe, that school was walking distance, it was only like four blocks away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we moved to--we moved onto 39th [Street] and Capitol [Drive] and then I went to Samuel Clemens elementary school [Samuel Clemens School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] from about third grade until--from third to sixth grade.  And I went to Jackie Robinson, you know the story behind Jackie Robinson.  Jackie Robinson Middle School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for seventh and eighth grade.  Then John Marshall High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] from ninth to twelfth grade.  And it was a John Marshall that I really got involved in journalism, because that was a specialty school with a journalism and broadcasting specialty.  And you know, I don't know if a lot of people know about magnet schools, but it was a time where we were doing magnet schools in the city.  You know, there was a automotive school which was Milwaukee Tech [Milwaukee Trade and Technical High School; Lynde and Harry Bradley Technology and Trade High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  There was a school for gifted and talented.  Each school had a specialty and John Marshall happened to have a journalism and broadcasting specialty.  And what made Marshall different is that Marshall teamed up with the Milwaukee Sentinel [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] which was a morning newspaper at the time.  And they would have journalists from the newspaper come to our--come to the school and speak to our journalism classes and tell us how we could become journalists and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 604244
Speaker 1: Was the news important to you growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  My parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey], that's the one thing I can say that they watched religiously, the news.  I mean we had to watch the news.  Things stopped for the news.  And we would sit around and especially the news on African American people, like anything like you know, that was happening involving people of color, you know.  It was almost like the lightning, when the lightning you paused, that's what my parents would do and they--they're still like that today.  So I, I think that's where it first started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you remember like some of the big stories when you were growin- growing up?  Now you were born in '69 [1969], so in the '70s [1970s], I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh the biggest story--Ronald Regan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] being shot.  I'll never forget that.  That was like huge.  I mean, I remember when we got the news I was at--I was in sixth grade at that time [at Samuel Clemens School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  I remember--I remember everything so vividly.  Mr. Menisscarro [ph.] that was o- my teacher's name.  He was the only--he was the first male teacher I had up until that time.  He was Greek and I remember he told the class, he said, "I have bad news, Ronald Regan, our president, was just shot."  And I remember half--
Speaker 1: About 1980, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: His first term in office.
Speaker 2: Half the class cheered, you know.  And I didn't, I just sat there.  And he lost it, he like, "What is wrong with you people?  Why are you cheering our, our leader was just shot, are you crazy?"
Speaker 1: Now these mostly black kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all black kids.  It was--yeah and he, he did not understand.  And he said, "This is ridiculous."  He slammed the door and he stormed out of the classroom.  When he came back he made all of us put our head down and he--you know what he told us to do, he said, "Pray that our president pulls through this."  And kids were like, "What? I'm gonna pray that he die."  You know, it was just like--I was just like--he was really mad.  He shut off the light and he was just--he was really, really upset.  And I remember coming home, I raced home because I wanted to see it on TV what happened.  And I remember seeing, you know, Reagan waving, and he does this wave (gesture) and then cou- cou- and then you see the cro- the [U.S.] Secret Service jump on--jump on the guy.  And--but I remember half the class cheered.  They were, "Whoo hoo," (claps hands).  You know, and he was like, "What is wrong with you people?"  He yelled and that was the first time I ever seen a teacher like that lose it.  He said, "Our leader just got shot and you guys are cheering, are you crazy?"  And everybody was like, "Whoa," you know.  But I--
Speaker 1: It's interesting dynamic that the--that the kids were that politicized at that age I guess.  That they actually knew enough about him to care one way or the other?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, beyond him just being a symbol of the president, they, they had a bias about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think a lot of black people did at the time though, you know.  Yeah.  That was--that was--I remember that, that--that stood out well as one of those times where I was like, whoa, that's a moment I'll never forget.
Speaker 1: I guess did they talk about the hostage crisis in Iran?  That seemed to mark this whole era.
Speaker 2: Hostage crisis, I remember that.  I do remember that.  Another thing, this was when I was in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], the space shuttle [Space Shuttle Challenger] explosion was huge.  That was big.  I'll never forget that.  That's ingrained in my brain.  "Houston, I think we have a problem."  That was like the most biggest understatement of the world.  Oh, we try--did he not like see what just happened?  We didn't realize he was just on a monitor and he didn't actually see the explosion when he made that statement.  That was huge.
Speaker 1: So this was in nineteen eighty--
Speaker 2: This was '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I remember that very well.  But there's, there's moments like that that I'll never forget, you know, that really made me love being a part of the news.
Story_ID: 604245
Speaker 1: Was it important to your family or the people that you knew that Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran for president in eight- '84 [1984], I know he-that was his first?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I remember, you know, my, my family, I think we may have been one of the first black families in our neighborhood [in Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to really start getting a newspaper.  And I remember my mother [Otha Tobias Causey] was saving the papers like, "These are gonna be worth something one day."  And it was some belief, you know, that she really believed that he would become president, you know, a lot of people did, you know.  So, yeah, that was big.
Speaker 1: As we sit here today, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is the president-elect.  But yeah, there were people that didn't believe that he would--I mean very excited in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was unbelievable.  It was unbelievable.  And his speech to a Democratic National Convention [1984 Democratic National Convention, San Francisco, California] was wonderful.  You know, it was just powerful.  But you know, knowing what we know now, you know, it's just everything prepared for Barack Obama to do what he's--to, to become the next president, you know.  So, you know, you compare Barack to what Jesse was then, I mean just everything just prepared, you know, for this to happen, this watershed moment, so.
Story_ID: 604246
Speaker 1: You boxed at an early age.  Now, I noticed that when, in your office you've got several representations of Mu- Muhammad Ali--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and your mother have--had a Muhammad Ali story to tell.  Did you get a chance to see him fight on television when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've always loved boxing.  I don't know, I think the first time I witnessed a boxing match I was hooked, I hooked on the sport.  And I--boxing was the one sport back in the day growing up where you knew who the champion was, you know.  If somebody said Muhammad Ali and he had the belt you knew he was a champion, or a Frazier [Joe Frazier] or whoever was the champion at the time, Sonny Liston.  But the champion was probably the most revered athlete in the world.  The heavyweight champion of the world, boxing champion of the world is like the greatest--was at one time considered the greatest athlete of the world.  And I remember I, I got involved in boxing because, you know, I always could fight.  I used to get into a couple of scuffles at school and things like that.  And Al Moreland was a longtime boxing coach here.  I remember going to his gym [Al Moreland Boxing Club, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] just to, you know, my parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] wanted to see if I could--if I could use that aggression towards something else.  And I used to train at his gym and at the same time, some of the greatest fighters that I ever knew trained there too.  Gerald McClellan who went on to become the WBC [World Boxing Council] middleweight champion of the world.  Kendall Gould was a boxer there, he became a champion.  Al Moreland knew everybody and he, he was a no nonsense kind of coach.  He, he will curse you, as well as praise you, but you knew he did it out of love.  And he saved a lot of young men from the streets, because during this time there was a lot of gangs in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  Gangs were everywhere.  There was--and gangs represented territories, like 27th Street Boys, they would go by 2-7 Boys, 2-4 Boys, 1-9 [Nash Street Boys], Tre [Tre Eights], 4 Mile [ph.], it was like all over the place.  And so I think gangs were at their height during this time.  And if you, you were either in a gang or you were about to become in a--or about to be in a gang.  And I think that was the one thing--boxing was the one thing that saved me from that.
Story_ID: 604247
Speaker 1: I still remember I got an invitation to become a member of the 2-7 Boys, and I got this, this, this fancy invitation letter, and I was supposed to show up.
Speaker 2: They actually sent invitation letters, too?
Speaker 1: They, they give some--someone will give you a letter and you don't turn them down.  And, and I didn't go.  And anyway, that turned out to be kind of bad for me, 'cause I remember when they came up to my middle school at the time, Jackie Robinson [Jackie Robinson Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and they were like fighting with kids and stuff like this and I got surrounded by these guys and got beat up pretty bad.  But, you know, it was just, it was the times.  It was just--it was really rough.  It was just tough going to school.  Just--all I wanted to do was just get to school and not have any problems.  But it was like, rough.  You know, it was the time where, you know, my father [James D. Causey], I remember him saying you know, "I'm gonna drive you to school every day, I'm gonna do that."  Like, "No, okay, I can handle it myself."  But that was a tough, tough time, you know.  I, I, I was at that time I was thinking that things are really, really outta control and the police are not doing enough to, you know, get a handle on this.  It was very, it was a tough time for me, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now this is in, in, in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] or gr- middle school?
Speaker 1: Middle school, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Story_ID: 604248
Speaker 1: By the time you got to high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], in, in, in a magnet school situation wa- was, was it as bad as?
Speaker 2: Oh my god it was even worse.  There was this gang--girl gang called the Sheiks that was run by this girl named Queena [ph.].  And Queena was on, I believe, they may even had her on 'The Phil Donahue Show' at one time because the Sheiks, at one time, had become one of the largest female gangs in the Midwest.  I mean it was hundreds of these girls and they were just as rough as the boys.  And I remember when she was--she was killed and I remember how many people--it was like thousands of people that showed up at her funeral.  It, it was--gangs didn't really start slowing down until like my--when I was like tenth, eleventh grade it sort of kind of did--they sort of got some kind of handle on it because a lot of the leaders were being arrested and stuff from drug trafficking and things like that.  And they were trying to break them up like that.  But it was still, you know, girl gangs were really becoming popular then and they were just as rough as the boys, even--I would even say they were doing bank robberies and some of everything.  They were--it was bad.  There's been a lot of books and reports done on the girl gang activity in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] during that time.
Speaker 1: In, in the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was, it was considered one of the roughest places in the nation for girl gangs and they were started by the guys who--what the guys wanted, gang members.  They wanted, you know, females so, you know, so they could have girlfriends and things like that, and they started them that way.  So like I said, it was--a lot of my friends, even to this day, became members of gangs back then because it was like you were either in or you was ab- about to be in.  And I think at the time, boxing and working kind of kept me outta that.  And just be--trying to be--remain an independent thinker, I didn't wanna be a follower, so.
Speaker 1: Now that sounds--that's a lot rougher than most people would think coming from a town the size of Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: It was pretty rough, especially if you lived in the central city, it was--it was real rough.
Speaker 1: Now were the economics fortunes starting to turn down in those days, I mean as we sit here now, as we were coming in last night we were noticing that some of the big breweries and stuff are not as big anymore, and a lot of cities in the Mid- Midwest are losing like the General Motors jobs [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] and that sort of thing.  You know, was Milwaukee declining then or were things pretty much still?
Speaker 2: Well you know, you gotta think about.  It was a time when crack cocaine and stuff like that was com- coming in too.  A lot of broken homes.  Kids realizing that they could make money off of selling drugs, and make a whole lot of money quick.  And so I think gangs, that--that's why gangs became so popular was the drug trade and they realize that they can make a lot of money off of this.  And the bigger their number, the larger the member the more turf you could control, the more drugs you could sell.  And at the same time, you know, it was the time of Reaganomics were taking effect and you know, there was--it was like the perfect storm.  And it, it created that situation.
Speaker 1: Okay. I think--anyway when you were co- coming along Mil- Mil- Wisconsin was still considered like a liberal kind of a state in a lot of ways,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think this is before Tommy Thompson [Tommy G. Thompson] became the governor, correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 604249
Speaker 1: In high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so you were--you say you were involved with the school paper, with the yearbook, you're involved in sports, and so you're making good grades and everything?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I never got below a 3.3 [grade point average] out of something like that.  I don't--I was in--graduated top 5 percent of my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you got a--maybe I'm a--now did you get an internship here [Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], is this--is this your first job with a professional paper, I mean or, or exposure to it?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  My first job was working for the black press, the Milwaukee Community Journal, MCJ.  I fir- I won first place in an essay writing contest, a citywide contest.  And the Milwaukee Community Journal ran my articles on Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], if, if his dream would be realized and I, I wrote the story as--I wrote the story as like if I was interviewing Martin Luther King, Jr. and they published it.  And at the time, you know, it was a homework assignment, but I, I really put a lot of effort into it and I won first place and they ran my article in the Milwaukee Community Journal.  And the Community Journal, just so you know is the state's largest African American newspaper.  It's publisher was Patricia Thomas [Patricia O'Flynn Thomas], a black female who's--did wonderful things with the newspaper.  And I--after my article ran, I went down there and got copies, extra copies, of course to show it to relatives and things like that, and I saw this young man working in there who was Patricia's son, Todd Thomas, who went on to form the group Arrested Development, Speech Thomas.
Speaker 1: Right, very famous--yeah, well known--
Speaker 2: Who won a Grammy [Grammy Award].  You know, they went on--went on to win a Grammy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they sort of based themselves in Atlanta [Georgia], but I knew there were members from Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  Very much a brother, Oje [Baba Oje] actually was a member of the Kemetic Institute in Chicago [Illinois].  He was the old man in the videos that goes (makes noise) and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  So I saw Todd Thomas in there and I'm like, "What are you doing here?"  And he was like, "Well I work here, this is my mother's newspaper."  And I said, "I would love to have a job here."  And he said, "I think they can help you," and so I talked to his mother, and she said, "Well you know, you could help Todd out," and they offered me a job right on the spot.
Story_ID: 604250
Speaker 1: And so I used to work with this guy named William G. Rogers.  He was the director of special projects for the newspaper [Milwaukee Community Journal] and so he would do investigations and things like that.  And I told him, I said you know what, I--, "One thing that is missing from the newspaper," and you gotta understand I'm like in junior high school [Jackie Robinson Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] at this time, I said, "I think we should do more teen related issues in the newspaper."  And he's like, "Well what do you have in mind?"  I said, "We should have a teen question of the week, because nobody ac- actually talks to teens.  Like we could have something like, I could have a question of the week and then take their picture and then run their comments up under their picture, like for instance what can be done to curb teenage pregnancies or how can we solve the educational gap between blacks and whites, and then hear what the response would be from teens."  And they're like, "Well do you have a camera?"  I said, "Yeah I have a camera."  So they would pay me like fifteen dollars a week and I'll go to different schools take pictures and that became like a standard every week where run the picture and the comments up under the kids.  And I became good friends with Todd Thomas [Speech] at the time and we would talk and stuff like that, and it was great.  It was a eye opening experience because, you know, working for the black press, you just don't write the story and then your story goes to copy desk and then you kind of like not really involved in it that much more, you actually see the whole process of how it unfolds.  And that, that really showed me what journalism was all about.  And that was really the main reason I wanted to become a journalist right then and there, I said I love this.  I think I can do this.  And when I went--it made sense for me to go to John Marshall [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] because I know they had the journalism specialty and I wanted to learn more about that, about that field.  And so that opened the doors for me.
Speaker 2: That's something, that's, okay.  So, so you're in middle school--
Speaker 1: Middle school.
Speaker 2: --when this was going on.  Okay, so before you even got to high school you had some journalistic experience?
Speaker 1: I had about, a portfolio of roughly like fifty articles before I even got to high school.
Speaker 2: That's something.  Is there any particular story in that era that stand--I mean question of the teen questions of the week that stands out the most?
Speaker 1: I, I think I had one question, like will there ever be a black president back then.  And because it was the time of Reaganomics and things--and I was surprised at how so many people said no, you know.  They just didn't believe it.  I mean, think about it, that's just--that's just so amazing.  So, yeah that was probably the biggest one.
Story_ID: 604251
Speaker 1: So you started John Marshall High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], in wha- what year, was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-four [1984], right, '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: In '84 [1984], okay that's the year Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran, yeah.  Now, were you still volu- I mean or, or working with the Milwaukee Community Journal?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we were talking about the Community Journal being owned by Patricia Thomas [Patricia O'Flynn Thomas] who the mother of Todd Thomas who is Speech from Arrested Development.  This is a conscious ki- so, so you think that his, his association with the paper through his mother perhaps made him a more conscious kind of a, a performer?
Speaker 2: Without a doubt, without a doubt.  I mean he was always around African American issues and promoting positive images of African Americans.  So in looking at their problems when African Americans were not being treated cor- properly, so--or treating, treating--treated fairly so, without a doubt it had to have some kind of toll on, on his musical career.
Story_ID: 604252
Speaker 1: I didn't ask about this, but did, do you remember part of the cultural life of, I know black Milwaukee [Wisconsin] is Afro Fest?
Speaker 2: Afro Fest, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your--did your parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] take you to that or you go to?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I the name changed, it went from Afro Fest to African World Festival.  Actually kind of surprising last year was the first year that they did not have African World Festival because of eco- economic downturn.  But--and that's really sad because it, it got smaller and smaller, and they didn't have it.  So that was--that was disappointing.  But it was a time--African World Festival, to me, was a time where I could see and meet all the people that, you know, you sort of lose touch with, but everybody is tended to gather at that and you could make those reconnections and things.  And Milwaukee, even though black Milwaukee is not overly--it's not huge, there was a time wh- everybody could come together and, and we, we lost that by not having it last year.
Speaker 1: I remember how accessible the people who spoke and entertainers were too, and I mean compared to Chicago [Illinois] where you have a huge crowd, you can't get close to them.  I remember standing almost right next to Hugh Masekela--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --early '90s [1990s] as he, you know, singing, you know, about Nelson Mandela coming back home.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  It was, you know, very--it felt like a family atmosphere because it was--everybody was so close to everybody.
Speaker 1: Now the festival grounds is used by the all the groups for different festivals, right, it's one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the diff--
Speaker 1: Milwaukee is one of the few cities that has a festival grounds--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that are basically accommodate any festival?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What it is, is like Summerfest is a huge money generator and the Summerfest for--supposedly for, for everyone and it's the eleven day event that brings in arts and entertainment, for its music fund, and all this entertainment.  And then we have a separate festival that usually goes two or three days for the other ethnic groups, German Fest, Afro Fest, Italian Festiana [sic. Festa Italiana], and things like that, but every nationality is covered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Asian Moon Fest [Asian Moon Festival].
Story_ID: 604253
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think when you were in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] they founded the, Mr. Cameron, [HistoryMaker] James Cameron founded the, America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] too, correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: It is singularly unique in the United States, there's no, no other place like it?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  The American Holocaust museum, he went through a lot to get it.  Because when he first started it, it was in the basement of his home, where he tells the story about how he was almost lynched for a crime that he said he did not commit.  And he--the, the story is really deep, where him--and he was with some friends, teenage friends and these friends had planned to rob a couple.  He did not participate in the robbery, but his--the other guys supposedly did.  And at that time, someone was hurt.  They arrested all three of them and they were gonna hang them publically.  And Cameron said he was about to be hung and the rope was actually around his neck and being tightened when someone in the crowd says, you know, "Don't do it, he didn't--he's innocent."  And this rabid crowd suddenly got quiet and they took the rope from around his neck and se- sent him back to his jail cell.  He was actually pardoned by former President Clinton [sic. Indiana Governor Evan Bayh] for, for that.
Speaker 1: So this--this incident took place in 1930 in Marion, Indiana?
Speaker 2: Marion, Indiana.
Speaker 1: A long time ago.  But this is--so he's actually a lynching victim that survived that dedicated this museum, you know, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not only did it talk about--his museum talk about his experience, but it talked about the experience of all the lynchings that took place and all the injustices that took place.  I mean it, it was a place to gather to hear stories about, you know, were we--how far we've come.  So it was--yeah.
Speaker 1: You're right.  So on the other side of there--there's a big picture of Vel-[HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips in there, you know, too and other heroes from this area that fought for civil rights and, and other things.  So, okay.  Did you know about him in high school or did you?
Speaker 2: Didn't know about him a lot in high school.  I think the first time I heard about him was when I was working for the newspaper [Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel].  I, I went to do a story, I actually did a story on his, his museum.  And, and when he was doing it out of his basement, it was--it was--I was in a group with like two other people.  And because it was so intimate, I thought I could interrupt him and say, well what about this.  But he's like, he stopped me and said, "I will take questions after everything is done, but I'm speaking now."  And I was like whoa, is he--he's really serious about this, so yeah, yeah.  He is a wonderful guy.
Story_ID: 604254
Speaker 1: Well what about your internship with the mil- Milwaukee Journal.
Speaker 2: It's Milwaukee Sentinel [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel].
Speaker 1: Sentinel, I'm sorry, Sentinel, yeah.
Speaker 2: At the time the newspaper had a morning paper, the Milwaukee Sentinel and an evening paper, the Milwaukee Journal.  And in the summer of 1986, before the summer of 1986, the newspaper wanted to try its hand at a high school intern.  The Milwaukee Sentinel has always had college interns, like most newspapers, but they wanted to try their hand at a high school intern just to see if they could acclimate a high school student to a newspaper environment.  And so I went through several interviews and they looked at my past clips and activities in school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and they picked me over I don't know, over a hundred plus applicants for the job.  And my first summer working for the newspaper it was kind of like, it was really getting me to know the different reporters and what they do.  So my--half of the first summer was spent, you know, kind of being a shadow to reporters and really doing like little things that they needed like filing, finding, you know, helping them do research, getting stuff from--up from the library, going out on assignment with them.  And then toward the end of that first summer I started writing my own stories and getting them in the paper.  So, it was--it was--it was full scale, they, they threw me in full scale.  My first story was on a demolition derby driver named Rex--Rex Menard [ph.].  And as I show you how unprepared, how this was a learning experience for everybody, for me and the newspaper, the demolition derby driver lived in Ozaukee County [Wisconsin].  And the re- the editor at the time gave me an assignment to do and told me that, "This demolition derby driver is in town, you should interview him and to promote this demolition derby driving event coming up."  And I said, "Okay, where does he live?" And he's like, "Ozaukee County."  I was like, "Okay how do I get there?"  He's like, "Well you drive this way, do this and this," and I'm like, "I'm fifteen I don't have a car," (laughter).  "You know, my parents drop me off every day."  So he was like, "Whoa, yeah you are fifteen."  So he had to find a reporter that could drive me up to Ozaukee County to interview this guy.  So he found this woman, Paula Poda [ph.], drove me up to Ozaukee County to interview this demolition derby driver.  I do this huge interview, come back type about about twenty-five inches, file it.  I think it's the best thing that's gonna be in the paper tomorrow.  I pick up the paper the next morning and the story is like about seven inches long with like three inches explaining who I am, how I'm going to be interning at the newspaper.  So that was my introduction to journalism 101, don't overwrite (laughter).  So, that was, that was a good experience.
Story_ID: 604255
Speaker 1: The following year I came back again [to the Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], they invited me back and so that summer I got more experience and they gave me bigger assignments.  When I was accepted at Marquette University [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I started working more part time at the paper instead as an intern.  I worked part time during the school year and full time during the summer as an intern.  And I worked the police beat, working a 5:30 p.m. to 1:30 a.m. shift while I was at school.  And so I was going out to shootings, stabbings, fires, you name it and writing briefs and stories on it for the police--on the police beat.  And that's when we first heard about the Jeffrey Dahmer incident or Jeffrey Dahmer really came into everyone's world.  It was the night that I was working the night police beat and--
Speaker 2: This is 1980--was it '88 [1988]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988], okay.
Speaker 1: And we got this call that, you know, there was a poss- possible bodies in a home or body parts.  And I called over to the newsroom and they sent out Tina Burnside who was the--she was a night reporter and she went to the scene.  She was actually the first reporter at the scene.  She didn't get credit for being the first reporter at the scene, but she was really the first reporter at the scene.  Now we got in a small brief in the paper, because it was--we were up against a deadline basically saying that the police are still investigating, but it's reported body parts in this--in this home.  The Journal [Milwaukee Journal; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] which is the evening paper, they came in and then they got their first real big story on this, which was--turned out to be more gruesome than anyone could imagine.  That was the story.  But--however, if you were here at the time, everyone worked on that Jeffrey Dahmer story.
Speaker 2: Now, well we talked off camera about what it meant for this community, I mean how horrible it was in so many aspects and one aspect you talked about was how--what it revealed about the police relationship to the black community?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  There's always been friction between police and, and the black community.  And it's--you can go back as far as you, you could think and there's been this friction.  There's been some times where there hasn't been conflict on the surface, but it's always been conflict in be- behind the scenes.  But, Dahmer who was white, most of his victims or thirteen of his victims were African American and most of them were gay.  This was a whole different type of arena then anyone was accustomed to.  It wasn't just black and white, it was like black, white and gay, and that was a whole different community that, you know, Milwaukee [Wisconsin] had not really addressed or dealt with.  I--as a matter of fact, I don't even remember seeing many stories about gays or lesbians in our newspaper up until that time.  And I read the newspaper religiously.  It was--so--the, the night Dahmer was--we, we know that Dahmer could've been stopped after our investigation a month--months before he was actually caught.
Story_ID: 604256
Speaker 1: There was a report that two black ladies saw this Laotian boy walking in the neighborhood naked and bleeding.  His name was Konerak Sinthasomphone.
Speaker 2: He was bleeding from the?
Speaker 1: From the backside.  And they called the Milwaukee Police Department and they reported it.  The police show up and they see this kid who is dur- not--he's like obviously on some kind of drugs or something like that because he had been drugged by Dahmer [Jeffrey Dahmer].  What happened is Dahmer got this fourteen year old runaway to come to--back to his apartment.  He drugged him, Dahmer raped him after he drugged him and then Dahmer fell asleep.  Konerak was able to slip out of the apartment and wander on the street, but he was still drugged with something.  Anyway, the black women, they reported this and saw this kid wondering around, called the police department.  Two white officers [Joseph T. Gabrish and John A. Balcerzak] show up.  Dahmer discovered that Konerak is missing out of his apartment when he wakes up, he runs out looking for him.  And at this point in time, the police officers, Konerak Sinthasomphone and Dahmer all converge at the same time at this critical point.  The police say, you know, "What's going on?"  Dahmer tells the police that, "You know, this is just, you know, this is my lover, you know, he's just a little--he's been drinking too much, you know, jus- just ignore it and let me take care of him, he just wandered out of the house."  The black women say, "Well are you crazy, this--he's bleeding, you know, he, he looks like he's like underage, what are you doing?"  Cops get mad at the black women, say you know, "Be quiet, you know, let us handle this."  Dahmer smoothed things over, he was supposedly a smooth talker and the officers let Dahmer take Konerak back to his apartment.  As soon as Dahmer gets Konerak back to his apartment, he kills him.  And he went on to kill several other people after that.  And these officers were fired, but then they sued and got their jobs back because they made a statement too over the radio that one officer said that after touching Konerak Sinthasomphone, that, "Maybe I need to be deloused."  Yeah, yeah.  So that was pretty bad too.
Speaker 2: Now he didn't direct any remarks towards Dahmer? Who--
Speaker 1: No.  He--d- it was--that comment was directly towards Konerak Sinthasomphone 'cause he touched him.  So he said maybe he has to be deloused.  There was the black community, Laotian community, the gay community were all in an uproar, as they should be, towards the Milwaukee Police Department.  And they demanded that these officers be fired, they were fired.  The union--police union is very strong, they fought it, these job--officers got their jobs back but they quit afterwards.  They just wanted their jobs back to prove a point so they could get the--
Speaker 2: Is the union the Fraternal Order of Police?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  And that was just chaotic.  But all of this just exposed, you know, everything that people already knew, that Milwaukee [Wisconsin] has a lot of racial issues and things that it needs to deal with.  And there needs to be a forum to deal with this.  Dahmer gave us the forum to deal with it, but it still wasn't really properly addressed.
Story_ID: 604257
Speaker 1: When Dahmer [Jeffrey Dahmer] was eventually caught, he made the police officers' job easy.  When he was caught, he told them everything.  He told them how many people he killed.  He told them how he killed 'em, was just very brutally honest of what he did.  He, he talked about the body parts he kept in his refrigerator.  He talked about a cannibalism he did.  He talked about how he brought vats of acid into his apartment, that they took on, how he put the--put body parts in that to get rid of the evidence.  He told them everything.  And it was like, all you had to do was just take notes.  They had him dead to right.  The only thing was, is he not guilty by a reason of mental insanity or is he just--he really knew what he was doing and he shouldn't--he should go to jail for the rest of his life.  The jury found him guilty.  He was sentenced to prison for the rest of his life.  And he was eventually killed in prison by a guy named Christopher Scarver [Christopher J. Scarver], who when they finally let, you know, they kept Dahmer away from the general public.  And when he was finally let to roam around with the general public, you know, Christopher Scarver beat him to death with a steel pipe and killed him.
Speaker 2: This has been about maybe ten years after the incidents?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And Dahmer had a lot of people that sent him fan mail, I mean this guy was still worshiped as like this, you know, like--there were peo- women that wanted to marry him.  It was just most bizarre thing I've ever heard.  It was--that story has so many legs and I was happy to be a part of that story which was probably at the time the biggest story I ever worked on in my life.  At the same time, that story was just, you know, it just, the more you read, the more you was like this is absolutely unbelievable.  And one thing that's really unbelievable is how many people could go missing in this city [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and nobody seems to care.  Is it because they were black, is it because they were black and gay?  I mean if, you know, you think today even if a person goes missing, there's news reports saying that police are looking for this person, he was last seen here.  The family is worried, there's something on it.  But you talking about a dozen people, black people, gay people missing and it's like it was really nothing really talked about.  It's like how come this ain't really talked about.
Speaker 2: Nowadays I know they have AMBER Alerts for missing children--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --but is there anything or missing adults is a different story?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was just--and I, I really believe it's because they were--these victims were black and they were gay, and I think the, there was low priority for the police department [Milwaukee Police Department].  And you know something should've been done about that.
Story_ID: 604258
Speaker 1: Have relationships improved with the Chi- the Milwaukee Police Department between them, the, the department and blacks, and the department and gays since that period?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say things improved for the short term and then we had the beating case where these Milwaukee [Wisconsin] police officers beat this guy [Frank Jude, Jr.] almost to death and--this black guy who they accused of stealing a badge from them at a party.  They beat him to death and you know, we ran a front page story after we got his pictures, after his family finally agreed to let us run the pictures of him in the hospital where his eye is just about out of his head and he's just, he looked like a monster.  That picture really stirred up a lot of things.  I mean it looked--he looked like Emmett Till.  I mean he was beaten beyond belief and he had knives--a knife club to his neck.  He was cut, he was--they beat this guy and these officers were--eventually lost their jobs, but it was like, you know.  I--it's this thing that goes on.  Milwaukee police officers say, you know, "If you know something tell us."  All police officer do this.  And then they said, "This no snitching policy that exists in--in central city is hur- hurting them in their investigation."  When it came to this case where they beat this guy, almost to death, then they used their own blue shield to hide behind.  And, and they were doing the same thing, they were not snitching, they were not telling.  And this--this is bad, you know, no one wanted to tell on anyone.  When today like sweeten the deal, like okay if you say what happened you won't be held, you--we could be, you know, plea deals basically.  So I don't know, I don't know if race relations between police and, and blacks or minorities will ever be right the way it should be, but most of all because the police department isn't reflective of the community of which they serve.  I think if they were more reflective that could go a long ways in solving some of the race problems.  But I still think we have a long way to go.
Story_ID: 604259
Speaker 1: Put this in historical perspective.  I, I guess the Dahmer [Jeffrey Dahmer] case happened when you were a senior in high school [John Marshall High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: No, Dahmer happened when I was in college (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or just right after, after you were--okay you just started college.
Speaker 2: I was in college. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was the fall of your co-, your freshman year I guess?
Speaker 2: Sophomore year, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's '88 [1988], see if you started school in '84 [1984], I'm thinking you got out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that was high school in '84 [1984], started high school in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Yeah, started high school in '84 [1984], right?
Speaker 2: I graduated '87 [1987] from high school.
Speaker 1: Oh '87 [1987], okay so you were--okay.  Sophomore, all right, 'cause I thought you had started up college in '88 [1988].  Well tell us about college and how did you choose a college?
Speaker 2: Marquette was pretty easy to choose for me.  Marquette University right in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  I was this program called the Urban Journalism Workshop one summer, and that was a three week program run by Rose Richards [sic. Rose Richard] who's a--she's a--she works at Marquette.  It's a Marquette journalism workshop where they bring in roughly a dozen minority kids with an interest in journalism and we work with professionals here at the Milwaukee Journal [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] to put together a newspaper every day in the lab, and we used the Marquette facility to do it.  And we cover stories in the news, stories on campus and things like that.  Meanwhile, you get to live on campus, you get to experience dorm life.  You get to experience everything about campus.  You, you get to go to the gym, eat in the cafeteria, all the great things that go with dorm living.  And after that three week experience, I was like well I really like this campus, it was close to home.  And you know, I went to other campuses.  I was considering Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington D.C.], I was considering Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], but Marquette just felt right.  It felt really--felt good.  So that was--it was--and plus I wanted to maintain my relationship with the newspaper, and I knew that if I could go there and they pretty much told me if you pick Marquette, you can work here.  So it was, was pretty easy decision.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a job here [Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] as, as you were going to Marquette?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which is (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  So they practically--they literally watched me grow up 'cause I started here when I was fifteen and I'm thirty-nine now, so.  Think about that, I've been here al- just about all my life.  So, a lot of people have really seen me grow up here.
Story_ID: 604260
Speaker 1: What did you learn in college [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that, you know, really sharpened you, you know?
Speaker 2: Well I had some really good professors and a lot of old journalism--a lot of my journalism professors were editors here, who really kind of built into me the philosophy of the newspaper and a philosophy of news, their philosophy.  And, and I just learned a lot.  I mean plus, you know, it was almost like learning on the job, because I was still working here, going to school, learning journalism.  So it was just like everything I was being taught in class I was able to reinforce it in the stories that I was doing.  And a lot of students didn't get that opportunity because, you know, the closest they probably got was maybe working for the school newspaper, where I was actually having, you know--not many students can say, you know, they could say, "Did you see my story in The Marquette Tribune?" I'm like, "Did you see my story in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel--Milwaukee Sentinel?"  You know, that's a big, you know what I mean, it's just--it's, it's pretty impressive, you know.  Back then I, I, I didn't really make a big deal out of it, but when I think about it now I, I was pretty good, you know.  I had, you know, by the time I graduated I probably had over a hundred articles, so--in, in the newspaper, so that's pretty good.
Speaker 1: Who were your major mentors, I guess both in, I guess in school and, and here at the paper?
Speaker 2: Mentors, Greg Stanford [Gregory Stanford] would probably be my main mentor.  Greg Stanford was a longtime editorial writer for the Milwaukee Journal, for the combined paper, the Journal Sentinel too.  He covered minority issues, urban affairs issues and things of that nature.  And what's funny about that, I took his position on the editorial board when he retired last year.  So it's--it's funny how things come full circle.  When I was at Jackie Robinson Middle School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], he came to speak to my class for career day.  His son, Franz [Franz Stanford (ph.)], and me were best friends at the time at Jackie Robinson.  We were in the same homeroom together.  He said, "Well my father's coming in to speak about his job," and I didn't know what his father did at the time.  We, we were just best friends.  We hung out all the time.  He would come to my house, I would go to his house.  And his father came in to speak about his job working for the Milwaukee Journal as editorial writer.  This is when I was in middle school, this was like seventh grade.  And I told him at the time, Greg Stanford, I said, "I wanna do your job one day."  And I'm doing his job now.  That's just really weird.
Speaker 1: That is really connected to know that.
Speaker 2: That's really, really weird.
Speaker 1: Really connected up. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: So he would probably be my biggest mentor.  There's other people that I admire when I--some of their writing style.
Story_ID: 604261
Speaker 1: But I was, you know what, I grew up on comic books.  I used to love reading comic books and loved the exciting style of writing in comic books, and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, which ones now, we got the two different major houses of comic books, well not--yeah well--in the action adventure mode anyway.  Were you--were you a Marvel fan [Marvel Entertainment Group, Inc.; Marvel Entertainment, LLC] or a DC [DC Comics] fan?
Speaker 1: I was--I was--actually I collected both-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I still--even to this day I probably got over like five thousand comic books.  But I used to love reading like 'Spider-Man' and, and you know, it was, you know, I think he'd say budding journalist (laughter).  So I used to love reading about Peter Parker and some of--and one thing I really liked about it, the writing was so, poof.  It was so--the, the words that they chose were like so powerful and things like that.  And I wa- I think I used a lot of that type of style in, in trying to tell really good stories.  Because basically what we are, are storytellers, we tell stories, and you wanna tell a story as exciting as possible, and so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, essentially 'cause, you know, people--you hear people condemn comic books or at one time kids shouldn't read them and that sort of thing.  But always glad when kids are reading anything, but I actually found Marvel comic books to be--especially be, you know, entertaining and actually raised my vocabulary.  I don't know about you, but yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it did, it did.  Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 604262
Speaker 1: So were you steadily matriculating up here at the paper [Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], even when you were in college [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I started out here, just to put it to you mildly, my first job was going around to reporters saying, "I'm going to the cafeteria would you like--what would you like from the cafeteria?" And they wou- they'd say, "Oh James [HistoryMaker James Causey] can you bring me back a Coke [Coca-Cola] and chocolate bar, a Snicker bar at the machine, and a cookie?"  And I write that down, how much it will cost and go around the newsroom doing that.  So I went from doing that to becoming a lot of these people's bosses, you know, (laughter).  So that's like huge, you know, so.  That was--it was harder for some people to take.  Like I remember one reporter, Dave Daggy [ph.] who was a court reporter.  He was one--I remember he was one of the first reporters that I really got a chance to meet when I was like fifteen, sixteen years old.  And when I became the urban affairs editor, he worked for me, you know.  And this is a guy who really looked to me as a kid all my life and now I'm his boss, and so that was--that was a lot for him to take, lot for him to take.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that, being, being somebody's boss that you used to look up to, you know?
Speaker 2: Well we had to have a difficult conversation and I knew that was gonna come because the way he would--he would just file his stories and not really talk to me, not really tell me what he was working on.  And it was sort of leaving me in the dark and I couldn't promote his stories unless I knew what he was working on.  So, our, our conversations were really short.  One--at one time we were--I considered us friends.  But karma is something.  This is what happened to him.  He was a athletic guy and he was jogging one day.  And he was jogging in his neighborhood over by Miller Park [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and he landed off the curb, broke his leg, the bone actually went through his skin like about 5:30 in the morning, nobody else was out.  And so he saw a lady that he was jogging behind at first, but he knew for her to make that complete circle he, he would be in trouble.  So he was trying to crawl and the neighbors wouldn't coming out or anything.  So she finally came around and helped him to--helped him to his house where he got an ambulance and he was taken care of, you know, he was on bed rest for a while.  So I used this as an opportunity to have that difficult conversation.  So I said, "You know what, he's my reporter I'm gonna go see him."  And so I went to go see him.  I took the card that everybody signed saying get well soon.  And he was watching a Brewer [Milwaukee Brewers] game.  I'll never forget it, it was a Saturday, and he was a big Brewer fan.  And I dropped the card off.  At first I was just gonna drop the card off and you know, and leave, but I said, "No this is time for me to really talk to him."  Dropped the card off and so I sit down.  He said, you know, "Have a beer with me."  And I was like, you know, I don't really drink but I took a beer anyway, and we talked.  And you know, I was like, you know, "Dave I know this is probably difficult for you because, you know, I used to be this kid and now I'm like your boss, but I, I consider us more of a team."  And he said, "Well, you know, it's not you James [HistoryMaker James Causey], it's the fact that I feel like I'm being bounced around from editor to editor and no one seems to care about what I'm doing."  And I said, "Well I care and I wanna know what you're doing."  And so we--I spent about three hours over there and we both walked away from that experience the better, because I was able to--he was talking to me more after that.  And I remember him giving me a card when he came back to work saying that, you know, you know apologizing essentially for the way he, he, he thought I was act- he was acting.  But he knew that, you know, we were--if this was gonna work we have to work as a team.  And that was a really good experience for me because I knew I had to have a difficult conversation and for young editors, that's like one of the hardest things to do.  I mean you can learn how to become a better, you know, wordsmith and things like that, but a lot of people hate--in this industry hate to deal with conflict.  And dealing with conflict, especially with a reporter is something hard to do.  One of the worst things people hate to do is give evaluations, because that's difficult, you know.  But I realized that if I was gonna improve as a editor, I would have to have difficult conversations with people because our goal is to give the public the best story possible, the best paper possible and you can't do that if a reporter and editor aren't talking.  So it, it worked out well, you know.  He had to get a broken leg for it to happen, but it was gonna happen with a broken leg or not.  And that was--that was probably one of the hardest things I had to do as far as editing is concerned, having a difficult conversation.  Other things, you just--it just comes with experience.  You know, so, that was--that was good for me.
Story_ID: 604263
Speaker 1: Now were there any black employees at the--at the paper when you started or I mean--I mean any reporters?
Speaker 2: Very few.  This has always been a white male dominated industry.  And even if you look at the numbers today, back then--actually I did my thesis on this when I got my M.B.A. [from Cardinal Stritch University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] on a number of--lack of minority journalists at the newspaper.  When I started at the newspaper, you could literally count on your hand, one hand, how many black people of color were in management positions, which was like absolutely zero.  And the ones that were like, you know, reporters which was like, just like five.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: Five out of how many?
Speaker 2: On the Sentinel side [Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], maybe a hundred plus.  Just a handful.  There was Chester Sheard.  I, I still know their names 'cause there was so few of them.  Barb Anthony [ph.] who left, just a handful.
Speaker 1: Five percent of that pool.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That number has incre- you know, the, the paper used to hide those numbers by counting like clerks and people like that to get the numbers up.  Because the ASNE had set a goal for newspapers across the country getting their minority numbers up.
Speaker 1: Now wha- what's ASNE?
Speaker 2: American Society of Newspaper Editors [sic. American Society of News Editors].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They set a standard, an industry standard that they wanted all newspapers, metropolitan newspapers to get their numbers up that were more reflective of the community to which they serve.  Our numbers right now are some of the highest for a newspaper in the--in the nation.  I think we're around 20 percent.  And we have people in managerial positions too that make that, you know, wor- not only are they there to report, but they're people in decision making positions and that--that to me was very important.  That's why I wanted to pursue my M.B.A. to become a manager because I wanted to not just be a, a person just writing a story, I wanted to be a person that could be in a position where I can influence news and influence news by being in the newsroom, do news meetings saying, no this is how the story should be played.  No why are we saying this about this?
Story_ID: 604264
Speaker 1: Or--and doing things like this.  You know, as an editor [at the Milwaukee Sentinel; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] I was able to help change this whole, the way we used to describe suspects.  Like if there was a, a, a black person we'll, we'll get a very vague description from the police.  A black male with a--over twenty-five [years old], 5'6", and 5'9" with a black hoodie, black jeans running west on North Avenue.  He may have had some black sneakers on.  And you know, we would run that kind of crap in the newspaper and have every person fearing every--that description could fit anyone.  So I fought hard against changing the way we did that kind of thing.  I said you know what, if I have to I--we had a meeting first and I just talked about it.  And then that didn't really seem like it went over very well, so I wore a black hoodie to work and some black jeans one day.  And, and I went into a news meeting and I told them I was a suspect in the newspaper that they were looking for.  It was--it was kind of over the top, but at the same time it was a way for them to understand that this could be anybody.  And now we don't do that kind of thing in the newspaper because it really just perpetuates stereotypes.  We only run descriptions of people if it has identifying marks like tattoos or things like that where you can know who this person is.  And be- and because there are so many surveillance cameras now, we'll use something like that as, as opposed to the very generic description.
Speaker 2: I think we all remember the Susan Smith [Susan Vaughan Smith] case in the Carolinas--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --where a medium sized black male, you know, with a--I guess a winter cap pulled over his head, and then everybody arrested everybody.  You know, looking for the person.  And Charles Stuart in Boston [Massachusetts] had the same description of a (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We actually had that case--
Speaker 2: --fictional male that, you know.
Speaker 1: We had the same similar case here.  When Jeffrey Dahmer was killed, it was a guy [Jesse M. Anderson] that killed his wife [Barbara Lynch Anderson], not killed Dahmer's wife, but this white guy killed his wife.  At this mall, he bought this hat from a black kid and he stabbed his wife outside a restaurant and he bought this kid's hat, right for like fifteen, twenty dollars.  He tossed the hat at--down at the scene and said a black male killed this kid--killed his wife.  And it was actually him, he did it for the insurance money.  When Christopher Scarver [Christopher J. Scarver] killed Jeffrey Dahmer, he killed this guy in prison [Columbia Correctional Institution, Portage, Wisconsin] too.  Because that, yeah, Christopher Scarver got both of them, because this guy that did that with his wife, cops were arresting so many black kids in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] during that time.  And the kid that had his hat bought from the guy, he said, "No that was my hat, he bought this hat from me in Northridge [Northridge Mall, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for like twenty dollars."  He said, "I remember this guy," and then that's when that guy's whole story started to fall apart and he was arrested for murdering his wife.  So yeah, we even had our own case of that.
Story_ID: 604265
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Christopher Scarver [Christopher J. Scarver] though.  Now this--he sounds like an interesting cha- cha- character--he kills this guy [Jesse M. Anderson] and he kills Dahmer [Jeffrey Dahmer], is he a politically motivated murderer of convicts that have somehow in--in--injured the black community or something or?
Speaker 2: Christopher Scarver is a very interesting--a huge guy, big, big guy.  A lot of people think that was an inside job and that the--some of the police were in on it because at the time he was able to get to both of these men with a steel pipe, it's just like it was too many things that had to happen absolutely perfectly for this murder--this double murder to go down like it did.
Speaker 1: So--is, is Scarver black or?
Speaker 2: Scarver is black, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is that a big guy?
Speaker 2: Big, big guy who, who was in prison [Columbia Correctional Institution, Portage, Wisconsin] for like murder [of Steven Lohman] or something like that anyway.  So to have him roaming around and able to get both of these men in a weight room like he did, it's just like something just was fishy with that.  Anyway, when he was arrested, I remember when they marched Christopher Scarver into the--into his arraignment hearing, he was singing a song, (singing) "Everybody plays a fool sometimes"  ['Everybody Plays the Fool']. He was singing that when he was leading them into the court.  I'll never--it was chilling, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he has nothing to lose, he's never gonna get out?
Speaker 2: Nothing to lose, but he'd get plenty of stripes for doing that in prison.  "I'm the guy that killed Dahmer."  Can you imagine, if you know you never getting out of prison and you say you the guy that killed Dahmer, and this other guy that killed his wife [Barbara Lynch Anderson] and blamed it on black people, he's like a star now.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  Do you know much about his background or whatever?
Speaker 2: Christopher Scarver?  Not a whole lot.  I just know that he was--he, he looked very scary.  He was very scare--big, big guy.  He--it was--it was a bounty, you know, it has to be a bounty on Dahmer's head, somebody was gonna get him.  And that's why they kept him isolated for so long, but they, they claim it was too expensive to keep him isolated and they would just let him out every so often and Christopher got him when he got a chance.
Speaker 1: That's another example of just when you think it's bad, it's worse than you think.  This is--now I never heard, you know, a story about him before or what he was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was really--you would think that would be the end of Dahmer, but then there was stuff on eBay [eBay Inc.] when they were selling like the door from Dahmer's house.  They were selling all this kind of stuff, and it was just like--it was like will this Dahmer thing ever end?
Speaker 1: Do they--do they bring tours by the place where he lived and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: It was torn down and a park was built there.  But before they tore it down, some people collected some things from the apartment and they were trying to sell it on eBay [eBay Inc.].  And they quickly put that down, shut that down.  People were just trying to make a quick buck [dollar].
Story_ID: 604266
Speaker 1: Well, let me just go back maybe just recap some, some chronology.  So you were--you're at Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] from '88 [1988] until--well '87 [1987] until?
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] for four ye- five years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So about 1992?
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], I graduated.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did you work on the M.B.A. right after or did you?
Speaker 2: No, I waited a while.  I just started working.  I--my first job I, I worked the police beat here full time.  And then I started working on the state desk, doing state rewrite, working wi- out a, you know, reporters throughout the state for, for out of state bureaus.  I did that and then we had the merger in '95 [1995] here, where the Journal [Milwaukee Journal] and Sentinel [Milwaukee Sentinel] merged [into the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], like a lot of newspapers will merge their morning and afternoon newspapers.  And at that time, we had to reapply for jobs that we wanted.  We had to pick our top three jobs.  At the time, I wa- I just figure I'll be a--continuing being a police reporter.  George Stanley, who had became the com- combined newspapers business editor said, "James [HistoryMaker James Causey] won't you apply for business, I would like to have you in my department."  And I was like okay, you know, I was looking at people losing their jobs and I did.  And they hired me to work in business.  And I think I was probably the first black male to work in the business department, I know I was.  And I covered the hospitality, tourism, and brewing industry.  And that was a fun beat because, you know, getting back to brewing, you know, a lot of people made the Gre- Great Migration north to get those jobs and now all these jobs are leaving.  And basically I was talking about how a lot of these jobs were leaving.  The whole problem with Pabst [Pabst Brewing Company] and this union [Brewery Workers UAW Local 9], how a lot of workers were trying to get, you know, what little money they could get out of the company that was closing its doors for good.  And then I covered the hospitality and tourism industry for a while, and then I started covering the banking industry.  They gave me a promotion to cover banking.  And that was, at the time, was the biggest beat on the business department, might have been the biggest beat at the newspaper because our, our biggest banks were being bought out by outside banks.  Like we had a bank here called Firstar [Firstar Bank Milwaukee, N.A., Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which was huge and it was bought out by Star Bank [Firstar Bank, N.A., Cincinnati, Ohio], which eventually bought out by another bank.  And I talked about this huge consolidation that was going on throughout the industry.  While I was doing that, I was pursuing my--I started pursing my M.B.A. [at Cardinal Stritch University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and then I got promoted again to--there was a opening on the city side for a, a news editor.  And I threw my head--my feet in first and then I became an editor and I was a public safety editor, where my reporters covered courts and crime, and, and urban affairs issues.  Then I became the urban affairs editor, then I became the night city editor, all promotions.
Story_ID: 604267
Speaker 1: And then the night city editor was the last position [at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] I held before I received a Harvard Nieman Fellowship.
Speaker 2: About what year is this then?
Speaker 1: Harvard Nieman Fellowship was just this past year, 2007, '08 [2008].  And the Harvard Nieman Fellowship is the most prestigious journalism fellowship you could get.  Where you, you submit a proposal, you know, it's very competitive.  And then they cho- you--after--if you get--if they accept your proposal or think about it then they bring you in for a interview.  And being in an interview for a Harvard Nieman is like you have past Niemans about six of them in a room along with the curator, and then they're firing questions at you to defend your proposal.  My proposal was focusing on the hip hop industry and its influence on central cities across America.  And I wanted to take classes at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Emerson College [Boston, Massachusetts] that would help me, like understand that whole dynamic better.  And so basically there is, is--imagine like being on a game show and you have thirty minutes to pr- protect your topic, that's how they were firing questions out at you.  It was like (makes noise).  It was very quick and fast.  And so I was answering the questions.  I felt really good afterwards.  This was on a Friday.  Monday they called me and said, you got the po- would you accept a Nieman Fellowship, and I was one of twenty-one Nieman fellows that year.  And so basically my company gave me a year off to pursue this.
Story_ID: 604268
Speaker 1: After, while I was on the Nieman Fellowship, my newspaper [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] went through a se- series of buyouts, like a lot of newspapers were.  And I called and I wanted to know if my job was safe, coming back as a night city editor.  I said, "I don't think I will wanna come back at that."  And they were like, "What would you like to do?"  "I heard that Greg Stanford [Gregory Stanford]," my--the guy that came to speak to my seventh grade class [at Jackie Robinson Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], was taking a buyout.  I said, "I want Greg's job."  And they said, "Come in for an interview."  I interviewed with the editorial, editorial editor, Ricardo Pimentel [O. Ricardo Pimentel].  He loved me from the start.  I interviewed with the publisher, and they offered me the position.  And I've been doing this now, editorial writer for the past going on six months now, six, seven months.
Speaker 2: So, well how do you like it?
Speaker 1: I love it.  It's, it's totally different.  Because now you're injecting opinion into stories and you know, from a history of being, you know, you know, where you just state the facts to a point where you--you're not stating just facts, you're, you're trying to influence public action, influence decision.  That's huge, that's a big difference.  And it took--it was very hard.  The first couple of w- months it was kind of difficult because I was still trying to play it straight down--straight down the line.  And Ricardo pulled me to the side and said, "James [HistoryMaker James Causey], all you have to do is state something you wanna defend and prove it, just stick to it and it'll be fine."  So that's to--the best advice I ever got.  And it's just been flowing since then.  And what I try to do, I try to tackle issues that--that first of all that I have a passion for.  You know, I'm very passionate about Milwaukee Public Schools and I wanna see them improve and, and survive.  I'm a product of Milwaukee Public Schools.  I had a chance to go to private schools, but I chose not to.  Issues of--concerning problems with urban affairs, I, I really take to heart.  This week for example, I'm gonna write about the lack of African American doctors in the central city.  I--that's a huge problem, and when you talk about the healthcare disparity between blacks and whites, you wonder why that is.  So I talked to the medical college here and find out what are they doing, what kind of steps are they taking to change his and they was like, they basically told me, well it's an issue of concern and we don't really know how to fix that.  We're--we're trying different things.  And so what I wanna do in my piece is come up with some solutions to fix this problem.  Some things I may suggest is maybe forgivable loans for people that practice in the central city of like four years.  Maybe doing a better job on recruiting.  Remember when you were a kid and you know, the teacher said, "Well what do you wanna be?"  I wanna be a doctor, I wanna be a lawyer, a race car driver.  Our kids not, you know, the kids that said they wanted to be doctors, what happened with them from that time to making that become a reality.  You know, something's happened because in, in Wisconsin alone we only had thirty-three people, thirty-three people of color apply for medical school, out of the entire state, thirty-three.  I mean, thirty-three out of two thousand eight hundred plus, thirty-three apply for medical school a year.  That's like those numbers are unacceptable.  So I wanna talk about that a lot and figure out what the problem is.  So those are the kind of things that I like to tackle.  You know, because I'm from here I think I understand Wisconsin and Milwaukee a lot better than other people, too.  Homegrown talent, doesn't get any better than that.  You know, a lot of people know me, I know a lot of people so it makes it a lot easier to, to talk about.
Story_ID: 604269
Speaker 1: What's been, is there a favorite topic that you have that you, or, or--
Speaker 2: I, I think the favorite topics are anything that I could write about that causes action to take place.  A couple of stories that stand out in my--started out real small and it--you know, I could've easily let it go, but I decided not to.  There was this--about ten years ago, maybe not that long ago, a guy by the name of Charlie Young, Jr. [Charles Young, Jr.] was beaten to death by a group of like ten males ranging in age from age ten being the youngest to some men in their thirties.  Charlie Young, Jr., this--this case made national news because of the way he was beaten.  Charlie Young, Jr. was--he--it started this way.  He punched a kid in the mouth and this kid told some friends, they friends told more friends.  This--this turned into a mob mentality and they were looking for this guy Charlie Young, Jr. and they found him.
Speaker 1: How old were they?
Speaker 2: The kids, the kids range in age from age ten on up.  But other people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As young as ten, okay.
Speaker 2: The youngest was ten.
Speaker 1: Now ho- how old was Charlie Young, Jr.
Speaker 2: He was in his thirties.  And Charlie Young, Jr. had some problem with drugs in the past and things of that nature.  And the kids caught him that night and beat him to death on his porch.  They hit him with sticks, shovels, put wrestling moves on him.  In front of this--this porch that they beat him on, blood was splattered all--everywhere.  They beat this man to death.
Speaker 1: This is in a black community [in Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's happening.  Yeah it was mega.
Speaker 1: This is a thirty year old man hit a kid in the mouth.
Speaker 2: Right, knocked his tooth out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, knocked his tooth out and they--the other kids told other kids and they got him.
Speaker 2: They got him.  But it turned into a mob mentality where it was like a group--this huge group of kids, you know, looking for this man, you know, to--I don't know if they set out to kill him I, you know, that's--I don't know but that--that could be debated, but they set out to do something to him.  They caught him that night and they beat him to death on this porch with sticks, shovels, kicks and everything else.  This story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in wh- what year?
Speaker 2: Oh Charlie Young, Jr., you know what, it's in that story right there--that story that's right on top.  Anyway, it wasn't that long ago, maybe eight years ago, eight to ten years--I say about eight years ago [sic.].  Anyway, the kid that I focused on in this article was one of the kids involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand six [2006], the one that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, no, that, no.
Speaker 1: Oh okay. Oh, 2002.
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], that's it.
Story_ID: 604270
Speaker 1: One of the kids that was involved in this beating, we ran his picture on the front page of our paper [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] being led into court crying.  That's the kid right there.  He came from a broken home, you know, he had what I like to refer to as black boy issues and when I say black boy issues it's the issues that they try to find on all college athletes and stuff like this when they--when they--when they talk about a story they go, "And this is Mike Brown a defensive back for the Wisconsin Badgers."  You know, "Mark Brown, you know, he was raised by a single mother, he had like ten kids."  They start bringing up all these black boy issues.  It's like what is that, what is that, why is that even important.  Anyway, Shanks [Artieas Shanks], last name Shanks, he has some problems and you know, after this Charlie Young, Jr. [Charles Young, Jr.] beating, there was a lot of agencies that wanted money from the government to fix these problems, to address problems in the central cities.  I call these poverty pimps.  All these agencies came out with their hands open and saying, "We can fix these problems.  We can give kids something to do."  The government say, "Yeah that was a tragic thing that happened."  Gave all these agencies money and these agencies disappeared.  They got their money and left, they didn't do anything for the central city.  Anyway to make a long story short, Shanks, one of the kids that was involved in that beating, he did some time in, in jail, but you know, he, he was like had a minor role in that beating, but he was involved in the Charlie Young, Jr. beating.  He started robbing people in a van, him and group of friends recently.  Just driving around neighborhoods robbing people at night at gun point with a van.  He was on an ankle bracelet.  He cut his ankle bracelet off and he--the next day he was involved in a shooting.  He tried to rob a guy and the guy ran, he shot the guy in the back and the police just said, you know, they went to his apartment, found some weapons in his--in his apartment, found him a couple of days later.  Anyway, the police chief, Edward Flynn [Edward A. Flynn] who's from Boston [Massachusetts] who's only been here for less than a year basically called this kid a menace to society.  And you know, it's--it made a good sound bite, it sounded real good and people like yeah, you know, we arrested him and you know, he referred to him as a true menace to society.  And I thought about that and I was like, okay it made for a good sound bite and all, but what's, what's society's responsibility to, to kids like this, you know.  Are we supposed to turn our backs on them?  Are we not supposed to offer them help?  What about all these poverty pimps that came in and took all this money from government agen- as govern- from, from the government and didn't do anything to provide any kind of help for these kids.  What about them?  And you know, it sounded good so I, I called the police chief.  I said, you know, "You said this about him, but what's our responsibility?" And he said, "Well I don't--it's not my responsibility to help kids like this.  My responsibility is to ge- arrest kids like this, you know, 'cause that's what I do.  I arrest them, I throw them in jail."  But I said, "But the problem is, when society starts to put all black kids that may have had some problems with the law into that bowl and they fear them.  And that's what the problem is right now."  That's why, you know, when you get on the elevator and a black kid gets on the elevator and a white lady is on the elevator, she clutches her purse extra tight 'cause she's scared that something's gonna happen to her.  You know, that's why white people are sc- have a fear of coming into the central cities, that's why businesses don't wanna invest in a central city.  Because they have this--this fear of black people and black men especially.  So I called the chief out on that and he said some things I didn't agree with, but I went ahead and expand on--I wanted him to know that when he makes comments like that about, you know, any black kid being a menace to society or whatever, then you know, then other people are affected by that.  And I think other people have a responsibility to help those kids.
Story_ID: 604271
Speaker 1: You've been at this job now [at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] for six months and this is a exciting job, now ho- how long you think you'll do this?
Speaker 2: Oh god (laughter).  Well in, in journalism is an interesting field right now.  We're, we're entering a lot of different realms and we're doing more stuff on line, we're doing more Internet, more interactive type things.  So this is a time to expand.  I'm, I'm, I'm not one to jump ship, a lot of people are leaving the industry.  A lot of people are being sw- the industry is being tightened, but it's also a, a time for opportunity.  As long as I can develop--continue to develop, in- insert my opinion, I, I think this is gonna be a great ride.  I'm gonna start my column pretty soon, that's gonna be fantastic.  But right now, I, I--I'm not looking far beyond like a year or so, I just wanna see what happens after that.  But I'm, I'm enjoying the ride right now.
Story_ID: 604272
Speaker 1: Now do you have, who amongst the editorial writers that are right now do you admire, you know, not just in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], but on a national level?
Speaker 2: Oh there's, there's a lot.  Pitts of course, I read him.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Leonard Pitts, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he's, he's huge.  But you know, I--what I try to do--oh Mikel Holt, local guy in Milwaukee who covers black issues for the Co- Community Journal [Milwaukee Community Journal] is fantastic.  I've been reading Mikel Holt for as long as I can remember and he's just--he's one of those kind of guys--it's Mikel, M-I-K-E-L, Holt.  He's one of those kind of guys that he, he really has a pulse on the community.  (Gesture) He really has that pulse.  And I, I really enjoy his style.  It's, it's more firebrand like all to action, and I, I really like that.  So he's, he's, he's someone that I admire a lot too.  I admire Eugene Kane, he's not a editorial writer, but Eugene is a columnist and he writes about issues that make you say, "Hm."  You know, he, he really focu- he takes a lot of flak too from white conservatives--shouldn't say white conserva- from conservatives who think he's too pro-black but you know, pro-black I don't--I don't get that.  He really just--he writes from the heart though, he's really good too.  So I--those would be people that I really--I read them every day, every chance I get.
Story_ID: 604273
Speaker 1: Do you have any, I guess, thoughts of, of writing a book at some point or, or?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I did, did the fellowship [Nieman Fellowship] one of the main things that I wanted to do was focus on the influence of hip hop on, on central cities.  Music, as you know, has a tremendous impact on young people's lives.  And one of m- in my proposal, I was--this--this is what got to me.  I would listen to Sirius radio [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.] and this rapper that goes by the name of Game was talking with this other rapper, 50 Cent, who's like a multimillionaire, and they were talking about record sales.  And The Game told 50 Cent that, "I would gladly take, you know, six slugs if I could go double platinum too."  And I was listening to that, I said, "That's the dumbest thing I've ever heard in my life," you know.  You promoting being shot and for some reason people think being shot is, is, is a--it makes you more real--it makes you sell more songs, more albums.  And there's been some studies that show when Tupac got shot, his sales went through the roof.  When Biggie Smalls [Notorious B.I.G.] was shot, sales go through the roof.  You know, and, and that's a messed up mentality when it gets to the point that you not considered real until you take a couple of slugs. 50 Cent was like a nobody, a struggling rapper until he got shot like six times, you know.  And it's like that just sounds so barbaric and ignorant.  And if you're promoting this kind of stuff and it's being played way too much in central cities, and too many kids listen to it without and--and they just hear this kind of talk all the time about kill, kill, kill.  "I'm gonna shoot you, I'm gonna get my money, I'm gonna get this."  And we're already living in a microwave society so you hearing this kind of constant talk it has to have some kind of influence.  So basically what I wanna do is--I have a book proposal together now where I'm talking about these, these whole issues and the dynamics of rap lyrics on, on, on young people and people's lives living in central cities.  Because a lot of these rappers don't live in the central city, but they steal stuff from the central city, put it on an album and they promote it and act like they're still doing these things.  When you know, you ain't selling no drugs, you're not t- getting shot, and you not killing nobody, but you talking about this kind of stuff.  And you know, if you look at XXL magazine and magazines like this that run those letters from people in prison that talk about--you know, they still have that prison mentality lifestyle where they said, you know, such and such is real 'cause he got shot this many times.  That's just so stupid, it's so stupid, it's so stupid and it's having an in- influence on our kids.  And you know, it has to have some kind of influence 'cause if you look in public schools and how they're struggling, and most of them are kids of color.  It, it has to be some kind of impact.  So that's what I'm working on right now.
Story_ID: 604274
Speaker 1: I guess we can take that to a question we always ask, and that's the, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my concern is with president-elect Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  I hope we don't think that our--everything is over now that we got Obama in, now we don't have to work hard.  I think we have to work extra hard, you know, being twice as good.  I think this is the time when we need to be twice as good.  Obama knows it's not gonna be easy.  He's coming in and he has--he's gonna have a lot of tough decisions.  But it was--I was happy to see so many people go to the polls and, and have this renewed alliance and this renewed spirit, and, and all of this, but I hope that doesn't die out, you know.  I, I wanna see this fire continue to burn throughout, not past the four years, you know past eight years.  I--you know, that's the onl- only we could change what's going on.  We can't rely on one man to do it.  And I think a lot of people are just like Obama's in there now.  They turn Obama into Superman, you know, (laughter).  They tur- they turning him into a comic book character where he could sa- heal everything and fix every problem in the world.  That's, that's one of my concerns.  I--I'm really concerned about public education too nationwide.  You--I, I just don't believe our kids are prepared to graduate.  You know, our graduation rates are improving slowly, but from a lot of the college experts that I talk to, these kids are graduating with like a 3.2 [grade point average], 3.5, but from public schools, but they're not prepared for college classes.  You know, they have to take preparatory classes to get ready for college.  They're not prepared.  So the--you're graduating kids that are not ready to go--to make that next step.  So that's--public education is also a concern of mine.  And you know, I see it every day when I'm driving in to work, and I see young black men on the bus stop with no book bag, no, no nothing.  How you going to school with no book bag? Did you take any books home, I mean--I--how are you--you know, are your books at school.  How come you didn't bring them home?  Like--it's just I, I, I think about that stuff when I--when I'm on may way to--on my way in and I had to take the bus in 'cause I did something on the safety on public--on county buses, so I took the bus to work for a week.  And I was just listening to how these kids talk and the lack of respect that they have for each other it's, it's embarrassing.  And, and I would like to see more adults tell them, you know, have some respect.  And--but I think we--I think we scared of our own kids now, you know.  And this--we--we're never gonna get anywhere if we continue to act like that.  But it has to come from, it has to come from in here (gesture).  People have to step up and, and like we said on the basketball court, man up.  We have to start manning up to a lot of things that we've been doing wrong for so long.  And not rely on one person to change it for us, you know.  Let's--I don't--you know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a great man, but we can't put King and Obama, and say that King can do--and Obama are the same people, with just one person could do it all for us.  No, it's gonna take a nation of millions to fix this.  So, that, that--that's what I would add to it.
Story_ID: 604275
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major activity or thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh god, there's probably so many things.  But I was, I'd take my mother's [Otha Tobias Causey] advice, everything that I did to this point, it's made me who I am.  So, I'm, I'm not gonna look back.  I said I wish I would've did that, because you know, for every action there is a reaction.  And if I would've probably did something differently, I probably wouldn't be here today.  So I guess that would--that's how I would answer that.
Story_ID: 604276
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today and you're still young by the standards that we have for interviewing people.  What would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh wow.  Well I, I do a lot of things like, I speak at a lot of public schools.  As a matter of fact, I'm speaking tomorrow to--at Cardinal Stritch University [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to a group of public school students about, you know, how media portrays African Americans in the newspaper.  I, you know--when it's all said and done, I want people to remember that I was more than just a journalist, I try to promote the field of journalism and show people the opportunities that exist here.  When I go to speak at schools and things like that, I'm working with our young interns.  I always tell them, you know, find something that makes you unique.  Don't--you don't have to try to be like anybody else.  Find out what makes you unique.  I, you know--the things that make me unique, I still live in the central city, I never wanted to move.  Things that make me unique is that I'm involved in the community in different ways.  You know, I've a involvement with my fraternity.  I've an involvement with my community, involvement with my chu- involvement with my family, involvement, you know, relationships with different people.  Life is based on, on relationships, you know, because when you die, you know, people won't say, "James [HistoryMaker James Causey] wrote over five thousand articles for the newspaper or wrote a book and did this, wrote a play and did all this other stuff."  You'll be remembered for the relationships that you live on--leave on people.  So my grandfather, Orelous Pinkney, he had this thing that he would do as a deacon and he would go see the sick and shut in and when I was real young, I--at first I didn't like to do that because, you know, I wanted to play and he was like, "No, we're gonna take us, we're gonna take some groceries over to Miss Lucille's [ph.] house," or something like that.  And he will go spend time with them and, as I got older I started to appreciate that more, 'cause I would hear stories about him and these people and learn more about my history.  I would encourage more people to sit down with their mothers or fathers and just talk to them, you know.  Find out little things that make them who they are.  You know, my father's [James D. Causey] nickname is (pronunciation) Twink.  And I was like, "How did he get that nickname?"  He didn't even know.  But my [paternal] grandmother [Ruth Anderson Pinkney] told me that she had--her brother held him up to--when he was born--held him up late at night and he had the southern slang and he was singing (pronunciation), "Twinkle, twinkle little star," ['Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star'] instead of (pronunciation), "Twinkle, twinkle little star."  And my father got the nickname Twink like that.  So it's like little stuff like that goes a long way.  My father didn't even know that story.  And I said, "Dad how did you get the nickname Twink?" He like, "I don't know. That's just what they always called me."  And I told him that story, it's like, "Wow, you know.  I didn't know that."  So it's stuff like that.  You'll be surprised what you can learn from older people, yeah you just be surprised.  So every time I get a opportunity to talk to my mama [Otha Tobias Causey] about stuff like that I do it.  And it, you know, it also keeps them sharp too, 'cause they have--sometimes they have to do the research.
Story_ID: 604277
Speaker 1: I take it you're a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how important is that organization to you?  Are you really, really involved in it or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm the, the local cha- I'm the president of the local chapter, Wisconsin Black Media Association, so yeah it's very important to me.  I've been a member of NABJ since, as long as I can remember.  They gave me my--I was one of the first scholarship winners for NABJ.  I--I'm national award winner for NABJ.  I wrote a sports story on Gerald McClellan and I received a first place award.  So it's very deep for me.  I never miss a convention.  And journalists are my family, they are my extended family.  So I, I do a lot of stuff with NABJ and with the local chapter as well.  And one of, or the mission statements from my local chapter is, "Always promote African American journalists and bring up young African American journalists at the same time."  And, and see how we can incorporate that with the national chapter to keep our numbers up.
Story_ID: 604278
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your family.  Now who--who's in your family, are you--are you married now, do you have kids or?
Speaker 2: I'm--I have one daughter, five years old, Taylor Marie Causey [Taylor Causey], she's beautiful, little skinny thing.  Not married, but Taylor is very special to me.  My mother [Otha Tobias Causey] and father [James D. Causey] are still married, been together since--for forty years.  They--they're like, when we used to live on 9th Street [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], they used to refer to my mother and father as a George and Louise Jefferson [Louise Mills Jefferson].  Because my mother looks like Louise and my father looks like George Jefferson, and they sort of act like that too.  And my father could do that George Jefferson dance, which is funny.  I'm still close to my cousins and everyone.  But my life is pretty boring I guess.  I, you know, I'm involved with every organization you can think of.  I have some kind of board position or something.  So between work, my daughter, spending time with my parents and--and working on my book it's like how much time is left.  You know, the other time is used for sleep and stuff like that.  Like I can't even remember the last time I've been to the movies, so, (laughter).  But the fellowship [Nieman Fellowship] was a good time for me because that was a year away from here and it gave me a time to catch up on a lot of things that had been mis- that were outta my life that as sort of like took a backseat.  And so that was a, a time for me to catch up with a lot of things, and for me to write for pleasure instead of writing for work [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] too.  So that was--that was very deep.  And being at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that was, you know, I keep going back to that because that was the best year of my life.  It was an opportunity for me to be on one of the most prestigious colleges or universities in the nation, and take class with [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree and sit in a class with Tommy DeFrantz [Thomas F. DeFrantz] at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and, and do things like that.  And really some of our brightest minds in the world.  And just--and actually get to know them and have their, their telephone number in your iPod--I mean in your phone, where you can call them and still talk to them.  Those connections are key and it gets back to all these connections are key.  You know, so and I mean I'm just trying--I'm trying to do my thing and, and trying to make a name for myself.  But you know, the most important thing is I, I love what I do, I really do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love it.
Story_ID: 604279
Speaker 1: What advice would you give a young, black, aspiring journalist today? I mean what--
Speaker 2: Seek an internship, develop mentors, do not be afraid, you have to take chances.  Be a risk taker.  You have to apply, you know, because I, you know, I go to different colleges and universities today and what I run into is, you know, they're in their sophomore, junior year never had an internship and that they only have college clips.  And you know, just think I've had clips since I've been in junior high school [Jackie Robinson Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  So you have to have clips.  You have to get out there and actually show people that you could do the work.  And you have to multi- be able to be in multimedia because journalism isn't about writing for the newspaper anymore, especially like three to five years from now, it really won't be about the newspaper, I think it's gonna be about being multimedia and that means being able to do stuff online, blogging.  It means being able to feel comfortable in front of the camera.  You have to be so diverse in, in journalism today.  I think it won't even be like the old newspaper that you could pick up, while there'll still be some form of that, I think if you think that's all you're gonna do is write for the newspaper and that'll be it, oh no.  I mean it changes so rapidly that, you know, like last week I wa- I wa- spent most of my time blogging on our editorial blog [for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel].  So it's just like things are changing so quickly.  And find things to do differently.  One thing I, I have an editorial done I'm gonna be working on now, I wanna know what it's like to be in a wheelchair.  So I'm gonna--I got a wheelchair so for a day or two I'm gonna spend a day in a wheelchair and write about it, because this one reader has said that, you know, snow removal time will be coming up and a lot of people don't shovel their snow and it makes it difficult for people in wheelchairs.  So I kept that in the back of my mind.  But not only that, crossing the street and things like that.  I just wanna write about that, you know, so I can put people in those places.  So find different ways to tell stories that take--sometimes takes you out of your comfort zone.  So that kind of stuff.  If you can show that you can do that, then you can--you can make a living in this industry, but you have to be able to take those risks and try it.
Story_ID: 604280
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't--I haven't asked that we need to ask before I ask my last ques- question?
Speaker 2: No, you could be like the kids and say, "What kind of car you drive," (laughter)?  I get that question a lot, "How much money you make?" But no, no, I'm fine.
Speaker 1: So are they satisfied with the answer to that?
Speaker 2: Never with the amount of money you make.  But they always like the car I drive (laughter).
Speaker 1: See you think--is it--I don't know, this is just a question I'd ju- would ask anybody, probably--just today, do you think kids have a perspective on how much money it takes to live a happy life or do they think it's either all or nothing or what, well what is it?
Speaker 2: Kids are so messed up and skewed, because, you know, I think they see all the multimillion dollar contracts the athletes get, the money that they believe rappers and entertainers get, and I say believe because it's never as much as they be--think or what reality really is.  And they think that, you know, making like seventy thousand dollars is nothing, that's all you make or sixty thousand dollars or fifty or eighty, that's nothing.  You know, I wanna make this and this, and they don't realize how hard or how many sacrifices you have to make.  My mother [Otha Tobias Causey] and father [James D. Causey], I mean they live comfortably, you know.  I ma- I make more money today then they ever made, but they are homeowners, they own ca- they have a car, they never really have any problems.  You know, and they appear to be very happy to me.  So I, I just think kids are just so skewed and it's like this whole microwave mentality, gotta have it fast and gotta have it now.  And you know, they don't realize the hard work and sacrifice that goes behind it.
Story_ID: 604281
Speaker 1: Now our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh boy.  If I was to die today or tomorrow, or you gonna give me another year or two?
Speaker 1: Well we'll give you, you know, a few decades.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I wanna be remembered as a hard working journalist that always strived to tell the truth.  Someone that was never afraid to take a chance or a risk on getting the story.  I wanna be remembered as a person who tackled big stories and treated them the same as small stories.  I wanna be a person that--other journalists looked up to as a person that they could come to for mentoring sh- mentorship or just to talk about anything.  I wanna be that open journalist.  I never wanna get to the point where I'm perceived to be standoffish or I made it and I can't do anything for you.  I'm, I'm gonna always stay grounded and I wanna be known as a grounded person.  Grounded in my principles, grounded by my parents [Otha Tobias Causey and James D. Causey] who I respect more than anything else, and a, a person that--who always challenged themselves, you know.  I, I told you a quote I think before we started taping.  My friend Gerald McClellan had this philosophy or his saying when he became WBC [World Boxing Council] middleweight champion of the world he said, "Shouldn't I be good?"  And it sounded cocky at the time.  But he said, "James [HistoryMaker James Causey], I've been boxing since I was like nine, I'm the champion now."  He said, "If you've been boxing all that time for all those years shouldn't you be good?"  If I wa- if I'm not good by now, I should've picked a different career, I should've been champion a long time ago.  He said, "Just like you and journalism, you've been a journalist for a long time, you should be good by now.  If you're not good by now, find something else."  So that's, "Shouldn't you be good."  That's where I got that from (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Hey, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Appreciate it,
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Appreciate it.
