Story_ID: 84198
Speaker 1: [My name is Larry Crowe.]  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's David H. Coar, C-O-A-R.
Speaker 1: And what kind of name is that--(unclear)--not--that didn't sound right (laughter).  What's the origin of your last name, do you know?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  The Coars come from a little town in South Central Ala--South Eastern Alabama, called Salem, Alabama.  It's near Phoenix City, Georgia--Phoenix City, Alabama, and Columbus Georgia.  And, and, and I assume there are both white Coars and, and black Coars in the area, so I assume the name came from a slave owner somewhere in, in that part of the country.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 11, 1943, in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a federal district court judge.
Speaker 1: And, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April, April 2nd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at HistoryMakers in Chicago, on Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 84199
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, now, before we get into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.  And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Banana pudding.
Speaker 1: Now, now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida Keys.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The answer is no.  No is not the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, right, the answer is no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 84200
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your family tree, I guess.  And how far can you trace your family back, I mean in, in time?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, really only through his parents; on my mother's [Lorraine Raines Coar] side, back to about 1820, on her father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about those ancestors from the 1820s--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what you know about 'em.
Speaker 2: Right, my, my grandfather's grandmother was a, was a slave.  She was a daughter of a, of a slave and a slave owner who eventually set the family free.  He acknowledged the children and set them free.  This was in Western Louisiana.  My grandfather--my grandfather's father, was--came from Ohio or, or Illinois.  He was--he looked white, and there was some debate about that.  That's why I know so much about his families, because it was some litigation about that.  He was, he came down and was what, what was called a waterman in Louisiana.  He worked on the rivers.  During the Civil War--he married, he married my great-grandmother in 1858.  My grandfather was born in 1860.  During the Civil War, a Union patrol came through that part of Louisiana, found out that he was from the North, and conscripted him on the spot.  He was last seen being put on a horse in handcuffs, and was never seen or heard from since.  My grandfather grew up in, in--with his mother in Louisiana.  And he married my grandmother in 1917, when he was fifty-seven and she was seventeen.  He'd been married once before.  My mother was the only child of that relationship.
Speaker 1: That's a forty-year--yeah.
Speaker 2: Forty-year difference.  So, that, that's--and, and he was--they--he farmed.  He, he worked--as a child he worked hiring himself out for people to work.  He and his mother lived on a farm, and he farmed that land too.  Eventually they found oil on some of the land he owned.  And when his mother died, the question was who would inherit the land.  Some of his cousins went to court and said that he couldn't inherit because under the miscegenation laws in Louisiana he would have been an illegitimate child.  The marriage would have been null.  The, the marriage between his parents would have been null, therefore, he would have been illegitimate.  And under, under Louisiana law, he could not inherit from either parent.  So there was a court case that went, went all the way up to Louisiana Supreme Court about whether or not he was white or black.  The court eventually determined that he was black, and so my grandfather inherited the land.  But in, in, the course of all that, they talked about who he was, who his, who his ancestors were, and that's why I know so much about that.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.  It's good to know, you know, something about your ancestors and--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 84201
Speaker 1: So you say on your father's [Robert Coar] side though you don't know much--
Speaker 2: I don't know much.  My, my father's--my grandfather came from Salem [Alabama] to Birmingham [Alabama].  He worked as a, as--they called him a drapery man for a, one of the department stores, the biggest department store in Birmingham.  When you ordered draperies, he would come out and take the measurements.  And then once the draperies were made, he would come out and install them.  His, his wife, my grandmother, came from a, a little town near Selma called Orrville, Alabama.  She and her three brothers and her sister came to Birmingham with their father, who was a, a CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister.  And he founded a church in Birmingham called Third Good.  Her, her brothers eventually became undertakers, and started a, a small, a burial insurance company.  And the two sisters, my grandmother and my, my aunt, my great aunt, ran the burial insurance company, and the brothers ran the, the funeral home.  They eventually had four children, three boys and, and a girl.  My father was the youngest of, of those three children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, maybe we, we, we can start by talking about your father.  Can, can you give us his name and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Robert Floyd Coar.  He was born in--on January 9, 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was he like, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a frustrated doctor.  He wanted to go to med school.  He always wanted to be a doctor, but he finished high school during the Depression.  And while his, his brothers and his sister had gone away to, to, to college, there was no money for him to go.  His grandfather was on the board of a CME college just outside of Birmingham, Miles College, and arranged for him to, to go to Miles.  He had to work to go, to go to school, but he worked--but he went to Miles.  He wanted to go to Morehouse, but they--there was simply no money to do that.  Afterwards he wanted to go to medical school, but, again, there was no money to do that.  So he took some graduate courses in public health.  And during the '30s [1930s] he worked for the, for the government, doing public health lectures.  He and a friend of his did public health lectures in rural areas in Alabama, talking primarily about hygiene.  And they would take slides and a movie projector and, and go around in these rural areas just putting on programs.  It was during that that he met my mother [Lorraine Raines Coar].  My mother was, was a student at Tuskegee.  Her roommate was a woman named Alpha Robertson.  Alpha Robertson is the mother of one of the little girls who was killed in the 16th Street, the bombing of 16th Street Baptist Church, but Alpha Robertson lived on the same block as my father [Robert Coar], grew up on the same block as my father.  So, they were doing lectures near Tuskegee, and he went by to visit her, and met my mother.  She introduced him to my mother, and that's how they met, and they eventually married.
Story_ID: 84202
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your mother's name, and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's name was Loraine, L-O-R-A-I-N-E, Raines, R-A-I-N-E-S, Coar.  She was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, went to Tuskegee.  My grandfather did not approve of my father.  So when he found out that they were dating, he had her transferred to Wiley College in Texas, where he had relatives, and he could keep an eye on her.
Speaker 1: So he just took her--
Speaker 2: Took her out of school.  Unbeknownst to him, they got married before she left.  And it was probably a year later before he found out.  And when he found out, he resigned himself to the fact that they were married, and, and that there was nothing he could do about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born February 14, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell me a little bit about her.  What, what was she like and what, what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a schoolteacher.  An interesting woman, she was way ahead of her time.  She was the first feminist that I knew.  She, she firmly believed that women should be educated.  There was no reason why boys should not--should go to school and, and, and girls should not.  The first time I ever heard the term "double standard," I heard it from my mother explaining to me that, that the same rules apply to men and women.  She was a, she was a reluctant schoolteacher.  I don't know that my mother ever really liked teaching, but it was the thing that college-educated black women in the South did.  You were either a nurse or you, you were a schoolteacher.  There just weren't that many opportunities other than that for you.  She read--she was a voracious reader, and she was, she was, she's an interesting person.  She, she, she challenged you all the time.  If you had a question and she couldn't answer it, she found a book for you and handed it to you.  Her theory was that if you, if you are big enough to ask the question, you were big enough to stand the answer or find the answer.  So she did it, and (unclear)--very unlike my father [Robert Coar].  My father, my father understood science, but he didn't care very much for other, other intellectual pursuits.  My mother was curious about everything and read about everything.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of books do you remember her reading?
Speaker 2: Novels, essays, biographies; you name it, she read it.
Story_ID: 84203
Speaker 1: That's, that's good.  Now, can you reflect back and kind of give us a sense of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I grew up in, in, in Birmingham [Alabama].  Every summer, until I was thirteen and my grandmother died, yeah, my mother's mother died, I spent the summers in Louisiana, which was about the best thing that could have ever happened.  My grandmother lived in Shreveport [Louisiana], lived in the middle of town in Shreveport.  But it's a great fishing area, so I went fishing.  She didn't fish, but she knew people who did.  So at least five days a week you'd get up in the morning before day, and somebody would pick you up, and you'd go fishing, come back, have dinner, play softball till dark, then play hide 'n seek until, till bedtime.  That, that's, that's all I remember about summers until, until I was thirteen.  Birmingham at that time was tremendously segregated.  The schools were segregated.  Everything was segregated.  There were, there were black theaters, black theaters.  There was one theater in town, the Lyric, where it was white on the bottom and, and blacks sat in the balcony, which was the dumbest thing I've ever heard, because the favorite pastime was throwing things over the balcony.  I, I never figured out who came up with that idea.
Speaker 1: They didn't think it through all the way (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, they clearly didn't think it through.  I don't think I had--well, I went to Catholic school for sixth, seventh, and eighth grades.  And the teachers in the school when--were nuns, and the nuns were white.  I think that was probably the first time I'd ever had a, a conversation with anybody white, but my world was entirely black during that period of time.  I had jobs in high school, and I had some contact with whites that way.  But, but my teachers were black; my, my classmates were black; my doctors were black.  It was just a very different environment.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of little boy were you?  What did you like to do, you know?  And I, I heard what you did in Shreveport [Louisiana] every summer, but like what did you like to do (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Play sports, go to parties, same things all kids liked to do.  We had a--set up a basketball court on a vacant lot near where I lived, and so every afternoon I'd be on the basketball court.  When we weren't playing football, we'd be playing bas--basketball or baseball.  By the time I got to be 13, discovered girls.  Then you, you wanted to go to parties, and you ran around behind girls talking about girls, talking to girls, thinking about girls all the time.  Like my mother [Lorraine Raines Coar], I read a lot, and I read a lot.  I think my sister and I inherited her, her love for reading more so than my brother, but pretty much--yeah, from, from, from what I know, a typical, typical childhood.
Story_ID: 84204
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me, did you notice differences between life on the Gulf Coast and life in Birmingham [Alabama], socially I mean?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, it was pretty much the same.  You know, in, in, in those days, it, it was so segregated that you could, you could transfer what was going on in, in Birmingham to Louisiana to, to Mississippi or Georgia.  It was, it was pretty much the same.  And I suspect in the neighborhoods in the Chicago [Illinois] there weren't that much different than that.  I was always amazed in high school that people did pretty much the same dances.  I couldn't figure out how that could happen.  They had--before television, they had the same sayings.  Sayings managed to get--go from one place to another fairly rapidly, and I, I never understood how that, that could be.  I didn't know that many people who were from other places, so it couldn't just be word of mouth, but somehow it did.
Story_ID: 84205
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about school.  You went to Catholic school for grade school, right?
Speaker 2: For, for three years of grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: School was--most of the time I was in public schools.  Public schools were probably the way public schools were most places before really desegregation.  There were--I considered myself middle class because I had two parents who were working.  They weren't making a lot of money, but compared to what some other, the parents of some other kids were making, we, we were okay.  The classes were big.  And probably the, the, the primary characteristic of the schools wasn't that--the ability levels in any given class were--the gap was, was tremendous.  There were people--I was in class with people who went on to be scientists, doctors, lawyers, college professors, and there were people in the class who couldn't read and write.  And so you just had that, that mix.  You know, and, and, and like most public schools, you had to, you had to learn to live with everybody.  We had thugs in, in class.  We had people who were nerds.  And you had to learn to get along or else in school.  So it was, it was, it was a great democratizing experience in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I had great teachers.  I had great teachers.  And one, one of the, the characteristics of segregation was that I had teachers in high school who had Ph.D.'s because they didn't have a lot of other educational opportunities or work opportunities.  It was either to find a job at a college someplace or continue to get more and more degrees, and get an increase in your salary, and teach in, in high school.  So I had some, I had some great teachers in high school.  I've never been shortchanged on, on, on my education.
Speaker 1: Now, can you remember some of the names of some of the teachers you had in grade school--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --and high school.
Speaker 2: Sure, T. Jones was a math teacher.  T. Jones used to divide the class up into, into ability levels.  I had a class of forty people.  He was teaching three classes in one.  He would, he would talk to one-third of the class and give them assignments.  While they were working in that, he would talk to a different section of the class.  And so, recognizing the difference in ability levels, he, he, he dealt with it.  One of the best teachers I had was a woman named--well, she, she married after I graduated.  Her name was Patton, P-A-T-T-O-N, and she was an English teacher.  And she told me once--I was trying to take a trigonometry course, which was an elective, and so I was gonna have to move some classes around.  And I, I moved my section with her from one period to the other.  And the class I took it with was a class that was not as capable as my homeroom class.  So she told me that--she, she called me aside me one day.  She said no, you can't do that.  I said but I have to in order to make my schedule.  She said no.  She said do you--if, if, if you do it that way, it's gonna be too easy for you.  So you have to change everything else around, but you have to take the class with the--you have to take the harder class.  She made us write, she made us write an essay every week.  We had to turn in every Monday morning we had to in an essay to her.  That was not part of the curriculum.  We were supposed to be studying American literature.  But she decided that we needed to improve our writing skills, so that's what she did.  She made us write a term paper that wasn't part of the curriculum either.  That's how I came to know about Africa, because my term paper was on Ghana.  Ghana became independent I believe in 1957, and I graduated in 1960.  But I--so I wrote my, wrote a term paper on Ghanaian independence because she said that's what you have to do.  She used to scare me to death, but, in retrospect, she was one of the best teachers I ever had.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she really challenged you.
Speaker 2: Oh, a challenge was not the word (laughter).  She threatened you to make sure you did it.
Speaker 1: So what were class-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, Larry, repeat the question--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just asking you about the class sizes, you know.  How big were they, you know--(unclear)--like three sections in one class (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Class sizes were anywhere from about thirty-eight to, to maybe forty-six.  I don't remember a class having more than forty-six, forty-seven people in it.
Speaker 1: And one teacher in charge of it?
Speaker 2: One teacher, no, no teacher's aides, just one, one teacher.
Story_ID: 84206
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about high school.  You went to A. H. Parker?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and what was that like in--what, what, what did you do?  What activities did you engage in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Parker was, was, oh, for a long time was the largest black high school in the country.  When I was there it was, it was smaller.  I think there were probably 3400 students when I was there.  My, my entering class had almost 800 students, all of which I think 400 and--about 440 graduated four years later.  It was, it was a, it was a big, sprawling school.  The principal of the school was [HM] Colin Powell's father-in-law.  Johnson was his name.  I can't think of what his first name--Robert Johnson, I think, but, but everybody called him Big Red.  And he ran the place with an iron hand.  He probably had to, given the size of it.  I was, I was a good student.  I think I finished, oh, clearly in the top five in my high school class.  I was involved in the science club; the, the student council; the honor society; I was in the choir; I played football.  Those were my primary activities in, in high school.
Story_ID: 84207
Speaker 1: Sir, yeah, you said you played football in, in high school, you know.  How successful was your team and how did you do, you know?
Speaker 2: The, the team was fairly successful, saying that, that the, the school was so big that there weren't, for a long time there weren't any other high schools that were comparable in size in the area.  So the team used to play, before my time, played colleges.  And, and, and sometimes, even later, scrimmage college teams.  They had some great athletes on my team, Buck Buchanan, who played for the Kansas City Chiefs--
Speaker 1: Now, let's just pause on him a second because we're talking about a man who's about six-nine or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Six-seven.
Speaker 1: Six-seven, yeah, big--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one of the all-time great linemen in football.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, he's, he was--in, in high school he was, he weighed I guess maybe 230, 240.  But--and he was a great player in high school, then went on to Grambling, and had a great career there; Lee May, who played with--you're right--Cincinnati, first baseman for Cincinnati [Ohio], and, and, and later on, I think, for the Orioles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think yeah.
Speaker 2: --was a fullback on the team.  He was a, he was a great football, football player but hurt his shoulder; was, was recruited by Nebraska to play football, but hurt his shoulder I think his senior year in high school and never really recovered from that; and so he, he opted to go into, into baseball.
Speaker 1: The power-hitting first baseman, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear), he was power-hitting fullback too (laughter).  You didn't wanna hit him too many times.  So it was--it really had great athletes. Great athletes.
Story_ID: 84208
Speaker 1: All right.  And now, when you were a senior in high school, what was your specialty?  What did you really concentrate on in high school in terms of subject matter in school?  What did you consider yourself, a science person or--
Speaker 2: Probably science, science and math, because the way, the way you elected courses really focused on, on, on the math.  Everybody had to take the basic sciences, but then there were--your electives were either math, bookkeeping, and there was another one.  I don't remember what the other elective was.  But that's sor--you sort of got routed in terms of your, your, your last two years.  So I was--and, and math was really the college prep option, so I was--it was primarily math.
Story_ID: 84209
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, now, did you, did you know you were going to college--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there was no question about it.  Both my parents had gone to college.  And I, I, I told my father [Robert Coar] once that I didn't think I wanted to go to college.  And he looked at me and said, he says no, that's the wrong question.  The question is where will you go to college.  And that shows you the power of, of, of my father and the influence he had.  I never even thought about not going to college after that, just was not, it just wasn't a, wasn't a possibility.  So, yeah, I knew I was going to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you went on to Syracuse University.  And you were telling me, you know, before we started, that, that football had, had a, was, was a factor in this decision.  Now, can you explain that to us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Both my parents had gone to small historically black colleges.  And one of the things my father insisted on was that all of us, me, my sister, and my brother, had to leave the South to go to school.  He said I don't care if you wanna come back here and live afterwards.  He said but I want you to see another part of the country.  So, you know, the first, first option was-- well, it wasn't an option.  The, the first criteria was it had to be a school outside of the South.  But they didn't really have a sense of how to go about choosing a school, not in the South.  They didn't know anything it, so that was, that was pretty much left up to you.  And sports was, like most teenage boys, sports was important to me.  Syracuse had been--I went to college in 1960.  Syracuse had been national champs the year before, and I was arrogant enough to think that I could play for the national champs.  So, I wrote them, asked them if they would give me a scholarship.  They didn't, they didn't do any scouting in the South, and they said that if I, if I came out and made the team, they'd give me a scholarship.  So I went there with every intention of playing, being a football player.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, you were a lineman in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you--about how big were you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I played anywhere from 195 to maybe 200 pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--but what happened when you got there (laughter)?  Tell the story.
Speaker 2: It was a rude awakening.  When, when I was in high school, the Southeastern Conference, which was the, you know, the, the big football conference where I grew up, had all these, these, these small, quick linemen.  Billy Neighbors was an all-American tackle at University of Alabama, and he played at about 198 at tackle.  Florida was the only school in the Southeastern Conference that had really big linemen.  So I thought I could play anyplace.  So I get up to Syracuse and the, the starting backfield on the freshmen team averaged 220 pounds per man.  I took one look at them and decided that this was--either I was gonna have to gain a lot of weight real fast, or this wasn't gonna work.  So I, I left practice and went over to the academic office, and asked if I could get an academic scholarship.  They gave--they told me yes the same day, so that was the end of my football career.
Story_ID: 84210
Speaker 1: So you had very good grades?
Speaker 2: I had, I had excellent grades.
Speaker 1: Right, right, you said you were in the top five of your class.
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and, and for a, a segregated school in the South, there were some, some really talented people in my high school.  There was my--probably the family who lived closest to us was the Davis family, [HM] Angela Davis and her sister and two brothers, all of whom were, were, were, were, were great students.  There's another family who lived right around the corner, and the, the oldest son, who was about my age, went on to, went to Morehouse, and then graduate business school at University of Pennsylvania at Wharton, and became a, a stockbroker.  So, the, the school, academically, the, the school was, didn't take a backseat to anybody.  I've never felt that I was unprepared academically, as a result of going to school in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the Davis's are--her brother went on and played football for the Browns--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --too--
Speaker 2: Right, he went to--
Speaker 1: --Ben Davis and--
Speaker 2: He went to Defiance College--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in Ohio and then, and then played football.  Her sister's a lawyer, Vonyazan--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fania.
Speaker 2: Fania, Fania's a lawyer in, in Berkeley [California].  And Reggie, the, the youngest brother is a works for Xerox, has worked with Xerox for a long time.
Story_ID: 84211
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you all live in Birmingham near Dynamite Hill--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I lived on Dynamite Hill.
Speaker 1: On (unclear), all right.
Speaker 2: I, I remember it was, it was Dynamite Hill because, you know, in, in a funny kind of checker board pattern of, of segregation in the South, Birmingham had some, some unique features.  There was a--the neighborhood I, I, I grew up in was historically black.  But just to the west of us was Birmingham Southern College, and the area around the college was white.  Dynamite Hill was the area--was sort of the gap period--the, the, the gap location--between the area that I grew up in.  And, and the college area--College Heights is, is, is, is what they called the area, and is--it was largely unpopulated when blacks started to move into the, into the area.  There were few white homes in the area, but mostly it was, it was vacant, vacant land.  And as people started to move in, they started to, to dynamite the homes.  And I remember my father [Robert Coar], we were one of the--the Davises were there when we moved, and then my father built a house.  My parents built a house on some vacant land that they owned there.  And there was a note left with the, the contractors that they were gonna blow up the house.  So I remember soon after we moved into the house, my fa--waking up at night, going to get a drink of water, and seeing my father sitting in the window with rifles.  And I don't know how long--how many, how many months he, he stayed up all night watching, but we never had a problem.  But I remember, I remember some of the other houses being bombed when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: That seems like it's a lot of pressure to be under, the, the pressure that your house might be dynamited as you sleep.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't anything that--as, as, as kids we were oblivious to it.  I was seven when we moved in that house, and, and so my brother and sister would have been younger than me.  I don't know if they even remember it.  I didn't feel the pressure.  It must have been a lot of pressure on my parents, but, but for, for, for me, it just sort of blew by.
Story_ID: 84212
Speaker 1: Okay, now had--be, before you left town, could you see a crisis, an, an, an impending crisis coming to a head at all, with Sheriff "Bull" Connor there, and you had like Fred Shuttlesworth down there then, right?  And he was--had he started making a move or, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ah, not, not overt moves, not organized moves.  There was always resistance to segregation.  My father [Robert Coar] told me--my father worked--because he worked in public health, he had headed up, during World War II, he had up this committee that was doing blood drives during the war among blacks.  And then he found out that the blood, once it was donated, was segregated by race.  And black blood went for, for the aid of black patients, and white blood went for white patients.  So he said that's insane, especially since a, a black man invented blood transfusion.  This makes no sense.  And he, he told me he resigned over, over that policy; when they wouldn't change the policy he resigned.  So there'd always been resistance in, in one form or another, usually on an individual level, but some of it was organized too.  Birmingham was a, was a big, rough steel and coal town.  There was not, nothing subtle about Birmingham [Alabama].  So there had been these flare-ups all along on Dynamite Hill; then people weren't passive about it.  My father and some other people used to conduct armed patrols in the neighborhood.  And the police knew that they were there, and knew that they were armed.  When Arthur Shores, who was a lawyer, who was a local lawyer, in the, the school desegregation cases in Birmingham, his, his house was threatened.  And so, with full knowledge of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], they were conducted armed patrols.  They were, they were, they would patrol in front of the house.  They were armed.  There were cars full of armed people in the neighborhood.  So that sort of thing, that kind of resistance to the system, had, had always been there.  And that's just sort of the way things were.  So there wasn't the sense that something was about to happen.  Something had always been happening, but just not on a, on, on, on a massive scale.
Story_ID: 84213
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, tell me about Syracuse [University in Syracuse, New York].  Now, what was it like being up in Syracuse, at University of Syracuse in school?  I mean was it the real radical change for you?
Speaker 2: No, it was a, it was, it was a shock, not radical though.  There was, there were about 17,000 students.  Of that 17,000, maybe thirty were African Americans, so I felt like my whole world had just gotten turned upside down.  It was not overtly segregated, but segregated nonetheless.  For example, my freshman year--and, and it was so few, there were so few African Americans that the issues with African Americans were not just on the front burner there.  My freshman year, the big issue on campus was that the, the administrator decided that interreligious dating posed problems.  And they had a lot of, Syracuse had a large Jewish population.  It was, it was private school, and it was, it was a, a Protestant denomination.  It was affiliated with some Protestant denomination, but there was a large number of, of, of Jewish students.  And so the school decided that when they became aware of interreligious dating, that they had an obligation to notify parents.  So there were these big demonstrations about that.  And then they expanded the policy that interreligious inter, inter, interracial dating, that they had an obligation to tell parents.  So there were these demonstrations.  I don't remember how that ever got worked out.  My senior year, there was an incident where the football team played the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], which at the time was segregated.  And there was some racial taunting during the game.  And so members of the football team decided that they shouldn't have to play.  Since they were--since Syracuse was the big draw, why should they put money in Richmond's coffers by playing Richmond?  So they didn't wanna play.  So they were gonna demonstrate to not have Richmond on the schedule.  The university said no, we do the scheduling.  You don't have anything to say about it, and they threatened the football players with, with suspension if they carried through.  The players threatened to boycott, and they, they threatened with, with suspension.  So it was not a particularly enlightened place when I was there.  So, so radical, it was, it was clearly not, just a, you know, different place, different time, but a lot of the same garbage that went on every place else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you remember talk about--I've seen a story about an instance at, at the Cotton Bowl the year that Ernie Davis went to the Cotton Bowl.
Speaker 2: I, I, I heard about that.  I, I don't know anything about it, I mean just, just, just from what I heard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But that, I mean that was not all that uncommon.  The, the guy who became basketball coach maybe my senior year--it was the year that Dave Bing and Sam Penceal and those games came--Syracuse set the, the NCAA record for consecutive losses in basketball.  So the school got fed up and decided that, that they should do something about it.  So they brought in a new coach, and the coach they brought in--I can't remember his name--was from Southern Mississippi.  And, and, and as I re--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --as I recall, he was the coach who, in defiance of the, the governor of Mississippi, had taken the team out in the, in the dead of night to play in the NCAA tournament against a team that had blacks on the team.  So he was--his first recruiting year, he went out and recruited the best basketball players he could find, which was a, a big deal for Syracuse at the time.  So, but, but, but that sort of thing happened, happened a lot.  And, and, and because a lot of the athletes there had been recruited and were, were, were star players, they were going on--they had at least a possibility of playing pro sports.  And the university had it within its power to sabotage that by, by telling the pro teams that the, the, the players were troublemakers that they shouldn't be serious about looking at.  And, and they use that power fairly freely.
Story_ID: 84214
Speaker 1: Now, now, did you engage in any student activities in, in, in college much?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot.  I spent most of my time in Syracuse [University in Syracuse, New York] wishing that I was someplace else.  A lot of my friends had gone to historical black colleges.  And I never, never got enough energy together to transfer, but I spent a lot of time thinking that's what I should do.
Speaker 1: Were, were the thirty black students close?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you--they were your, your entire world.  First, first couple of days on campus, people would walk up to you and tell you that--I think African Americans referred to themselves as members back then--that the members were having a party.  And the first time somebody said it to me I had no idea what they were talking about, that the members are having a party tonight.  And so, your social life was pretty much outside of the regular university function, that there was a, there was a black party or get-together every weekend on campus.  You got to know--I knew most of the black students in upstate New York, because either you went to a party on their campuses or they came into Syracuse.  And I've talked to people a generation ahead of me who were in New England.  And they said the same thing, that they knew, they knew all the, the African-American students in New England, because you all got together, and you all knew each other.  You--they were sort of your, your world.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you didn't really get involved in many campus activities at school?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 84215
Speaker 1: What, what, what did you major in?
Speaker 2: International relations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, did you--I suppose you had to get into foreign languages on some, some--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, you didn't have to.  You could.  My, my area of concentration was Southeast Asia, as the Far East.  And the only language that I could have taken was Hindi, and, and my area was really Southeast Asia and not, not Indian, per se.  So there was really no language for me to take.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you were specializing in Southeast Asia when Vietnam War was, was just starting to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --kick into gear.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the U.S. advisors are all up over there in '60' [1960], right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And, and one of the reasons that I, that I got involved in, in Southeast Asia is that, that I didn't--one of the failings of my high school education is that when we studied history, we never really got into 20th century history, American history and world history.  So I didn't know very much about World War I, World War II, or any of that.  When some--when I first heard about the Holocaust in college, I said that, that couldn't have happened.  How could, how could six million people have been killed, and I don't know anything about it?  That couldn't have happened.  So that came as a big surprise to me.  And when I found out about colonialism--and I told you, I'd done this term paper on, on, on, on, on Ghana, so I had some sense of, of colonialism in Africa.  But I didn't understand until I started taking a couple of courses in college of what the impact of, of, of World War II on breaking the back of colonialism had been.  So, and a lot of the countries in Southeast Asia were just coming out of a colonial regime.  So, that was, that was sort of how I got, I got steered into that area.  And, and, and Vietnam was, was just one of--Vietnam Malaya, Indonesia, I mean, all of those were--
Speaker 1: Cambodia--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Cambodia, all, all of that was--
Speaker 1: Thailand.
Speaker 2: --and Thailand was the only country that, that really didn't have a, a strictly speaking, colonial (unclear).  But, but how all that worked out in, in, in relationship between the, the colonial powers and, and what happened in, in the war, was, was, like opening a whole new, new, new universe for me.
Speaker 1: So, so you really followed the events in Southeast Asia closely--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I had every intention of going into the Foreign Service out of college.  As a matter of fact, after I graduated from Syracuse, I was--I had planned to go to, to do graduate work in Japan at an English-speaking university in Japan.  I had it all set up where my professors taught there for--(unclear)--summer, and he had it all set up.  And at the last minute I chickened out.  I thought that (unclear) Japan's a long way away from, from Alabama.  I don't know how this is gonna work out, so I decided no, I didn't think I'd do that.  But I still had intentions of, of, of going in the Foreign Service.  Matter of fact, that's, in, in a, in a funny sort of way, that's wound up in law school.  I wanted to work for the State Department, and I had to take the Foreign Service entrance exam, which may be the hardest standardized exam in the world.  So, I took the, the law school admissions test as practice for the Foreign Service entrance exam, with the understanding I would, I would go to grad school in international relations.  Well, when I started looking at where the grad schools were in international relations, and there were, you know, concentrated in and around Washington.  There were a few other places, and I didn't wanna go to school near Washington.  But there were law schools every place.  I did pretty well on the LSAT, and there were law schools every place.  So I decided that, well, maybe I'll try a law school, and I can still go into, into the Foreign Service later if I go to law school.  But that's, that's sort of the circuitous route I took.
Story_ID: 84216
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to--now, now, you ended up going to Loyola Law School [Loyola University Chicago School of Law] .
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And how did you ended up--end up choosing Loyola?
Speaker 2: Insanity.  I, I decided to be a better student in law school than I'd been in college.  Most of the people I knew were in the New York and D.C. area.  So I decided I was gonna stay away from there.  I was gonna go to school some place I didn't know a lot of people.  My sister, by that time, was in Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]--was at Northwestern--as an undergraduate.  So I applied to--Loyola was the only, I think, law school in this area that I applied to.  After I applied, I got caught up in the draft.  And I didn't wanna go to Vietnam, so I was gonna have to go in the Reserves.  And I joined the Marine Corps Reserves in May of '65 [1965].  I graduated in June of '64 [1964], went in, in, in the Marines in, in May of '65 [1965], and I wasn't gonna get off active duty until the end of November, which put me beyond the start of law school that year.  So I wrote all the schools that I'd, I'd been accepted in, and asked them if they would hold my admission over for a year.  Loyola was the only one that said they would, so I decided that I don't wanna go through the application process again.  I'll just go to Loyola.
Story_ID: 84217
Speaker 1: When I was at Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], some of my classmates my freshman year were the children or relatives of, of Holocaust survivors of people who'd been killed in the Holocaust, and they would tell me these stories.  And, and I, I--it just didn't compute.  I just, it made no sense that, that, that somebody who'd grown up during that period--I was born in 1943; I was alive during the war; I'd gone to elementary school in the '50s [1950s]--that I didn't know anything about.  But it was, it was just not on the, on the radar screen, and took me a long time to, to, to come to grips with the fact that, that, that had actually happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a--yeah, I think it, it shocked a lot of people around the same time.  I guess--you'd guess the general population knew, but they didn't talk about it if they did.
Speaker 1: No, they sure didn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They sure didn't.  And, and, and, and (unclear)--as you say, the Civil War--in high school, I tried out for an auditory contest--oratorical contest--once, one year.  And the, the teacher gave me this, this--the topic, and it was about John C. Calhoun, who was a Southerner who supported slavery.  And so I go through and make this--you know, I'm using the speech that she gave me.  It was years later when I realized that John C. Calhoun was a despicable person.
Speaker 2: He was the worst of the--
Speaker 1: He was, he was the worst.  He was, he was the spokesperson for the, the pro-slavery position.  I said why in the world would she give me this person to talk about, at least not--and, and, and I didn't know.  You know, this was, this was, this was like a class exercise.  I didn't bother to do a research about the person I was talking about.  But it was, it was years later before I, I realized who, who John C. Calhoun really was.
Story_ID: 84218
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay, so, you--we had you going to Loyola [University Chicago] Law School, and I--and you kind of chose it in a kind of around about way.  So, so you, you start at Loyola in '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Sixty--
Speaker 2: No, it was--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: When I got, I got out of the, I got out of the Marine Corps--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to--yeah, you went--yeah, you're saying you went, you went to the Marines.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I got out of the Marines in November of '65' [1965].  And I couldn't start law school until the following September.  So I had a friend who'd gone to Tuskegee [University in Tuskegee, Alabama], and he was working for a government program in Tuskegee that was, oh, it was one of those war on poverty programs.  And they were doing, doing a lot of things in, in rural areas.  And the Black Belt of Alabama was headquartered in Tuskegee, but most of the work they were doing were in other places--was in other places.  So, I went down and worked, worked for that program.  I got a job with that program until then, and it was at a time when--remember that the Selma march was in '65' [1965].  And a lot of the people, rural, local people, who had supported the march by, for example, letting the marchers camp out on their land, had been thrown off the land.  A lot of these people were sharecroppers.  And, and after the march, a lot of 'em were unceremoniously thrown off the land, so there were some tent cities that had been set up.  And, and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was, was there.  SNCC had several freedom houses in some of the rural areas, so we were doing some work with SNCC too.  Stokely Carmichael, Rap Brown, and a lot of those folks were, were, were in the area at that time.  So I worked there from, from November till that following August, when I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 84219
Speaker 1: Now, were you there for the march from Selma to Montgomery?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I was--that happened just before I left for the Marines.
Speaker 1: And did the, the Edmond Pettus Bridge incident take place before you got there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, well, did, did you get a chance to people like Stokely Carmichael and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sure, they were--the program was giving aid and comfort to the SNCC workers.  There were some of them on the payroll.  The managed to wind up on the payroll--full of part time.  And there were some, some activities that, some joint activities that we were doing in, in some of these areas just to provide some relief to, to some of these people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was becoming more militant I think in--since--I mean they, they had been like dedicated through a nonviolent, direct action.  And I guess they still were, but there was a lot of, lot more militant talk going, going on.  And I think it was '65' [1965] that they came up with "Black Power," I think it was--
Speaker 2: Right.  I, I don't know if they were doing anything that was that different.  The rhetoric changed a little bit, and their philosophy changed.  I think the actions were pretty much the same.  But they--the profile increased substantially, and, and they started to come--they, they drew the attention of some people in the government.  And some of the things that, that, that Stokely--especially Stokely--was saying were I think perceived to be fairly radical.  And so they were, they were, they were starting to have some problems.  A lot of people were starting to investigate them.
Speaker 1: Now you had been following--you said I think off camera before we started that your brother was in high school in '63' [1963] in Birmingham--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: James Bevel and SCLC then organized the students to march, you know, in that march that sort of broke the back of that city's resistance to desegregation I guess.
Speaker 2: Sure.  And, and even when I came to Chicago [Illinois] to start Loyola, I didn't know anybody here except--well, I didn't know him.  My parents told me to look him up, and that was Chauncey Eskridge, who is, who is [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King's lawyer, and who did a lot of the work for SCLC.  Chauncey had gone to Tuskegee [University in Tuskegee, Alabama] with my mother, and he was a friend of my mother and my father, so they told me to be sure and go by and see him.  So he was the first person I, I looked up when I got here.  And later on, after I'd, I'd, I'd finished law school and went back to Alabama, I did some work with, with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 1: Okay, here in the cit--in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, in Alabama.
Speaker 1: In Alabama, okay.  Did you remain affiliated with them here in the city?
Speaker 2: Well, through Chauncey, through Chauncey.  Chauncey, I did some work with Chauncey here when I was--later on, when I was teaching, I did some work with him on some cases, but directly with the organizations, no.
Story_ID: 84220
Speaker 1: Let's see, you're here in 1966, right, okay.  And well, how was Loyola?  How, how did you--were there more black students at Loyola than, than--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Syracuse?
Speaker 2: No, two of us in the starting class.  And one of the two dropped out after our first year, so there was just me.  Loyola had a day class and evening class.  I don't remember how many people were in the evening class, but in the day class I was the only African American my three years, after, after that other fellow dropped out.  There was a woman who started a year after me, and she dropped out by the end of that year.  So by the time I gra--my senior year there were, there were no African Americans in--I was the only African American all through the years in the day class at Loyola.
Speaker 1: And how did that--that's--did you--I guess you felt isolated, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was, that was pretty much true of all the law schools in town.  There's a, there's a fellow named Clarence Wilson, who is a lawyer in town.  Clarence was at Northwestern.  I think Clarence, as I recall, started out at the University of Chicago, but he was at Northwestern when I met him.  I met him in the library at Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois].  And, and Clarence was trying to find out how many African-American full-time students that were in all the law schools in Chicago.  So the way he did that was to go to the library and count (laughter).  And so I met Clarence in--during that time period.  I think he told me that, that, as far as he could tell, there were twenty-two African American law students between Loyola, Northwestern, University of Chicago, DePaul, and Kent [now IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law, Chicago, Illinois].  So in five law schools there were a total of twenty-two students.  Cecil Butler had just finished Northwestern, and I, I don't think there was anybody in Cecil's class when he graduated.  So that was, I mean, that was, that was true in all law schools around here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any mentorship from some of the black lawyers in town?
Speaker 2: Other than Chauncey, I didn't know any of the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --black lawyers--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --in town.
Story_ID: 84221
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have some decent professors at Loyola [University Chicago Law School]?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.  No, I--the professors were great.  The--Bill Lamey, who became dean of Loyola I think after my second year.  After my first or second year there, Bill Lamey became dean, and, and, and Lamey asked me one day, he says how you fixed for money?  And I said I could always use some more.  I mean I'm working and, and I'm--but I'm doing okay.  He said, could you use a scholarship?  And I said sure.  And he gave me a scholarship on the spot, a half-tuition scholarship.  And, and the way I got into teaching was through two of my professors at, at Loyola.  Vince Vitullo and Bob Spector encouraged me to go back to school after I finished Loyola, and get a, get a master's in law, which was sort of the, the unofficial teaching credential, and, and to teach.  And so I did, and wound up not going into teaching directly.  But a few years later, I got a phone call.  I was in Alabama practicing.  I got a phone call from Vitullo, asking me if I'd be interested.  He--by that time, he'd moved on to DePaul [University]--asked me if I'd be interested in coming back to Chicago [Illinois] and, and teach.  And I said I'll come up for an interview, and we talked about it, and I wound up teaching.  So, that was--I, I have, I had a great experience as far as my, my professors were concerned at Loyola.
Speaker 1: Now, did you like Chicago?
Speaker 2: When I was in law school, no, did not like it at all, thought that Chicago was every bit as segregated as Alabama had been.  I was here for the riots after [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] King was killed.  I was here after JFK [John F. Kennedy] was--after Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy.
Speaker 1: You were here when Dr. King came and visited, right, and--
Speaker 2: I was here.
Speaker 1: --spoke at Soldier Field and all that, right?
Speaker 2: I was here.  I, I came here the summer after they had demonstrations, the housing demonstrations here.  I came up in August, after that had happened.  But I was here during the, the '68' [1968] convention, and so, Chicago left a bad taste in my mouth.  When I left here in '69' [1969]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I swore I'd never come back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: The riots, the con--the convention, the police riot--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the convention and all that--
Speaker 2: Right.  And when I came back five years later, I came back with every intention of staying for a year or two and then leaving again, and then wound up being here for the last thirty years.
Story_ID: 84222
Speaker 1: Okay, so, when you finished Loyola [University Chicago Law School], you went to Harvard [Law School]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you got a J.D. from Loyola, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then--now I don't really understand as much about law as I need to, but when you add a J.D., you know, what else do you need, you know, I mean--apparently there something else that you wanted to get, so--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --what, what was there else?
Speaker 2: J.D. is, is all you need to practice law.  And, and, and, and it makes more sense if you understand historically how the degrees were conferred.  Originally it was called an LL.B., a bachelor of legal letters, okay.  But some schools started to call it a J.D., a juris doctorate.  And for some, for reasons that I have never understood, the government and some other agencies would pay you more for a J.D. than for an LL.B., even though it's the same degree.  So, of course, the law schools weren't stupid.  All the law schools then changed the degree to a J.D., but, the, the next degree was an LL.M., a master's of legal letters.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's con--that's what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then a Ph.D. is an S.J.D.  So it, it really--once they started changing the, the degrees around, it really got confusing.  But J.D. is just, it's--whatever it's called, it's, it's just the, the, the first degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it sounds like the highest one, so I--it's kind of confusing when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it's, it's really just the, the old LL.B.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84223
Speaker 1: All right, so you went to Harvard.  Now, now, was that a--that had to be a--well, was, was it a big deal to go to Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and to--
Speaker 2: It was, it was interesting.  It was, it was really interesting.  There were a lot of very bright people there.  Not--from top to bottom, there had--it was, it was probably the, the, the, the, the biggest collection of, of bright people I've ever met.  The people who were at the top of class at Loyola could certainly compete at Harvard.  I don't know if the people at the bottom of my class could compete at Harvard.  There were a lot of African Americans there.  There were even a lot of African Americans from Alabama there.  There was at least one person who had gone to college with at Syracuse who was there in law school.  So it was, it was an interesting, it was an interesting time.  It was, it was also interesting for me because my brother was in the graduate business school at Harvard when I was there, so we roomed together.  Yeah, he had gone, he went from high school to University of Southern California and graduated and then come to Harvard--had come to Harvard for, in the business school.  So, we overlapped for a year at Harvard, and that was one of the reasons I went there, was because he was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, who were some of--what, what were the highlights of your, your experience at Harvard?  Were there certain professors or, or people that you met that, that really stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, Derek Bell was teaching there.  I took a (unclear)--part of the, the LL.M. program is you have to take a write--a, a course in which you write a major paper.  And so, the course I chose was Derek Bell's "Race, Racism and American Law" course, which he was really just getting off the ground, just designing the course.  There was no, no book.  It was mimeographed materials when I was there.  So Derek's class was, was always very interesting.  It, it was provocative.  In, in those days, civil rights law was not part of any law school's curriculum, and so Derek's course was one of the first courses to try to pull all that together.  And it was a fascinating course.  It was a fascinating course.  The people there were interesting.  I met some, some people who I--who made a, a big impression on me, one of whom was a fellow from, from Alabama, from Bay Minette, Alabama, Hank Sanders, who's a, a state senator in Alabama now.  It was, it was, it was in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s] there were a lot of really interesting ideas being floated around at the time, you know, some very radical, some very conservative.  And so it was a, it was a, a real witch's brew of ideas at the time.  And, and, and one of the great things about Harvard is that it's--they sort of stir the pot, so--sort of big and brawly, and people were yelling and screaming at each other, and, and just throwing ideas at each other.  So it was a lot of fun.  I enjoyed, I enjoyed that period very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's probably the best--the most fun I'd had in an academic environment in my life was, was that year at Harvard.
Story_ID: 84224
Speaker 1: Okay, so, after Harvard [Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts], did you--you went back to Alabama?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: Not, not directly.  I got in what's called--what was then called--a, a Carnegie Foundation externship with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund.  It was a program designed to encourage lawyers to go back to the South--lawyers from the South to go back to the South--and do civil rights work.  So it was a four-year commitment.  You spend a year in, in New York at the Legal Defense Fund offices and three years in the South doing a substantial amount of--you work with a, a, a local firm in the South, and, and your commitment is to do a substantial amount of civil rights work.
Speaker 1: Was Attorney [HM] Julius Chambers in charge of that?
Speaker 2: Julius was not in charge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Julius was already--Julius had been an extern, a Ford Foundation extern, and he was in Charlotte [North Carolina].  The person who was in his office who was--there was an extern with me, and that's [HM Melvin Watt] Mel Watt, the congressman from North Carolina.  Mel had just finished Yale, and so we were both externs.  And Mel was then gonna go back to, to North Carolina, and practice in Julius's office.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a, that's a talented company there.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's sort of the Legal Defense Fund's theory.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Their, their, their approach to things is that they, they say that we're gonna match you talent for talent, and nobody's gonna be more prepared than we are.  That's sort of their philosophy on how they handle cases.  So they go after, they go after topnotch talent, and they, they, they'll outwork you on any case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that theory is being right doesn't get you very far (laughter).  You also have to have the resources.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.
Story_ID: 84225
Speaker 1: So, was it after that that you--now, now, at some point you actually--did you go back to Alabama and, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did, after a year.  After a year, I went back to--I went down to Mobile [Alabama] because there was a fellow--I told you a little earlier that I'd practiced law with the brother of one of the people you've, you've interviewed in the past, [HM Algernon Johnson Cooper, Jr.] Jay Cooper was--had been an extern the year before me.  He graduated from Notre Dame Law School, and then he worked for the (unclear).  Jay was the founder of BALSA, Black American Law Students Association, when he was at, while he was going to Notre Dame.  (Unclear) undergrad, he went to NYU [New York University, New York City, New York], the law school.  While he was in NYU he'd, he'd founded BALSA.  He and some other people had founded BALSA.  And he was from Mobile [Alabama], and he was gonna go back there.  So, through some mutual friends, I met Jay, and he convinced me to come to Mobile rather than going back to Birmingham.  So I went--after my year, I went with an office down in Mobile that Jay and, and some other people were at, and I stayed there for a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, is this when you were invited to come back to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I, I left there.  Remember, I had three year--a three-year commitment in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, after a year and a half, I went back to Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Jay ran for mayor of the town next to Mobile.  It's the eighth largest city in, in Alabama, Prichard, Alabama.  And he'd been elected, and so I decided that I'd go back to, to Birmingham.  And so I went back to Birmingham and practiced for a year and a half.  And it was there where I got the phone call from, from Vince Vitullo asking me to come back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in some interesting cases in Birmingham--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--what was going on at that--
Speaker 2: Sure, oh, everything.
Speaker 1: --the civil rights background and stuff.  I know they were still trying to convict these bombers.
Speaker 2: No, no, that was--this, this was sort of the, the, the lull--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --during that period.  No, we were doing, we were doing school desegregation cases; we were doing voting rights cases; we were doing police brutality cases; we were doing--when I got to Birmingham, the first case I got to work on was the, the employment discrimination case against the United States Steel Corporation, which at that time was the largest--one of the largest employment discrimination cases in the country.  They were attacking the seniority system in the whole steel industry.  So there were, there were just lots of cases.  I mean those, and those were the, those were the big cases and lots of smaller cases, you know, criminal cases that had civil rights overtones in it. So, no, there were a lot of cases.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you, you named a few may--I mean, you know, do it--can you name a couple of others?
Speaker 2: Well, the "Birdie Mae Davis" case in, in Mobile was a school desegregation case in Mobile.  That was--I started working on "Birdie Mae Davis" when I was in, still in New York.  That case went to the Supreme Court during that time period, so I got to work on some of the briefs, the Supreme Court briefs--the "U.S. Steel" case.  There were several, several school desegregation cases going on down there.  I don't remember the names of all of 'em now.  But--and it was--there was, there was so much work, so much civil rights work to do, and so few lawyers, that the lawyers literally divided the state into quadrants.  And, and, and you would be assigned a particular quadrant, so anything that came up--and, and some of these lawyers were working with the Legal Defense Fund.  There were a couple of professors at the University of Alabama who were doing--Ralph Knowles is one--I can't remember the other guy's name--who were doing--took a different quadrant.  And anything that came up in that area was yours.  So you'd have to pick up--you get a phone call in the middle of the night, and you just had to drop everything and go.  There was a big demonstration case in a little town called Butler, Alabama, where a--they'd been having--SCLC had been having demonstrations all summer, and one of the demonstrators had been killed.  And so people started coming in from all over the country. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King was dead, but Abernathy came in, and Bernard Lee, and all the, the leaders of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] came in.  And so I got a phone call--go to Butler and negotiate, handle negotiations with the local authorities.  So I just--you know, you drop everything.  You're up there for two or three weeks just doing that.  So that was--it was, it was, it was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 84226
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you got to--but you eventually came back to Chicago [Illinois] to teach?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  My commitment was up.  After my third year in Alabama I was tired, really.  And I got this phone, and I said okay, I'll come back and I'll, I'll take a break.  I'll come to Chicago for a year or two--and I think I signed a two-year contract--and you know, I'll go back to Alabama, and didn't make it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't make it.  Being in Chicago with a couple of dollars in your pocket was a lot better than being a student in Chicago (laughter).
Speaker 1: So the world changed a little bit.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So this is in, in 1979--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, '74 [1974] I came back.
Speaker 1: --seventy--okay.  Okay, okay, you came back '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84406
Speaker 1: All right, well, tell me about your experiences as a teacher at DePaul [University College of Law in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, one of the reasons I came to DePaul was DePaul at the time was, was--had a very aggressive affirmative action program.  And they had, by far, more African American, more Hispanic, more women students than any law school in this area and as high a percentage as anybody in the country.  For example, DePaul had taken a very novel approach to, to women.  Remember, Harvard didn't have women students until the late '50's [1950s], I think.  A lot of law schools didn't admit women.  There were two women in my class at, at, at Loyola, in the late '60's [1960s].  DePaul had taken an, an--in law schools, like medical schools, had pretty much said no to older students.  Well, DePaul decided that there were a lot of women out there who were--had been very good students, but had, had opted to raise their children, to have, to have families and raise their children.  And now their children were out of the homes, and they had time to go back to school.  So DePaul had been very aggressive about recruiting and admitting older women like that.  And so there were--I, I, I would imagine that DePaul probably had the highest percentage, or near, nearly the highest percentage, of any law--women in any law school in the country, and done pretty much the same thing with, with minorities.  And that was an attraction to DePaul.  And it was, it was a, it was a big, raucous kind of place, because that wasn't the traditional student mix at DePaul, and there was some, there was friction.  But, but it was an interesting place.  It was, it was a very dynamic place at the time, a lot of interesting things going on.
Speaker 1: And who was responsible for that mix?
Speaker 2: Primarily the faculty.  That had been--it had been a faculty decision to, to do that.  And it was--didn't always sit all that well with the administration.  As I said, there--and there was some, there was some friction.  There was clearly some friction.  But when I was there, for example, I think DePaul, by accident--I don't think anybody intended this, but the, the, the first-year class is divided into sections.  And DePaul had three sections, three sections of about a hundred students each.  Well, quite by accident, one of the sections had all women faculty members.  And I don't think you could have done that in any other law school in the country, just there weren't that many women teaching.  So DePaul was, DePaul was, was an interesting place.  It was a good place to be during that period.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any, any outstanding students come through there that you remember that, that--
Speaker 2: Oh, probably there, there, there are a lot of state court judges who came through as students then.  I, I'm, I'm terrible with names.  I can't remember all their names at this point, but there were some, there were some really excellent students who came through.
Story_ID: 84407
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you--now, you did two stints at DePaul [University College of Law], you said, from '74' [1974] to '79' [1979].  Now, now, what did you do after '79' [1979]--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: --in, in between '79' [1979] and '82' [1982]?
Speaker 2: My, my, my work history--we, we focused on one part of it.  The other part of is that, even when I was in Alabama doing a lot of the civil rights work, I was also doing a lot of corporate and business kind of work.  I was in--most of the firms I was with I was always the, the corporate lawyer.  And as part of that, I'd done a lot of commercial work, including some bankruptcy work.  And I liked the commercial work; I liked the civil rights; and I liked the bankruptcy.  So, at DePaul I had taught that, that sort of dichotomy, that, that schizophrenia.  It followed me.  I taught constitutional law, employment discrimination, but I also taught corporations, corporate finance, and labor law every now and then, but I really enjoyed bankruptcy.  So, in 1978, Congress passed a, a new, the new Bankruptcy Code.  And in the Code they created this new agency on an experimental basis called the U.S. Trustee.  And it was a pilot program, and they were gonna U.S. Trustees in ten districts throughout the country, and Chicago was one of 'em.  And I applied for the position in Chicago.  And they set up teams to come out and interview people in, in these ten areas.  By the time the team was coming out for the interviews, the associate dean at DePaul had some medical issues and had to resign.  So the dean had asked me to be the associate dean, so I decided that I would withdraw my application.  But I didn't--the team was on the, on the road, and I didn't know how to contact him, so I wanted until the interview, to go over to the interview to explain things to him and tell him I was withdrawing my application.  One of the people on the team was a woman named Lovida Coleman.  Lovida Coleman is an African-American woman who is a daughter of [HM] William Coleman, who was the Secretary of Transportation under [President Gerald Ford] Gerry Ford.  William Coleman had also been the head of the Executive Committee Legal Defense Fund.  So when I went in to talk to them, they had that interviews slot open, so we just, we talked for a while.  It wasn't--I didn't consider it an interview.  We just talked.  That weekend I got a phone call from Lovida Coleman, saying that they had finished all the interviews around the country, and there weren't gonna be any African American U.S. Trustees if I withdrew, and that she would really like that at least one of the ten be an African American, so she asked me to reconsider.  And I told her, well, I'd made a commitment to the dean, and I would do this: I'd talk to the dean, and if, if he agreed, then I would, I would reactivate my application.  So I talked to him, and he said no, go for it.  So I did, and, and, and I got the, I got the position.  So I did that from '79' [1979] until, till '82' [1982], when I went back to DePaul [Depaul University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then you taught again at DePaul from '82' [1982] to '86' [1986].
Speaker 2: '86' [1986].
Story_ID: 84408
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, well, are there any significant stories you think from your, your time at the U.S. justice department--I mean the Department of Justice?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that the, the U.S. Trustee got to do was to appoint trustees.  Before, one of the reforms in the, in the legislation was to take the, the appointment power from judges and give it to an outside person, the theory being that, that the, the trustees litigate against people in court, and it gives--it, it, it, it, it makes people feel funny litigating against somebody who the judge selected.  So the U.S. Trustee would make the appointment, and the U.S. Trustee was not involved in litigation.  And there were very few--so when I became the U.S. Trustee, there were very few African American and, and women trustees.  And so I made a conscious effort to go out and recruit people who were a-typical of the people who had formerly served as trustees.  So, for the first time, there were, there were significant numbers of, of African-American trustees involved in bankruptcy cases.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went back to DePaul from '82' [1982] to '86' [1986], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, now, why did you end up going back to DePaul--I mean, I mean, or what happened--not, not, not that it's going backwards, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, what--
Speaker 2: No, no, no there's no, no, no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [President Ronald] Reagan becomes president in 1980.  My appointment was, was still good, but the--as originally envisioned, the U.S. Trustee program was understaffed.  So we'd finally gotten Congress to approve additional staffing.  Reagan comes in and decides to cut the budget.  David Stockman is head of OMB [Office of Management and Budget], and he's cutting back money.  So he says that they're gonna cut the, the staff in half.  So I tell the people in the justice department--the program is in the justice department.  I tell the people in the justice department I can't, I can't do what the law requires with that level of staffing.  And they said well, we've talked to the political people in justice, and they said that you'll have to do it.  I said I can't.  I said it--you know, I'd taken an oath to, to uphold the law.  If I can't uphold the law, then I'm violating my oath.  So I ha--I can't, I can't do that, so I resigned.  And having resigned, I had no place to land.  So I got on the phone, got on the phone and called the dean and said I need a place to, to come down.  And he said, well, you can start teaching right away, so I went back to DePaul.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's pretty good--you know, that's, that's a--you know, yeah.  That's, that worked out.
Story_ID: 84409
Speaker 1: All right, now, from--during the period that you, that you were at DePaul, the Harold Washington campaign was going on.  I don't know if you, if you had any, any relationship to him--
Speaker 2: There was, there were a couple of lawyers' committees appointed, so I was involved in, in, in one of the lawyers' committees during the primary and general election.  We went out and did poll watching.  They had teams of lawyers standing by in case there was a problem to, to go to the polls and try to, try to deal with the problem, be observers and try to resolve the problems if you could through negotiation.  So I did that during the campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, was that--did you have any other role in the camp--
Speaker 2: No, before, before Washington ran, when he was still congressman, I had--he'd set up some, some committees around.  And I was on a couple of the committees that he had, he'd set up.  I didn't know him.  I had met him through, through that work, but I didn't know him in, in particular at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was, that was my primary function.
Story_ID: 84410
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 80--well, you go--in '86' [1986], you, you are appointed a, a judge I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you--
Speaker 2: I was a bankruptcy judge.
Speaker 1: Bankruptcy court, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: The first African American bankruptcy judge in Chicago [Illinois] was a fellow named Edward Toles, a (unclear) interesting man.  Edward Toles was the historian for the National Bar Association, Black Bar Association.  And some people say he was appointed bankruptcy judge to shut him up.  He knew more about the history of black judges in this country than just about anybody.  He collected statistics that everybody used, used on, on black judges.  In, in one of his functions for the National Bar Association was to lobby to get federal judges appointment, and he did that very effectively.  And so, by appointing him a bankruptcy judge, you cut off his (unclear) ability to lobby.  But Toles was in his mid--well, he was about seventy-two at the time.  So in, so in '86' [1986] Toles retired.  And, well, there were two vacancies.  And a couple of friends of mine, a couple of bankruptcy judges who are friends of mine suggested that I should apply for one of the vacancies.  And I didn't think that, frankly I didn't think I was old enough to be a judge, and I didn't--there were some issues I, I wanted to be vocal on.  And I didn't necessarily wanna be a judge because I couldn't speak out the way I want, but they convinced me this was something that I should do.  So I applied for it, and got the, got the appointment as a bankruptcy judge.  And bankruptcy was an area that I had, as I said, I'd always been interested in, so it, it, it made some sense.
Story_ID: 84411
Speaker 1: Well, do you--what would be the highlights I guess of, of, of your tenure as bankruptcy judge?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I presided over one of the biggest bankruptcies at the time in the, in the country, the UNR's asbestos case.  When the case was filed, it was filed in 1982.  I came on in 1986.  They had $93 billion dollars in debt when the case was filed.  And it was resolved in 1989, I think, (unclear) the plan was confirmed.  It's probably the most successful asbestos company reorganization in our country.  Bankruptcy is, is, is, is, is interesting.  Bankruptcy is where, it's really where the rubber meets the road on economic theory; it's where economic theory hits real people in the face.  And so a lot of--most of the cases have to do with, with just mom and pop people, everyday people, and how the Bankruptcy Code affects them, people who lost their jobs because there's a catastrophic illness or because they've got a child who's a drug addict, and who stole a checkbook and, and, and depleted their bank account, because a union goes out on strike and is out for six months, and there's no income coming in, that sort of thing.  And so, some of the most important things that you do in bankruptcy are in cases that nobody ever heard of, cases where somebody who's worked hard all their lives to buy a house, and now they're about to lose it.  And the judge has some discretion about whether that happens or not.  That's, that's, that's really the highlights, not necessarily the big cases.  It's the, it's the little cases where, where the impact is made.
Speaker 1: So you get a chance to help some people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: How is the--what was the mix like of judges in bankrupt--bankruptcy court been in terms of I guess where--you would clearly be somebody who'd be sensitive to the plight of the poor, but I mean how did it--what was the, I guess, disposition of it?
Speaker 2: I think most of the judges, whatever there, there, there politic persuasion, most of the judges realize you can't do that job for very long without coming to understand the plight of poor people.  So I think that's, that's fairly universal.  Congress doesn't understand that issue very well.  Poor people don't have lobbying groups in Congress to lobby on their behalves, so the law is not always sensitive to what their needs are.  And so, but there are some, some, some creases in the law that you can use, some areas where the judge has discretion so that you can soften some of the hard edges of the law.  But by and large, there, there, there are not a lot of minority bankruptcy judges, if, if, if that's part of your question.  When I was there, there were eight.  There are fewer than eight now, nationwide, out of probably three hundred, three hundred plus judges, and, and, and that's an issue.  Bankruptcy is a very specialized area.  On, on the one hand, you have to be able to handle somebody who is, who's only income is a social security check.  In the next instance, you have to handle United Airlines or WorldCom, that kind of thing.  So, so the skillset that you have to have as a bankruptcy judge is, is enormous.  You have to be able to, to, to weigh in on some fairly complex labor law issues, financial issues, securities issues, that sort of thing.  And so it's not the kind of thing that, that people who come out of a general practice, you know, a divorce practice, that kind thing, are likely to be comfortable with.  So it's a, it's a, it's a tough area.  It's an area that, that, that African-American lawyers have not been involved in, in a great extent.  I, I could probably name you the people who handle, who are involved in big cases across the country--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I could probably do it on my ten fingers.  There just aren't that many people who handle that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in--I guess, so you were in bankruptcy court from '86' [1986] to '84' [1984]--I mean to '94' [1994].
Speaker 2: Ninety-six--Ninety-four [1994], right.
Speaker 1: Nine--ninety-four [1994], ninety-four [1994].
Story_ID: 84412
Speaker 1: And you became a U.S. District Court judge.  Tell us about that.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Okay, when, near the end of President [George H.W.] Bush's--the first President Bush's term, I, I met--I ran into a woman who had been a district court judge and who, who resigned, Susan Getzendanner.  And she told me that there were some people who were trying to get Bush to do the right thing and make some, some good appointments, and that when the next vacancy came up, I should, I should apply.  And I didn't.  I thought about it.  I didn't think very much of it.  The Chicago Council of Lawyers did a, a survey of all the federal judges in Chicago, including the bankruptcy court.  And they concluded two things: one was that bankruptcy court was, may be the best court in town, and that, that I was probably the best judge in the bankruptcy court.  Joe Flom, who is now the chief judge of the Court of Appeals, I bumped into.  And Joe says you get great publicity.  It won't last.  Take advantage of it.  The next vacancy that comes up on District Court you should throw your hat in.  All right, I got another phone call saying the same thing.  Now district court judges are appointed by the president on the advice and consent--well, at the recommendation, a senatorial prerogative at the, the recommendation of the senior senator of the president's party in the state.  That would, that would have been, during that time period [U.S. Senator] Paul Simon, Paul Simon agreed that he and [HM] Carol Moseley Braun would do it jointly; they would make the decisions jointly.  There were five vacancies early in [President Bill] Clinton's term, so they appointed a committee--what they call a Merit Selection Committee--to, to recommend the people to them for appointment.  There were about 150 applicants for those five vacancies.  They went through an interview process, and you know, got it down to ten people.  They made the recommendations to, to the senators.  And out of that process I was, I was selected and recommended to the president, and eventually he nominated me for the position.
Speaker 1: And yeah, so that's 1994.
Speaker 2: That's '94' [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 84413
Speaker 1: I wanna backtrack a minute 'cause I wanted to--when you mentioned the older President [George H.W.] Bush.  And one of his appointments, you know, made national news for the U.S. Supreme Court.  And I'm sure that you were watching that.  I mean what, what did you, what did you think about that, you know, his nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: I, I thought it was--I didn't know very much about Clarence Thomas, other than his, his, his tenure on the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  I, I thought that it was somewhat disingenuous of them to say that he was--that they don't believe in affirmative action.  They were appointing him strictly on the merits.  There were a lot better lawyers out there than Clarence Thomas.  There's a lot better lawyers than just about anybody you appoint to the Supreme Court.  And, and that's okay.  I don't have a problem with that.  But, but to, but to claim that he was the best lawyer, he was the best black lawyer in the country was just not true.  So that was, that was sort of my overall reaction to it.  And then the whole Anita Hill thing broke, and it just got to be a circus.  But (unclear)--it's, it's sort of like this whole business with affirmative action now and, and, and [President George W.] Bush, Jr. saying that affirmative action is unconstitutional, but he was the beneficiary of affirmative action, that they practiced affirmative action in his, in his appointments, but for the University of Michigan to do it, it's unconstitutional.  I mean it's just, it's just hypocrisy, just rank hypocrisy.
Speaker 1: In his recent--yesterday's activity in the Supreme Court around affirmative action, do you have any thoughts about?
Speaker 2: I understand the, the negative reaction to affirmative action.  This goes back--Derek Bell was saying in the late '60's [1960s] at Harvard that affirmative action is--may be too counterproductive because it does exert a price.  There is a price to pay.  Those two women who didn't get in, assuming that but for affirmative action, they would have gotten in, they're paying the price.  And the question is, should those two individuals have to pay the societal price?  I can make the argument that, that, that that's okay.  Derek used to say that this problem has been with us since the, since the country was founded.  The question of what to do about slavery, people who, who, who drafted the Constitution understood that, that slavery was a moral issue.  On the other hand, they couldn't, they couldn't hold the country together if they abolished slavery.  So they made the choice the slaves will have to stay as the price for creating a country.  That was they made, so the slaves had to pay.  He says that, that after the Civil War, the promise of forty acres and a mule--now that we're gonna free the slaves, now the slaves are free, what are we gonna do about 'em?  We just can't turn 'em out in the streets, so we'll give 'em 40 acres and a mule.  The question then becomes whose forty acres and whose mule?  So he says that, that the question has always been who has to pay?  Who has to pay the price?  And affirmative action's the same thing.  Who has to pay the price?  There's no question there's a problem out there.  There's no question but that education is unequal.  There's no question but that, that opportunity is not, is not equal.  What do you do about it?  Who pays the price?  These two women--these two white women at the University of Michigan says it shouldn't be me.  And Derek would say that's, that's always been the answer: not me; let somebody else pay.  So, I don't find that, that, that affirmative action is, is, is, is particularly constitutionally offense.  On the other hand, I do understand politically why it's offense.  So, I mean it's a tough issue.  I think it's, it's a political issue, and whatever comes out of this case, it's gonna be a political issue.  I think all of us lose sight sometimes that affirmative action is a remedy.  It's a, it's a means to an end.  It's not an end in itself.  And if somebody can come up with a, with a better way of dealing with the problem, I'd be happy to consider that other way.  It's just that nobody's ever come up with a better way.
Story_ID: 84331
Speaker 1: We thought that the time that Clarence Thomas was nominated for the [U.S.] Supreme Court, no one could imagine a, a, a person that would consistently vote against the interest of his people time after time.  You know, we just couldn't imagine that he could always, you know, at--or then not say anything in the face of all, you know, just there and be silent.  We just couldn't imagine anybody like that.  We thought that surely once he got nominated and he knew that, well, Supreme Court's for life.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Hey, I can say what I wanna say now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he's, he's never done that, and that's--
Speaker 2: Well, he believes, I mean he, he believes that his positions are the most helpful positions.  Now, it's hard to understand how, how he reaches that conclusion, but that's what he believes.  I'm, I'm, I'm convinced that that's what he believes, and that, that there are some, there are some African-American conservative thinkers who say that, who actually believe that, that some of these conservative positions are best in the long run.  You know, I happen to disagree with that, but that's what they believe.  That's what they believe.
Speaker 1: I think my era then, and a lot of black people, is that we, we see them as opportunist basically, trying to achieve a certain status.  And with him there's no other higher, there's not a higher place for him--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to go, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --why not just be yourself now, since--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're already vest--vested already.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I think he is being himself.  I think that, that, that there's, there's really nothing in it for him to take some of the positions that he takes.  He, he, he takes them on, on the merits.  He, he believes that.  Now, I don't, I don't understand how he reaches those conclusions sometimes.  I don't understand some of the opinions that he's, he's participated in, but that's--I mean he's--I'm, I'm, I'm convinced that, that to him it's rational what he's doing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your--yeah he--you're probably right.  He must believe what he's doing--in what he's doing.  That's, that's the only other way to explain it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 84332
Speaker 1: Okay, now as a U.S. District judge, now you've been involved in some, some highly publicized cases.  And I mean not that they made a celebrity out of you, you know, but, but they, they were high profile cases.  And one is the anti-abortion leaders that were fined and you know, by you in 1999.  Talk, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure, 'cause that's all over now.  The Supreme Court has reversed everything.  It was a, the RICO [Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations] Act.  They were sued civilly under the RICO statute, and the, the basis was that they had violated the Hobbs Act, the extortion act.  And the theory was that, that by--that they'd used violence to extort the clinic operators to cease doing business, and that they'd used violence to extort women who wanted to avail themselves of the services of the clinics from, from doing that.  There were at the time criminal RICO cases that had said that that type of thing would constitute extortion.  Before I got the case, it had gone up the United States Supreme Court.  And the Supreme Court had--well the way it got to the Supreme Court is that the judge who had it before me said that under RICO, you couldn't reach a definitive under RICO unless there was an economic motive to what they were doing, and that here the motive was political, not economic.  They weren't trying to get money or, or, or, or things.  They were trying to, to--they were doing it for political reasons.  It went up to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court said, no, there's nothing in the statute that requires that there be an economic motivation.  They raised for the first time the, the First Amendment issue before the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court said, no, that's not for us to decide.  We need--in the first instance, we need to send it back down to, to the lower courts.  When it got back down, they argued that this was not--among other things, they argued that this was not extortion.  Looking at some of those other cases, some of the criminal RICO cases, I said that, that it was.  The Seventh Circuit of Appeals agreed--goes back up to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court says, no, that extortion under the statute requires not only a violent act, but it has to seek to acquire something, in that when they tried to stop the clinic operators from, from operating the clinics, certainly they were taking something away from the clinic operators, but they weren't acquiring anything for themselves.  When they stopped women from using the clinics, they were, they were taking something away from them, but they weren't receiving anything.  And that's not extortion under the statute.  Well, that came as a big surprise to a lot of people.  The Supreme Court said that it was consistent with, with all the other cases.  It--I disagree with that.  I don't think it was, but that's the way the law stands.  And, and I was just reading the other day about a case in New York, as a criminal prosecution, they had to dismiss some of the charges, in light of the Supreme Court case and a now case, because the, the judge said they changed the definition of extortion.
Speaker 1: What goes around, comes around.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah.
Story_ID: 84333
Speaker 1: Now you were involved recently in a case around the--concerning the Global, Global Relief Foundation too.  Can, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure, the, the, the case I had was simply a defamation action against some major newspapers for things they had said after--actually that they'd said before the government seized the assets of Global Relief.  And the question was simply, in that case, whether or not under the law they had, they had committed defamation.  Basically what they said was that, that there was a government investigation going on.  And in fact there was a government investigation going on, so that case was dismissed.  There's a separate case against the governor for the seizure of assets.  In that case, that's not my case, but that case is still going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did--I, I, I, I dismissed the case against the newspapers.
Story_ID: 84334
Speaker 1: There was another case that involved, it was an Internet telephone usage.  It had to do with the, whether the calls on, on the Internet are charged locally or long distance--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you talk about that one?
Speaker 2: Sure, the "MCI" case.  The Congress passed a law a few years ago, changing the way, changing a regulatory regime for, for telephones, the, the, the, the Telecommunications Act.  It really has to do primarily with whether the federal, whether federal courts will do the regulating, or it's left to the state communications commissions.  I mean it's, it's a little complicated, but, but basically, what happened was that the whole area of regulation of local phone calls historically has been left to local reg--to state regulation.  Once--but that was at a time when there was really no competition for local phone service.  The, the, the, the Bell Companies always handled that.  The competition was really for long distance calls.  Well, that changed, and now there's competition for local service too.  And what the act says is that the Bell Services have to connect to the competitor's services.  So that if you make a phone call, and, and, and SBC is your, is your local exchange carrier, and, and I'm twelve blocks away in the city of Chicago, but I use MCI, for example, for my local carrier, that there has to be some mechanism to connect the two, so we can make this local phone call.  And what happens is that when, when you make the phone call, it's bill to you.  But I'm talking to you at the same time, so part of the conversation is over MCI's lines.  All right, the, the, the SBC lines go into what's call a switch, which is just a computer.  And then it switches.  There's a connection between that switch to the MCI lines.  So we're using--and the MCI line goes from the switch to my house, so we're using both MCI's resources, and we're using SBC's resources.  So the billing is done by SB--by, by your carrier, but my carrier didn't charge us what's called a reciprocal charge.  SBC pays MCI a reciprocal charge to compensate them for their end of, of the service.  All right, that's all--what, what the legislation says is that they negotiate that arrangement among themselves.  In the local, the state, commerce commissions can get involved or not as they see it.  If they get involved, the question was whether or not that then becomes subject to federal regulation.  That was the issue in the case.  And I concluded that, that it did fall--at that point it didn't, if, if they do get involved.  And they were claiming Eleventh Amendment immunity, that, that because they're a state, they're immune from regulation by the federal government.  So, I said no, [quote] "the Court of Appeal agreed," and in a different case, the Supreme Court agreed with that.  Now, how that ties into the Internet, is, is, is, is, is, is, is slightly skewed.  Internet calls--the question is, are Internet calls long distance calls or local calls?  If I'm an Internet Service Provider--you dial into the Internet Service Provider.  The Internet Service Provider leases phone lines that may connect you with somebody who's in California, with a, with a web, a website that's in California.  To promote the Internet, the Federal Communications Commission says that that can't be billed as a long distance call.  But what it means is that these Internet Service Providers have a lot of local traffic.  If we didn't call all those local calls--have a lot of local traffic.  And so if--and, and you may call your Internet Service Provider, and you're on a line for an hour or two.  If that's a local call, it sort of falls through the cracks with these, these reciprocal agreements.  So it, it, it, it impacted the whole way that, that, that Internet calls are made through the, the, the ISPs.  The Federal Communications Commission is looking at all that, trying to sort it all out, but it's so complicated, it's taking them years to get around to doing it.  In the meantime, these agreements, these problems are cropping up around the country with these, these local exchange carriers.  And so, everybody, me included, would prefer that the Federal Communications Commission would go ahead and, and resolve all of this.  But in the absence of that, we're, we're having to do it piecemeal.  So this case was just one of many cases like it that was trying to address some of these issues.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, thank you for that.  That was a (laughter)--
Speaker 2: More than you asked for (laughter).
Story_ID: 84335
Speaker 1: It was more complicated--these are comp--just an example of some of the, of the complexity of I guess these decisions, you know, 'cause they're, they're not, some of these are not easy decisions.
Speaker 2: Well, federal courts in this country--district courts in this country, what, what are called generalist courts, there's no specialization.  You can have some specialized courts.  The tax court is a specialized court.  The, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit handles patent cases, that's patent and, and copyright cases.  That's what they do.  For the most part, the federal courts are generalist courts.  So I might have a patent case one day, a communications case the next day, a securities case, a labor law case, a criminal case right after that.  So it's, it's, it keeps you on your toes.
Speaker 1: It sends you and your staff to the books a lot.
Speaker 2: A lot, (laughter) an awful lot.  And we depend on the lawyers, because frequently the lawyers are experts in the field.  And they have--some of them are better than others in, in, in just educating you.  And, and the lawyers in, in that, that communications case were excellent.  They brought in charts and graphs, and they showed--explained how the system, the whole communications system operated.  And, and that makes a big difference when the lawyers are helpful like that.
Story_ID: 84336
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about any other seminal cases that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Boy, off the top of my head I can't think of any.  There are lots of 'em.
Speaker 1: Are there any that, that particular affect the black community (unclear)--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I had the case that settled, the strip search case over at the county jail.  The--it was, it was an interesting case.  They were--a case arose in in, in, in, in this setting: If you're in the county jail awaiting trial, they will send you out every morning to one of the courts throughout the county.  Sometimes when you get to court you're ordered released on that case; the case is over.  They sentence you to time served, or they find you not guilty or whatever, then you go back to the county jail.  Well, any time you come into the county jail, any time women come into the county jail, they're strip searched, all right, even if you're only coming in there to pick up your things to leave.  And, and, and, and, and, and I mean these are, these are, this is a serious strip search.  This is not just take your clothes off.  This is a lot more than that.  It's very intrusive.
Speaker 1: Cavity searches and so forth?
Speaker 2: Cavity searches, you've got to, you gotta strip, you gotta bend over, you gotta do squats three times.  If, if, if a woman is, is heavy, she's gotta raise her breast to make sure she's not concealing anything under her breast.  It's, it's, it's, very dehumanizing process.  Turns out that they weren't strip searching the men on a regular basis.  Now, nobody's quite sure why they weren't doing it.  I, I, I suspect that it had to do with just being inconvenient.  They move more men than women, and it was just taking too much time and too many, too many people to supervise the, the searches.  But, in any event, they weren't, they weren't regularly strip searching the men, but they were regularly strip searching women.  And I held that that was unconstitutional.  There's no rational justification for strip searching the women but not the men.  And, and, and inconvenience is just not a reason that pass the constitutional muster.  So I enjoined them from, from sip--if they weren't gonna strip search the men, then I enjoined them from strip searching the women, at least those women who were coming back from, from court.  They eventually settled the case, and, and paid the, the class of women a substantial amount of money.  I think it was, the total was about $8 million dollars in, in, in, in total compensation for, for doing that.  That was a, that was a significant case because it changed the policies at the, at the jail, the county jail.
Story_ID: 84337
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you think when you were describing your, your mother [Loraine Raines Coar] and her attitude about equal treatment, you know, and it seems like (unclear)--it seems as though you've been involved in a couple of cases, at least that we've heard of just in the past half hour, where equal treatment, you know, under the law has been an issue, you know.  Do you--are you--does--I mean do you ever reflect back on your mother's teachings?
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I suppose I do.  I, I suppose I can't think about things any differently.  On the other hand, part of my oath is to follow the law, even, even--if the law said something inconsistent with what my personal beliefs were, I'd have to follow the law.  As I tell juries all the time, I have to, I have to apply the law as, as it is not the way I would like it to be.  There's a lot about the law that I don't like.  There's a lot about the laws that I have to, to apply that I don't like.  But that's not--the issue is not whether I like it or not, because I'm not the lawmaker.  I have to follow the law.  And sometimes, sometimes I reflect and think that my mother would agree, and sometimes I think my mother would disagree with some of the things that, that, that I'm doing.
Story_ID: 84338
Speaker 1: Now, are there any other cases you wanted to raise, you think?  I don't wanna leave anything important out.  But if--
Speaker 2: No, none that I can--that, that, that occur to me right off the top.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what, what, career wise, do you think you wanna do next (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I grow up?
Speaker 1: No, you're already up there.
Speaker 2: Well, this, this is, this is, this is probably, I'm at the point in my career, I'll be, I'll be sixty years old this year and eligible for retirement in five or six years.  I'm probably too old to think about another job in the judiciary.  I'm not sure--because of my job, I don't have, I don't have to retire.  I've got a job for life, and as long as I am mentally competent, I can continue to be a judge.  I don't--a) I don't have to retire; and b) even if I decided that I didn't wanna work full time, I could be what's called a senior judge, and I could continue to do this on a part-time basis, or I could retire and do something completely different.  I'm, I'm, I'm thinking about that right now.  I'm trying to think about what I want to do with the rest of my life.  I may decide that what I wanna do is volunteer work.  I may decide to go back into teaching.  I may decide that I, I think that there is--the whole area of, of a prisoner's rights is, is one that needs a lot of work.  I might decide to go in and just volunteer to do prison litigation.  I may decide to, to lots of things.  I may decide to go into business.  I don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: So you're still trying to make your mind up?
Speaker 2: Still--I, I don't know what I wanna do when I grow up.  There's a, there's a famous--it's a true story about these two professors at Harvard who were--went to Washington with J. F. Kennedy.  One was John Kenneth Galbraith, and I can't remember the other professor's name.  But they--Harvard has this two-year rule.  If you're a tenured professor, you can only be away for two years, and then you have to come back or you lose your tenure.  Both of these people had endowed chairs at Harvard and tenure.  So, at the end of two years, Harvard wrote the president--the dean of, of the law school wrote to both of them and said you know, you have to come back or you're gonna lose your, your tenure.  Galbraith went back.  The other fellow said I'm not ready to go back yet, and he stayed on till the end of Kennedy's first term, Johnson (unclear)--and then he decided to leave Washington.  And the dean called him and said that, you know, you don't have a right to come back.  We've held your chair open, and if you wanna come back, we'd be, we'd love to have you.  And the guy said no.  He says I believe that in everybody's lifetime there are two or three lives to be led.  And he said I've lived that life; it's time for me to do something else.  He said I don't know what it is, but it's time for me to move on, do something else.  And, and, and I believe that.  I remembered that story, and, and I believed that.  I believed in, in everybody's span of time on earth there are several things that, that you should do, and that we, we become too complacent in what, what we're doing.  And I, I suspect that there's something after judging that I wanna do.  I just haven't figured out what it is yet.
Story_ID: 84339
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, tell me, sir, what is some of your hopes and concerns about the black community right now?
Speaker 2: There was a time when there was by and large a consensus among black people as to what--not, not just black people--against all people, all, all, what I'll call right thinking people, about what a better world would look like.  And that would be a world without segregation, a world without discrimination, and, and, and, and what that world would look like was, was fairly clear to people.  Well, we've lost that vision.  There, there is what I called a conservative view, and then there's what I call the radical view.  The conservative view is that it's all a matter of class.  So, in a perfect world we'll have wealthy white people, and wealthy black people, and wealthy Hispanics, and they'll enjoy all the privileges of wealth; and then there'll be all these other people.  And there's a, there's a, there's a, an egalitarian view, this radical view that says that that's not good enough.  The idea is to make everybody's a lot better.  This, this sort of conservative is that if you can make enough money, you can live anywhere you want, but we don't want the riffraff living with us.  The egalitarian view is that, no, that, that's, that's wrong.  If that's, if that's all there is, I don't want any parts of that.  And, and, and there is this split in the black community as, as to what, what they want.  Before they thought they knew, they thought they knew.  Now they're not sure what they want.  If you took a group of, of, of, of ten black people and you went around the room and says tell me what a better world would look like, there, there won't agreement, there won't be agreement.  And, and I know what I would prefer, what I would want, but there's, there's no consensus anymore about that.  And maybe that's a good thing.  I mean the conservatives would say that's a good thing.  You, you shouldn't expect all black people to think the same way, to, to have the same goals and aspirations.  That's unrealistic.  So they'd say that's a good thing.  I'm not so sure that that's a good thing.
Speaker 1: What would you see as a better world?
Speaker 2: I, I would--a better world for me is that we wouldn't have poverty.  We wouldn't have class distinctions the way we have now.  If, if, if people--and I don't believe in social Darwinism.  I don't believe that, that the people who have more talent will be successful, and the people who have less talent will be less successful; and therefore, that's a, that's part of nature, and that's the way it should always be.  I don't, I don't believe that.  I don't believe that.  That's, that's inconsistent with my experiences in life.  I went to, I went to school with people who are poor right now.  I went to school with people who are in jail right now.  And I don't see a different in talent between some of them and, and, and me.  I had more opportunities.  I had some, I had some help from my parents.  They instilled some different values in me than some of these people.  But just in terms of, of, of, of raw material, there's no difference, there's no difference.  I see criminal defendants in, in my courtroom all the time, and sometimes they are, they are very bright people.  And they're, they're bright in terms of what they're doing criminally, but that doesn't take away from the fact that the raw intellect is there.  So, it's inconsistent with my experience that only successful people succeed, only talented people succeed.  So, I, I, I think that I'd like to see a world in which everybody's got a fair, a fair chance and the highs for the successful are not so high, and the lows for the unsuccessful are not so low.
Story_ID: 84340
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Probably as somebody who, who, who did his best with, with what he had, and, and, left the world a little better than, than the way he found it.  You know, sort of my, my, my, my philosophy of life is that things don't change because of leaders.  People like [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King get too much credit for, for what they did.  King could not have led the movement unless the people were ready to be moved.  And so it's, it's, it's the collection of, of, of people who come around to a point of view that's important.  And I'd like to be somebody who came around to the right point of view, maybe serving as an example of some other peoples, but that's not important.  It's just that, that I did the best that I could when I was here.  That's the way I'd like to be remembered.
Story_ID: 84341
Speaker 1: And sir, I know you have a lot of things you need to do, and you might have some other lives to lead, but what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Probably first and foremost, my children; secondly, that I had the courage to, to do what I thought was right.  We, we talked earlier about the demonstrations in 1963.  One of the things I try to tell young people about those demonstrations--you know, you talk to, to, to young people now, and they say, well, if I had been there during that time, I, I clearly would have been involved in demonstrations, and I would have, I'd be on the front lines.  And I, I try to tell 'em, I said I hope that's right.  But you have to understand that there was a price to be paid, that there were a lot of people who went to jail, a lot of people who're dead now for what they thought was right; there are a lot of people who lost their jobs, a lot of people who lost their opportunity to get an education because of that.  And so when--I don't want you to think it was easy.  Because when you have--now when you have tough decisions in your life now, you think, well, this is different because this is hard.  It was hard then.  And, and you, you know, it's like when, when you go Down South and you, you, you talk to white people about segregation, they all say, well, that was them; I wouldn't--I don't believe in that.  And even people who were around then, they don't believe in that.  You talk to black people, and, and everybody was a, was a civil rights worker; everybody was involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  Well, that wasn't true, that wasn't true.  I have been in, in, at a party when Stokely Carmichael [later Kwame Toure] came in the party, and this was a party among black college students, and they wouldn't let him in because he was too controversial; he was too radical; he was a civil rights worker.  I've been in black restaurants in Tuskegee [Alabama], where if you look like you were a civil rights workers, where if you had long hair, you--or you wore wire rim glasses, you weren't welcome in the restaurants.  So there was a price.  Not everybody was on board during those time periods.  And I think it's important to young people to understand that not everybody's on board now.  They, they, they say that, but they don't really mean it, and that you, sure, you should do the right thing, but you have to be willing to pay the price.  And I think I've, in my life, I've shown that I'm willing to pay the price for doing the right thing.  That's, that's--it's easy for me to do than it was for, for my parents and for their parents.  I mean we've made that kind of progress.  I can, I can make the right choices, and the price I pay is, is, is smaller than the price they had to pay, and, and that's a good thing.  And the price my children will have to pay hopefully would be smaller than the price that I had to pay.  But that could all change.  That could all change, and they may have to pay big prices.  And I hope that they would be, hope my children, I hope the young people today would be willing to pay the price to do what they think is right.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Alright, thank you.
