Story_ID: 487106
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Emory Shaw Campbell [HistoryMaker Emory Campbell], E-M-O-R-Y, S-H-A-W, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: October 11, 1941.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: I retired as executive director of Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].  That was my last job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: My home.
Speaker 1: And we are where?  In Hilton Head?
Speaker 2: We are in Hilton Head at my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 30th (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) January the 30th--
Speaker 2: --nine- 2007.
Story_ID: 487107
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you what I call five People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love rice, and I love nuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When going on vacation, what's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gosh.  You mean, my favorite def- destination is usually, usually an urban center.
Speaker 1: An urban center?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like leaving the, the rural and I like to go to the urban, urban areas.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: It's probably, that's great (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 487108
Speaker 1: We're gonna start with talking about your mother and father [Reginald Campbell] and their families, okay?  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Sarah.
Speaker 1: What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Williams, Sarah Williams [Sarah Williams Campbell] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born October 16, 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her mother and father.
Speaker 2: Her mother and father were Rosa Brown Williams and Perry Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember their parents, your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember them, heard of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You heard of them.  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, my maternal grand--great-grandparents were Alvira [Alvira Brown] and Nathaniel Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My paternal, my, my mother's f--
Speaker 1: Your mother's father.
Speaker 2: My mother's father's parents were--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Susan [Susan Williams] and Julian Williams [Julius Williams].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have you heard any stories about them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard that Julian may have--might have come here from, from Charleston [South Carolina] during the Civil War.  And I heard that Susan who we call Suki was--I think she did some midwifing, some midwifing work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know whether they were slaves or their parents were slaves?
Speaker 2: No, I think Susan was born about 1864.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is about a year before--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --slavery ended.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what about the Brown family?
Speaker 2: The Brown family originated on St. Helena Island [South Carolina].  And my, my grandmother used to talk about her mother having long hair almost like Native American.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So she might have been mixed with Mid-Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she always bragged about her father being this man who always worked and shared, shared with everybody, shared fish.  If he were to catch fish, he would share it with everybody in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So we're, we're talking about, you're talking about Rosa?
Speaker 2: Rosa's-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --father.
Speaker 1: Father.  And tell me his name one more time?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nat Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any other stories about Nathaniel and his wife?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --that's about all we know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 487109
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, your mother's mother, your grandmother, Rosa Brown [Rosa Brown Williams].  Do you remember her?
Speaker 2: Yes, very well.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Well, let's, let's tell me about her.  What type of person was she?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a--well actually she was my babysitter and she, she took care of all my mother's [Sarah Williams Campbell] children.  And so she--we called her mama.  And she--very good cook.  She could stir a pot very well, and seemed to me she could make food from anything--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and made it taste good, you know.  The bread and she was a good bread maker and--did a lot of wildlife cooking.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: She cooked, you know, turtle, and she could cook rabbits and she could cook raccoon and made it taste like chicken (laughter).  And she was a fishing person too.  She liked to fish, so she always was very serious about her boat and making sure the boat was ready to go without leaking.  And she would insist that my grandfather [Perry Williams] have the boat ready, and he was a net knitter so she made sure that he had her net always ready to, to be cast.  And, and she took us along fishing.  And when you were too young to row the boat or to cast the net, you went in as, as a bailer, a person who kept the boat dry by bailing the water, and, you know, then she taught us how to fish as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now you said your, your grandfather was a, a net mender?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She--he actually weaved nets.
Speaker 1: Weaved, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those nets were nets that were made from cotton yarn.  And you would cast them over shrimp or fish.  You could--he could make the net that would catch either of those two things, either of those two things, and sometimes he could make a net that could catch both.  In those days people called the net a poor man's net if you couldn't afford but one (laughter).  And so he could make a net that could catch both fish and shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember going shrimping?  Did you go shrimping at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes we did a lot.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: Oh, you had to go with the tide you know.  The tide you--you cast for shrimp or when the tide is out, what we call m-tide.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so you, you had to follow that tide depending on how, how the tide ran.  So you sometimes you went early in the morning, you know, as we would say in Gullah fo' day.  That mean before day broke, and so you would go through the woods and down to the landing and get in the boat and go out sometimes in the dark and, and cast for shrimp.  And then when daybreak comes you, you go and use the shrimp as a bait to catch fish. And sometimes you caught enough fish--enough shrimp to just have shrimp as well as fish.  But usually you caught the shrimp in order to use them as bait.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were your grandmother and grandfather, were they born on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was--yeah.  They both were born in Hilton Head.
Story_ID: 487110
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your, your mother, Sarah Williams [Sarah Williams Campbell].
Speaker 2: My mother was a very strong woman.  I mean she had to be; she had thirteen children.  She was pretty much the matriarch of the family.  My father [Reginald Campbell] was working away in Savannah [Georgia] for a good period, and so she pretty much ruled the roost (laughter).  And with twelve children and nine of which were boys, she taught us everything about housecleaning and how to work in the yard and the field.  And she demanded--she commanded (laughter) and she commanded respect, and we gave it to her.
Story_ID: 487111
Speaker 1: Where did you live on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina]?   What, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We lived in an area called Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  Just where I live now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm right where, about ten or about a hundred yards from where I was born.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?  Okay.  Your mother [Sarah Williams Campbell] and father [Reginald Campbell] did they buy this land?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father bought the land that, that I'm living on now, but where we grew up, we grew up on land that was purchased by my [paternal] great-grandfather [Julius Campbell].  And then my father and them inherited, inherited it from their father [Solomon Campbell], and they subdivided it after their father passed away.  No, just before they passed on, they subdivided the land 'cause land was always shared.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody lived on the land that my great-great-grandfather had bought, and, and it was no, no subdivision of the land.  Everybody just used it cooperatively.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he acquired the land, how he was able to purchase the land?
Speaker 2: I think he purchased the land from money that he earned.  My great-grandfather, I think, right after the Civil War purchased land, and he purchased at one time a hundred acres down on the southernmost end of this island where there's development now.  And he somehow sold that and bought a tract down here in Spanish Wells which is the northern end of the island.  But he bought it with, with earned money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, this might be a good time to talk about how the people came to this--the African American people, came to this island.  Can, can you share that with, with me?
Speaker 2: Well, this island was a military base early in the Civil War.  It became a military base when it was invaded by the Union [Union Army] in 1861 by some twenty thousand, some people would use the number twenty thousand troops.  Fifty-five ships came into the north end of this island and the Union took it over within four hours and they stayed here from then 1861 until about 1868.  And while they were here, eventually they sold the island off to various people.  But most of the time, most of the people were, were northern businessmen or missionaries, and some of the military people also bought land.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so what we've, what we've found out in history is that, although the government they did, did not sell land directly to those newly freed slaves who came here and from various parts of the mainland and other islands--they came here because they wanted to get behind Union lines, eventually those people bought land from people who had bought it from the Union.  And some of them bought land eventually from former Confederates because the Confederates after the Union had gotten the land and Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] got assassinated, some of the Confederate families got their land back because they went to [U.S.] Supreme Court who ruled that their land was sold illegally, and they in turn sold some of those parcels back to, to former slaves.
Story_ID: 487112
Speaker 1: Living here in, in Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] with your brothers and sisters, tell me more of about your, your mother [Sarah Williams Campbell], and tell me, what are some of the lessons learned from her, for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh (laughter).  You see when we, when we grew up, there was not only mother teaching, but everybody else taught the same lessons (laughter), and all of the children in the neighborhood did pretty much the same things.  And so mother taught us how to do our chores depending on the, on your age and your size, everybody had a chore. And that might have been raking the yards or keeping the yard neat or that could have been feeding the chicken and taking care of the chicken, taking care of the turkey.  Because we raised chicken, turkeys, pigs, cows.  And we also went into the river [Harbor River] to, to gather food.  So everybody had a, had a chore in keeping the household going, cleaning the house, cooking.  All those lessons were learned and they were taught, and they were taught by mother to the, to the eldest and then the, the eldest members of the siblings would pass those lessons down to us.  But we--most of us got direct lessons from, from mother.  And one of the main lessons is how to behave, how to respect the elders and how not to tell a lie and (laughter) all those real, real, you know, basic lessons.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Getting along was you know the, the key, because there were--I had twelve siblings eventually, but we were taught how to treat each other.
Story_ID: 487113
Speaker 1: Now, tell me your father's name?
Speaker 2: Reginald.
Speaker 1: Reginald Campbell.  And tell me his mother and father's name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reginald. My father's mother and father were Julia [Julia Campbell] and Solomon [Solomon Campbell].
Speaker 1: And where were they from?
Speaker 2: They were from right here, Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember them?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Your grandparents.
Speaker 2: My grandfather--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --my paternal grandfather passed away before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A couple of years before I was born.  But I remember very well my, my grandmother, Julia.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about her?
Speaker 2: Very kind, very soft, but well-read because she taught school.  And Mama Julia also played the piano.  She had a piano in her house and, and she would--I remember her playing that piano.  She had books.  I always remember her house always having books, and she always read the newspaper.  I'd go to her house and she'd have the newspaper in front of her face, reading.  We didn't have local newspaper.  The newspaper was, you know, a Beaufort [South Carolina] newspaper which sometimes came to us a month later (laughter), but Mama Julia always read, read and was very kind.  She always, she always was a kind, soft lady.
Story_ID: 487114
Speaker 1: Going back to your mother [Sarah Williams Campbell], there was a question I wanted to ask about your mother and father [Reginald Campbell].  How much education did your mother and grandmother have?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother Rosa [Rosa Brown Williams] said she went to the third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she always bragged how much she--how, how well she could write and read (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I grew up, the emphasis was always on the fact that you can read and write, and she always made sure that everybody knew she could read and write (laughter).  She wrote her own, you know, her own mail orders and she could read her, her letters that came from away from her sister.
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  How much education did she have?
Speaker 2: My mother went through high school and she took summer courses at, at Savannah State College [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], because she eventually became a teacher.  Not eventually but ever since I, you know, was growing up I knew she was a school teacher.  She taught at a one room school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she taught as you were growing up, so she worked outside the home?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 487115
Speaker 1: Was there anything else that your, your father [Reginald Campbell] did?
Speaker 2: My father worked down, down river in Savannah [Georgia] at the dredge, and he also worked as a carpenter occasionally because he had gotten his education, a couple years at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in carpentry.  And so he and his brothers, which were my uncle, would occasionally do carpentry work.
Speaker 1: What is the dredge?
Speaker 2: Dredge is, is when you pumping out the silt out of the wa- out of the river to make it deeper for shipping so the ships can come in.  And that's what they did around the Savannah River about in the late 1940s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so men would go from Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], including my father, down to Savannah to work.  And then he came back after he became arthritic.  He came back and began teaching school.  So he taught school for about three years, I think, including teaching myself.  He taught me in the third and fourth, I think, up to the fifth grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow.  So you had both parents as teachers.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And your grandfather, Solomon [Solomon Campbell], what did he do?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, Solomon was also a school teacher, so was Julia [Julia Campbell] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. All right.
Speaker 2: Solomon and Julia were, I mean people told me about them.  I never remember them teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Julia was retired when I came along.  Solomon had passed away but people referred to him as that teacher.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And they used to refer to me as, as Doc Campbell [HistoryMaker Emory Campbell], they said I looked so much like him.  And they called him Doc, Doc Campbell.  And they tell stories about him riding his horse down to the school.  And, and my father and them if they were late at, at school they would, they would get punished just like any other student although he, he knew he left them chores to do at home before he left (laughter).  He expected them to be, be at school on time.  But the--and then he was also a pastor of the First African Baptist Church [Historic First African Baptist Church, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] for a short time which was our local--one of the first churches on the island, was the first church on the island.  And he pastored that church I think, up 'til his death.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Is there anything else you wanna tell me about your mother [Sarah Williams Campbell] and father or grandparents?
Speaker 2: The, the thing that strikes me about them all is how, how much they stressed education.  And my mother would teach school and walk two miles to, to teach and walk back.  And yet she had twelve children in, in between those years.  I mean in between those births she taught school.
Story_ID: 487116
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.  Can you list them, and tell me where you fit in the progression?
Speaker 2: Not--I think I'm number six (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And my oldest, my oldest sibling is George [George Campbell].  And George, George was raised by my grandparents, my maternal grandparents [Rosa Brown Williams and Perry Williams], and he was always kind of the leader type person, you know.  He'd take us into the river [Harbor River] and showed us how to fish and he kind of tutored us, tutored us in how to chop wood and so you always looked up to him.  And my sister, Carol [Carol Campbell Oriage] was next in line.  She lived, she lived with us so she taught us how to cook and she would be the person who did the cooking, and she'd be the person who yelled for the wood and (laughter) and tell us when to bring the wood in and when to start the fire.  'Cause as parents, as parents, as our parents [Sarah Williams Campbell and Reginald Campbell] would leave the house she'd be left in charge.  Hattie was--I mean, Regina [Regina Campbell Ragland] was the next in line.  Regina was raised by my grandparents with George.  She and George were raised by my grandparents over there on my maternal, my maternal grandparents so they were much closer than to us.  Two, the two of them are very, very close even today, but she would occasionally come to our house and she always had things that she needed and wanted (laughter), 'cause she was one of the few, one of the few children over there.  And then Hattie [Hattie Campbell Bryant] was my next sister, next in line.  She was raised by my paternal grandparents [Julia Campbell and Solomon Campbell].  And so she also was a privileged child (laughter) down the street they lived.  And when we met, of course, we knew they were our sisters although they didn't live in the same household.  But, but thinking of them they never had to really heed to any directions of my parents.  They could always leave and go (laughter), go back to grandparents.  Herb [Herbert Campbell] was the next in line.  Herb was, Herb is, was, was, was the--my mother used to call him Old Man because he was the eldest male in the house and so he did all of the, the chopping of the wood and the--he would go out and gather the, gather the animals in until we grew up.   But we went along and so he was, he always tutored us in how to, how to manipulate the, the forest, you know, and snakes were around.  How to look out for snakes and that kind of thing.  My next is--I'm, I followed Herb and then David [David Campbell] is under me.  And so David, David took pretty much all of the directions from me as I learned from Herb and then as, as we went gathering food and gathering wood, firewood and hunting, whatever we did I had to teach David.  And Leroy [Leroy Campbell] who also was raised by my maternal, my maternal grandparents.  Leroy none--he just decided he was gone go and live with them and he did.  But, but we always included him in any kind of venture that we did.  And, of course, we all were athletes so we played a lot of baseball and so we always gathered them around baseball.  And after Leroy, Irvin [Irvin Campbell].  Leroy and Irvin have the same birth date.  They, they were born two years apart, same birth date.  They always celebrated together.  So we would always look forward to their birthday.  Irvin, was, you know, all of us were born in, in the house by a midwife.  A midwife helped my mother birth all her children.  And Irvin came and a little over a pound, I guess, they said.  He was, he was always referred to as the little baby who, who, who made out, made it, and became a pretty, big young boy.  He, he grew pretty well after he--after those first few months.  And then Melvin [Melvin Campbell] came after Irvin.  And Melvin is--he was always--he liked to play baseball and, and, and he became the only teacher of, of us all.  He is a school teacher.  And then there was Morris [Morris Campbell].  Morris is much younger.  He came along when things were modernizing.  So we, we, we had to teach him or tell him about the old days.  Benjamin [Benjamin Campbell] is the, the last surviving one.  Lucille [Lucille Campbell], followed Benjamin.  Lucille didn't live but about three months.  But Benjamin had an accident when he was a kid that left him as a paraplegic, but he's, he's done well.  And, and we took care of him, still taking care of him.
Story_ID: 487117
Speaker 1: We just finished listing your, your brothers and sisters.  And you told me that Benjamin [Benjamin Campbell] had an accident that left him as a paraplegic.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, when Benjamin was about two years old, he fell off a porch.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was two (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were and we had there was playing he, he and his first cousin.  Well, actually he and his nephew were playing.  His nephew was the same age as he was, my older sister child.  And he fell off the porch and that ground was so hard he hit his head and gee whiz, he, he slept for about sixteen days before he woke up.  Took him to Savannah [Georgia], of course, but we had just, I think, yeah, we had just--no the bridge was just about to be connected.  We had a ferry boat then, and they took him to Savannah and he stayed in the hospital and had to start all over again.  He had to learn how to walk again, and how to talk again and--.  But he, he came out of it and all through, you know, his, his whole childhood he, he did the same things that everybody else did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days we didn't have a lot of medical care for paraplegics.  So he, he, he withstood all of the, all of the difficulties until we were able to take him to Boston [Massachusetts] in the 1970s and they had some surgeries done and, and he, he, he was quite improved from those surgeries.
Story_ID: 487118
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], the community in which you lived.  Was it--you, you lived on farm land?  Did y'all farm on--where you lived?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about the community and about Hilton Head in general.  What was it like during this time when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well Hilton, Hilton Head was, was an isolated place, you know.  We were isolated from the world I always say (laughter).  We, we didn't, we didn't get away from here except by boat.  For a long time folks left, only left by sailboat, and then we finally got gasoline engine boats that could take us a little faster, and the boat that left here regularly was run by Charlie Simmons [Charles Simmons, Sr.] who, who had a kind of a regular ferry going to Savannah [Georgia] about three times a week, I think, and he took all the freight.  But, but these--this island was carved up into about ten different neighborhoods.  The rest of the island was pretty much one big forest.  As you know we got a thirty thousand acre island about forty, forty to fifty square mile island here.  And most of it was forest except those ten large openings where you had farming going on around those housing, the various families within those neighborhoods.  And every neighborhood as I recall now, just about everybody in every neighborhood were kin (laughter).  You come to Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and you know, you know your fortieth cousin.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And everybody around here was, was kinfolks.  And so you had the open fields and the houses within those fields and there were mixed, I call 'em mixed gardens now because they were all different crops around those houses.  Beans, and corn, and peas and sweet potatoes and sugarcane and peanuts and just about everything you could name.  In the days, just ahead about during even my time we had grits mills in every neighborhood.  Not in every neighborhood but in certain neighborhoods you would grind the corn and you could get grits and you could make it fine and you could get flour from corn.  And sugarcane mill, there was a couple of sugarcanes mill here, and so every, every, every fall you could get your syrup from sugarcane.  And lots of fish.  We, we ate fish it was just about every day (laughter), and you got tired, you got tired of fish.  And so I was, I was, I was glad sometime to see canned goods like pork and beans.  That was a great meal (laughter).  Ate so much fish, fish, fish, and we didn't do a lot of frying of fish because we didn't have a lot of oil.  Oil was kind of scarce.  And so we did--that rice was staple and, and stewed food, stewed or boiled.  And a lot of bean soup.  And a lot of stewed fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The community was basically African American?
Speaker 2: About 99 percent.  When I grew up there were, oh, there must have been about three or four white families living here.  We had about fifteen hundred.  I guess at one time we probably were up to nearly two thousand people here, and you could probably count on two hands the number of white people.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did they do the same type of work?
Speaker 2: Same type of thing.  They were in charge pretty much of the governmental bodies like the judgeship, the postal service, they were all operated by white people.  And then white people had the businesses.  The oyster factory during the winter months, they operated that.  But most of the time the--most of the black people had their own independent services.  They had--we had our own little stores.  We operated our own stores.  We operated the boat transportation.  Everybody had a boat of some kind and some people had sailboats that they sail themselves to Savannah.  And they would, you know, they would hold the fish in, in these little--at one time we had fish cyas' we called them.  It's almost like lobster traps.  See you keep the fish in there until, until such time that you're ready to take it to Savannah so the fish goes to Savannah fresh.  Or you could go and get some mess of fish out of your fish cyas' (laughter).  There were no refrigeration.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There were no electricity here.
Speaker 1: No electricity.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And this was in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Electricity came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did they get electricity?
Speaker 2: Electricity came in the early '50s [1950s], about 1950 I think was the first electricity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you had iceboxes?
Speaker 2: And many people didn't get it then (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had iceboxes and the--Mr. Simmons [Charles Simmons, Sr.] when I grew up it was--we relied on him for ice.  And people would get ice and they would bury the ice in the ground because they all put saw dust around it, they said all that would help to keep the ice.  But sometimes we went to get that ice and there was nothing there but the sack (laughter).  The ice had melted.  And so the ice didn't last very long, particularly when you really needed ice was the summer months, and so, you know, how hot it gets.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so that was a luxury to have ice.  But just about everybody would have an icebox.  But you, you couldn't keep that box cold.
Story_ID: 487119
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Ooh.  I guess the two things that sticks out in my mind during my early childhood, one was my trying to avoid going with my aunt and uncle.  They waited too late to try to adopt me.  You see in those days the, the larger the family, more chance you had of getting (laughter), getting sent away with, with a person who might have wanted you.  And they would adopt, you know, extended family meant that people adopted their relatives.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so my aunt and uncle wanted to adopt me.  They, they were my godparents, because they gave me the name and they christened me, and so they adopted, wanted to adopt me except they waited too late.  I was too old to, to be adopted (laughter).  And I had been, I had been bonded then to my, to my parents [Sarah Williams Campbell and Reginald Campbell].  And so he, he was one of the few people, my uncle, my aunt was my father's sister.  And my, my Uncle Arthur [ph.] married to my, my father's sister, Erline [Erline Campbell] and so they'd come down to Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  They had, they were one of the few people that had, had an automobile, because he had a store and he, he worked and he had saved money and he bought land and he had lots of cows.  And he was a quote unquote wealthy man.  And so he--it come down to visit my grandmother and I'd hear that truck coming and I'd run under the house because he'd stopped by and wanted to coax me to go back with them, and I never wanted to go.  But that was--that sticks out in my mind as one of my early childhood memories.  And it wasn't pleasant (laughter).  The next one had to do with my, my grandmother taking me fishing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was so encouraging.  She would say, "Oh, look at you.  You, you hold that line like you know.  Ooh, you a great fisherman."  She was so encouraging (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 487120
Speaker 1: So your brothers and sisters that lived with your grandparents, this was basically out of necessity, because how many rooms did you have in, in your house where your mother [Sarah Williams Campbell] and father [Reginald Campbell] lived [in Spanish Wells, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, we only had about three bedrooms total, but you know it wasn't so much out of necessity as much out of the fact that they wanted to go.  My parents didn't encourage it, because they would, they would have loved to kept them.  They would have kept them and we would have still got around, get along very well with, with what, whatever we had.  But, but they just wanted to go.  And they was, they was young people, you know, when they say I'm going with (unclear) stay there.  And I, I never asked them why, what really encouraged them to do that.  And I don't know whether it was the fact that they, they got petted and doted on by the parents or they saw an opportunity (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But y'all--you all lived close together though, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, just down the street.  Right across the--in the case of my paternal grandmother's [Julia Campbell], my grandmother because I didn't know my grandfather [Solomon Campbell], but they lived right across the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grand- my maternal grandparents [Rosa Brown Williams and Perry Williams] lived about a half a mile down the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what were the other things that you did as a child with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: We had time to play, but we, we--you know, most of our childhood was spent working together, you know.  Doing your chores and then you'd have time to play.  You'd play with tires like you'd roll tires or roll the, an old rim.  Or in my--in our time it was mostly boat building.  We'd build little boats and, and that's what we saw around us.  We saw a lot of boats, saw sailboats, and we'd, we'd go down to the river [Harbor River] and we see boats.  And so our, our model for toys were boats, and we did a lot of building of boats.  We did--played in the--built sand castles in the yard, and did a lot of baseball.  Once we got old enough, we started playing baseball.  And then in the afternoons sometimes our parents would play baseball with us. And then they'd hit the ball and we'd run (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 487121
Speaker 1: So you started school.  What school--what was the name of the elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: We started school down--right in the neighborhood [Spanish Wells, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  We had a, we had a praise house.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the day we converted, it was converted to a school. So we used it as a school during the day, and three times a week during the evening, it was, it was used as a praise house.  Which is almost like a church, but the praise house is, is the neighborhood, is the neighborhood meeting place for having worship service.  And you might say it was like the elementary part of the church.  That's where you learned to read scripture.  That's where you learned to direct service, that's where you to lead a song.  And so when you, when you're a youngster you begin going to prayer meeting in the praise house.  And you also get prayed for because there's a mourning bench, a bench put across the front of the building where every--all the youngsters go and kneel and get prayed for by one of the elders.  So in the daytime the--that praise house was our school.  So there were about thirty to forty children in that--it's a one room building.  And so in the evenings or after school we'd have to set it up for prayer meeting.  In the morning you put, put the building back in place for school.  And there were, so there were about five grades to--actually they started off at six grades before we got the middle school built on the island.  And that's when--but that's when it turned to five grades.  So five grades were taught in that school by one teacher.
Speaker 1: How, how did they do that when you had just one room?  How was it set up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very well (laughter).  They did it very well.  Looking back, there were no problems at all because the youngsters were then tutored by the older, older class people.  While the teacher's teaching sixth grade, the sixth grade, the fifth grade is helping the fourth graders.  And so forth, and some sixth graders would be helping some fourth graders who were slow.  And the others were just reading and reading their lesson.  The teacher would say, "All right.  Pull out your book and study.  Pull out your English, John.  Do your math, Mary."  And she--he or she knew, you know, we had, I had one teacher taught me, was a lady, and then my father [Reginald Campbell] taught me the last few years of, of elementary school.  But they knew every student.  And they knew every parent.  And so they, they had no discipline problem because they, they saw their parents every afternoon (laughter).  Or they could stop off on their way home from school.
Speaker 1: Was there a name to the praise house or to the school?
Speaker 2: It's called Spanish Wells School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I used to put on my paper Spanish Wells Schools, no elementary.  We just put Spanish Wells Schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Schools.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the Spanish Wells praise house as well.
Speaker 1: All right.  How were you as a student?
Speaker 2: Very good (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Got all A's (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had to be.  I had to be good, yeah.	 We were, we were good students my siblings and I, not being braggadocios, but we, we got our lessons.  And we had to, because my mother [Sarah Williams Campbell] was a teacher, my grandparents were teachers at one time.  My maternal grandparents [Rosa Brown Williams and Perry Williams] were always encouraging, and so they expected--it was expectation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were expected to do well.  In our house every evening, you know, was a tutoring house.  So all the kids--some of the kids in the neighborhood would come to our house to, to get their lessons, get their homework.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you were in elementary school, had you thought about what you would like to become when you grow up?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.  I, I don't know. It might have been, you know, our model or role models at that time was Charlie Simmons [Charles Simmons, Sr.] whoever did things like, you know, driving a vehicle or driving a boat.  We admired those people.  We admired, we admired people who built things like my father and them were carpenters, so some of us would say we want to be a carpenter.  I don't--I believe I always wanted to be a captain I--of a boat or something.  I think that's why, that's why they called me Cap as a (laughter) as a nickname.
Story_ID: 487122
Speaker 1: So where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: By the time I entered high school, the bridge had connected us to the mainland so we went daily to Bluffton [South Carolina] which is about ten miles from Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], less than ten miles from Hilton Head.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause--so you went straight from elementary school to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --to high school?
Speaker 2: No, there was a middle school built.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went to, after fifth grade here they--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --had a middle school by that time.  So I went to sixth, seventh, and eighth grade--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in a middle school which is located in the middle of the island.  So we, we went there by truck, and then eventually we got us a bus.
Speaker 1: Was this Mr. Simmons' [Charles Simmons, Sr.] truck again?
Speaker 2: Mr. Simmons truck.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  He was--
Speaker 2: And then Mr. Simmons got an old army surplus bus that he--we used that for a while. And then, I think, before I left middle school we may have had school buses by then.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think we did.
Speaker 1: So this was Hilton Head junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we called it Robinson--
Speaker 1: Robinson.
Speaker 2: --Junior High [Robinson Junior High School, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  There was a, there was a man [William Robinson] who was a quasi-philanthropist that helped to build the school, and they named it in his behalf.  He was a North Carolinian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there anything that you wanna talk about, about middle school?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was, you know, that was you might say my world widened, because I went beyond Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] where I grew up.  You know, I told you about these ten neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And you stayed within your neighborhood most of your life up, up to twelve years olds.  You would go to church occasionally up to the other end of the island, but this was daily, you could go to the other end of the island and see other folks (laughter).  And on your way there you could see other neighborhoods.  And so your world--my world opened and I met new people, and I, I heard about, you know, what they did in their neighborhoods.  People from the Chaplin [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] area, for example, there was a whole beach front.  And so those kids, those kids saw the beach all the time, and they fished on the beach (laughter) and they went to the beach, and so we could talk about the beach versus these rivers that I grew up in.  And they did things a little different from what we did.  They, they farmed, bigger farms.  They, they, they saw more things because it was highway that was--that went to Chaplin and through those neighborhoods like Stoney [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and Chaplin the only highway on the island was there, so they saw more cars than we did (laughter).  And so we, we exchanged a lot of--we exchanged quite a bit of stories.
Speaker 1: So, if Mr. Simmons; bus was really the only transportation going back and forth, how were other people getting around the island?
Speaker 2: Mr. Simmons--
Speaker 1: Did everybody have--?
Speaker 2: Mr. Simmons had a boat that went to Savannah [Georgia] and then he had trucks, a couple of trucks and the bus he had for us, the big school bus.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He, he took most of the kids to school and then there was another man on the other end of the island that had a, had a car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, had a truck.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He brought the kids from that end to the school.  So the, the people who owned stores usually had a vehicle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although they weren't, you know, big transporting people like Mr. Simmons.
Speaker 1: So they would go and get their, their goods for their, their store--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --via Mr. Simmons--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --going to pick it up from Savannah or from wherever it was coming from?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.  So most people didn't travel from one side of the island to the other for--because there was really no, no need to do that, is that right?
Speaker 2: Not a--no, you know, all these neighborhoods were essentially self-sustaining.
Speaker 1: Sustain, okay.
Speaker 2: You know you left to go to church to the other end of the island--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --or you left to go to get to get something that you did not have within the neighborhood but that was rare.
Story_ID: 487123
Speaker 1: In junior high school [Robinson Junior High School, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], were there any classes or extracurricular activities that you hadn't had before like music or art, any of this was introduced (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I got--junior high school introduced me to the world because in sixth grade we had a sixth grade teacher that had a big atlas on the wall.  And she told us everything about the continents and who lived on them and where they were.  Gee, I learned about the Arab world a long time ago (laughter).  No, and she would tell us about--we used to call them the Arabs (laughter), you know.  And, and she'd tell us about Ethiopia.  And, and she would also try to match us, our features, with the African countries.  I remember her saying, "You could be an Ethiopian," you know (laughter).  And so for the first time I learned the differences of the world, different people of the world.  Also learned different games.  We, we had a basketball.  We saw basketball for the first time.  This big round ball but no basket to throw it in.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So we used--we played rugby with it (laughter).  You know so we, we tried to play rugby with that ball, trying to pull it from each other, but baseball was our--still our main, our main game.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was this a pastime--that's baseball that is, for Saturday games or what different times or did you just really spend much time doing chores or working on the, the farm?
Speaker 2: Oh, on weekends we always had a little time.  And in the evenings sometimes, when the evening got long in the spring, we had about an hour to, to spend time playing baseball.
Story_ID: 487124
Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to listen to radio?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know that's, that was one of the--oh gosh, to have a radio and to be able to play it.  I remember our first radio that my father [Reginald Campbell] brought from Savannah [Georgia] at Christmastime.  And, and they used to have to go to Savannah by, by boat, of course, and gee, we couldn't wait until he got home.  It seemed he wouldn't never get home that night because he was gone bring this radio.  And he brought this big beautiful--those radios used to be large at that, those time.  Big, nice cabinet, you know.  Boy, and we couldn't pick up hardly a thing on that radio (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: In those days you, you had to, you had to put a pole up because everything almost was like satellite.  And you had to put a--we ran out and cut, and cut the, the pole, had all the pole ready because they would bring a wire so you could run it from that pole.  We, we use to try to find the tallest, slimmest tree to put next to the house for that radio.  We rigged it up that night and we put it on that thing just went (makes sounds) we couldn't hardly pick up a station on it.  And then from then on we, we played that radio but it was rationed; that radio was rationed for a long time.  By rationing I mean the battery, you couldn't use it for every--I mean to play it and listen to the music all the times.  You only--you listened to the news and they would listen to spirituals or gospel.  They used to be used to be--we used to call 'em spirituals.  And then once in a while you could hear rag songs (laughter).  That's what they called the rhythm and blues.  So you even put in a rag song.  But there were times you--when they went away you tried to play that radio and you, you know that they about to come and you turn that thing off.  You had to ration that radio (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But other folks who had radio before us, people used to go to their houses to listen to the, to the fights, Joe Louis fight.  There were a few people in the neighborhood [Spanish Wells, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] that had radios and everybody's gathered to their house to look and to listen to the fight.  I was too young to, to leave the house.  It wasn't until television time that we could leave and go and watch one television which was the same as, as when the radio first started.
Story_ID: 487125
Speaker 1: So you went now to Bluffton high school [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me what that experience was like, because this is the first time you're actually going off the island [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: There we go again, yes, another, another, another new world.  I mean we go over this bridge in this school bus loaded, I mean, we--overcrowded bus, you know.  In those days you know it was nothing for ten, fifteen children to be standing while the bus was going because there were no seats and you don't get but one bus.  And then in those days you also had student drivers.  Today you don't have student drivers.  But you know once you got fourteen you could get your driver's license.  And you could get a school bus driver's license.  And so we had fourteen, fifteen year old drivers.  Our driver was about seventeen, I guess.  And he drove us to Bluffton [South Carolina].  He was a junior when I got, when I got in high school I think he was a junior, maybe a sophomore but he was our bus driver.  And you get there and there's this big brick school.  And it's got radiators, you know, that's where you got the heat.  So the heat comes up in the radiators, and all the rooms are heated.  You got restrooms inside.  And, and Bluffton had paved streets and stores (laughter).  And those kids, those kids laughed about the way we talked, because we were, we were pure Gullah speakers.  And gosh, we got ridiculed for, for our speech.  But, but we, we got our lessons.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That, that shut a lot of people up after that (laughter).
Story_ID: 487126
Speaker 1: Well, when you were back on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] going to elementary school and, and junior high school [Robinson Junior High School, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], there was no heat.  Did, did you have to do chores at the school as well as (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: --as at home?
Speaker 2: --indeed.  We had to chop our wood.  You know the older kids, sixth graders, fifth graders they chopped the wood.  And our parents would bring wood to the school.  See we had--some schools, in our case our parents would bring the wood and then later on they were able to--the county were able to pay one person to haul wood, but, but the boys had to chop the wood.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And we, we'd start that fire before the teacher came.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And not one school that I know of got burned down (laughter).
Story_ID: 487127
Speaker 1: So you were talking about Bluffton high school [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], and how the way you spoke, that the kids would laugh at the kids from the--from Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], and it's because of the Gullah language.  And I remember coming up people would call people from this area Geechees.  Now tell me what--is there a difference between a Geechee and Gullah?
Speaker 2: No.  Most recently people are saying that, you know, Gullah is South Carolinians and Geechees are Georgians, but they're both the same.  We have, we have for a long time white people, white scholars referred to us as Gullahs, and--but most black people always referred to us as Geechees.  And we don't know exactly where both terms came, where either term came from.  Gullah we think derived, was arrived from Gola which is a tribe in West Africa, rice growing people, Gola.  Had some people to take the tour with us--we run a tour company--and some people came from Atlanta [Georgia] and they were on the back of the bus and I was talking about the derivative of Gullah.  And I think I said, "I think it's Gola."  And they raised their--raised their hand and said, "We Gola people.  We live in Atlanta but we came from the Gola region of West Africa."  And they came, they said they expected to see a lot of rice fields.  And so originally when, when people were brought from West Africa for the rice plantations, they came from that region of West Africa where they did a lot of rice growing.  You saw advertisement for Gola Negroes during slavery.  There are old historic ads.  And we think that got changed to Gullah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Now Geechee we don't know exactly where it derived from but we know that along the Ogeechee River there were rice growing fields, and we think that that might have been where Geechee came from.  But also there is a region in West Africa known as Kissi.  Some people think that that might have been a source of the term Geechee.  Portuguese is another; Portuguese were involved in the slave trade, we don't know whether that was, that was a term Geech.  Some people say Geech, some people Geechee.  But there is no difference in the culture.  Both cultures are very much the same, language, religious belief, family life, pretty much, very much, very much the same Geechee, Gullah.  In South Carolina, Georgia, Sea Islands, pretty much the same.
Story_ID: 487128
Speaker 1: What are some of the traditions that you, you're speaking about that are the same?
Speaker 2: Well, I told you about the cousins.  You know your fortieth cousins because you, you live in the same land, and so you stay connected, and, and you keep those lineage.  And then, then living on an island, it's almost like the old African tribes so you, you're very clannish.  You really look out for each other and you, you suspect, you suspicion of outsiders.  And that's island life because you know, you--the island is, is surrounded by water so, who's that coming over the river?  Is that somebody that shouldn't be here?  Is that somebody that's gone hurt us?  The other thing is the food, rice.  Rice is always--they call us rice-eating Geechees.  And then I never knew why, I thought, I thought that's what made me talk funny (laughter).  So I stopped eating rice, and I still talk funny.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, but rice is always you--we didn't grow rice when I grew up but people grew rice up in, you know, after slavery.  And some people on some of these islands grew rice into the '60s [1960s], you know, the swamp rice where you had to depend on the rain water.  But in the old days of plantation days, people grew rice by--from the fresh water part of the up- upland.  They actually took the fresh, fresh water rivers and, and actually dammed the rivers so that you could get the water as you pleased to flood the fields.  And they said that that traced that, can get traced back to the Senegambia part of West Africa, where they originally discovered rice growing.  The Europeans found rice being grown in West Africa, and they went after those folks to import because South Carolina and Georgia had large rice growing fields.  And so in the '50s [1950s], '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] when I grew up, and no rice was being grown here, people would go to Savannah [Georgia] and that's the first thing on the list, a sack of rice, either a fifty pound or a hundred pound.  And everybody'd come back on that boat with those big sacks of rice, very much a staple.  But okra, sweet potatoes, all--fish, and the fish nets, all that food gathering method, you can trace it to West Africa.  That's, that's Gullah culture.
Story_ID: 487129
Speaker 1: The superstitions and some witchcraft, Gullah culture, and that can all be traced back to West Africa.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The church is a big part of the island life also, was it not?
Speaker 1: Which is also connected to Africa and our, our spiritual beliefs.  You know there for a long time we used, we used dreams to find God.  We would dream, and our dream would be interpreted.  We would go into the wilderness; we called it wilderness but we went into the forest three times a day to meditate during that seeking period.  And seeking was done from the praise house when you decided you wanna join the church as we said.  Then you began to seek, and seeking included dreaming and meditating and being away from all of the devilish things like playing ball and playing.  You actually couldn't do any of that; you just had to seek and be to yourself.  So it was very solitary.  And that--even after your dreams were interpreted by your spiritual leader that's when you were allowed to get baptized, if those dreamed revealed that you gotten rid of all your sins.  Then and only then are you allowed to get baptized.  Not only did that spiritual leader interpret your dream, but his interpretation or her interpretation was verified by a board of deacons.  So you had to tell, every day, you had to tell a dream to your spiritual leader because most nights you did dream.  I can't remember mine now (laughter), nowadays.  But, but when you told it to him or her, and you went there before day, they say fo' day, fo' day clean.  You went there and told that dream and they would catalog it and you would catalog it.  Somebody at once asked me, "Do you write it down?"  No, you didn't keep a journal.  You keep, kept it right in your head. And so after your spiritual leader say okay you're ready, then you go to the next level and you tell all those dreams to that board just as you had told them over that period of thirty days or more.
Speaker 2: Wow.  And so after the board then what happens?
Speaker 1: After the board verifies it, then you get baptized.  And you get your right hand fellowshipped.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now that, that business of going into the woods--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I finally discovered after I started at Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] where I came into contact with writers and culturists and Africans, and one day I was walking with some Africans, and I was explaining this and some other African Americans said, "Well, why did you go in the woods?"  And the, and the African answered said, "That's where God be."  He said God is where and that's what we say in Gullah, "That's where he dey."  That's where he is.  But he said, "God is where there are dangers.  Where there's the snakes, where there are the animal.  And if we wanna find him, that's where you go."
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: So I think that's where we got that from.  Never knew before.  Never knew why we did that.  So there was a blending between West African belief and practices with, with Christian life.  I think that began probably in slavery.
Story_ID: 487130
Speaker 1: The slaves that lived on this island, though, were free before most slaves, is that right?  During the Civil War time?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but you know you had free blacks throughout slavery because some plantations, people were allowed to buy there's, buy their freedom.  On this island, I don't know of anybody that had been allowed to do so.  But after the Union [Union Army] came in in 1861 and Africans came from other plantations behind Union lines, officially this was one of the first places where, you know, massive number of people had opportunity to buy land and to live as free people before others.  And so in 1862 they actually established a village called Mitchelville on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] named for General Ormsby Mitchel [Ormsby M. Mitchel] who was in charge at the time.  And so he took this plantations and organized people into a little town where they had their own town council; they had their school board; they had garbage collection; they had a police department.  It was the beginning of self-governance for, for black people.  He was, he was experimenting with it.  And that lasted until 1868 when the Union pulled out of here.  That's where all the church started, you know the first church on this island started, the first school.  Say the first compulsory education in the state or maybe in the South by any organized group was done because everybody who was six years old and older had to be in school.
Speaker 1: So I know that there's a town called Mitchellville not far from here, but it's not on the island. Did it (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Ridgeland [South Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, near Ridgeland.
Speaker 2: There is Mitchellville in Ridgeland, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I don't know where that got its name.  You know, there is a Mitchellville, Maryland as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But this Mitchelville was, was spelled with one L on the end.  And it's, it's named for General Ormsby Mitchel.  Who, who was an Ohioan and a, and a West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] graduate, and they said he had a couple of other towns named for him over in Ohio as well as in, in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he white or black?
Speaker 2: He was a white general.
Speaker 1: White general.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do we, do we know why he wanted to make a town for blacks?
Speaker 2: Well he, he that was one of the way he wanted to solve the problem of the blacks getting in the way of the, of the war.  You see, when soldiers are fighting war, they don't have time to deal with civilians.  So he said, "Y'all gone on over there and take care of yourselves.  Now I'm gone organize y'all.  Don't y'all come bugging me."  (Laughter) And but he only lived six weeks.  He did all that organizing in six weeks.  He seemed to have been a very compassionate man in terms of his, his relationship to slavery.  He--we have, we have heard some of his speeches that he made, I mean we've read some of his speeches he made to the contraband, because that's what we were at the time, what our ancestors were at the time.  They didn't get emancipation until a year later, but he told them to take care of your family, educate your children, and live to take care of family.  And, and so he did all that in six weeks.  He died from malaria.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Or yellow fever.  He got--contracted with yellow fever here.
Speaker 1: Oh, um-hm.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very--but, but a very, a very bold move on his part.
Story_ID: 487131
Speaker 1: So back to the Geechee, Gullah language.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you say that this is a combination of English and maybe West African language?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We have found, we have found through linguists that we have many words in the Gullah language that can be traced back to West Africa.  And Lorenzo Turner [Lorenzo Dow Turner], one of our greatest linguists, came through here from Chicago [Illinois].  His widow [Geneva Calcier Townes Turner] still lives there actually; she is remarried.  But Lorenzo came into South Carolina through South Carolina State College [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] then state university.  And he heard this language at South Carolina State, and so he was curious enough in 1932 to come to these island and began interviewing and listing words.  So he gathered the combination of words and names, he gathered some thirty-five hundred that he could trace back to West Africa, and he traced it back because he went over there.  He was one of the few scholars that compared this language to West African languages.  And yet he was not acknowledged until after his death as he wasn't white, and they didn't think that a black scholar could do it.  And so he, he prevailed though.  And now his book is the most essential book in studying the Gullah language, even by white scholars.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: We just had it republished, it's called, 'Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect' [Lorenzo Dow Turner].  And this--it was republished a couple years ago and the foreword or the introduction was written by two professors [Katherine Wyly Mille and Michael B. Montgomery] at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], ironically.  But Lorenzo, you know, compared words like coota, what we call turtle.  We call a turtle coota.  When I grow up my grandmother say, "Get that cuda, I'm gone cook cuda soup today."  And then you had bidi for chicken.  And you got tote you know that word, tote.  That's an ordinary word nowadays, but it mean to carry. That's, that's an African word.  Juke, disorderly, juke joint.  Came from the word juke which is a Nigerian word.  My grandmother always used the buckruh to describe white man.  It mean boss man or white man.
Speaker 1: And she would say what?
Speaker 2: Buckruh.
Speaker 1: Buckruh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Say, "Well, isn't that a buckruh out there?"
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But all those words--but the, the syntax is the key to the Gullah language.  Do you know the, the way we place these, these words, where you place the verb and how you put that African verb in front of your verb like duh, duh talk, duh walk.  And you say that mean walking.  So you put duh in front of it or dey.  And you say I dey dey or I live Stoney [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], I, I been dey today.  You know not there, but dey.  I dey Stoney.  I dey Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  I am at Spanish Wells.  And that's the way Africans--where now Africans don't use--they say most African languages don't have two consonants coming together.  So we don't do the -ths, teet, mout.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, that's what the Bluffton [South Carolina] kids laughed when they (laughter), when they heard it, but they didn't speak much different.
Story_ID: 487132
Speaker 1: So tell me what else happened in high school [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina] once they got over how you spoke (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --and your--you became very good students, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they began admiring us, particularly me.  I graduated first in my class.  Probably started off with about, I guess, we started off with about fifty kids.  I graduated there were, there were no more than about thirty-five, forty kids.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Background noise) But I did very well with what they taught me in high school.  I, I got the lesson that they taught me.  And so I, I became one of the admirable students there.
Speaker 1: Now in high school, had you decided that you were gonna go to college or was that a new thought?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  You could, you could, you could see the light being turned on in high school.  You met new teachers, you saw more college graduates, because we had about what ten or more teachers there who had just come from college, and they were fairly young people.  And so they began encouraging us and they encouraged me to go to school.  And--but the biggest thing was one day my mother [Sarah Williams Campbell] and my, I guess it was when I was approaching my senior year and my mother said, "You know, you can go college next year."  She say, "I'll help you.  I'll help you go to Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] if you wanna go."  But I had no other, no other thought after that.  I said well I'll just go to Savannah State to college.
Speaker 1: What--besides your mother, was there a teacher that encouraged you to go on to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or encouraged you period?
Speaker 2: Teachers always did, yeah.  Teachers always said you smart you need to go on to school.  But you know in those days most people wanted to go to work or to the [U.S.] Army or to the [U.S.] Air Force, expedience for you know gaining more wealth (laughter).  And, and so it was--but it wasn't unusual for them to encourage you to further your education, but they also told you how far you are behind, you better get your lesson.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, you gotta get twice as, you gotta be twice as good as, you gotta get your chemistry, you gotta get your algebra.  And so whatever they taught you they expected you to get it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Savannah State College that's where you decided to go to school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Anything happen before you leave high school that you wanna talk about?  Were, were there any sports that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Never got involved in sports (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any clubs?
Speaker 2: --couldn't, I couldn't crack the sports because see you had stay so long, so far away from home and had to stay so late to, to practice.  So I, I did my--I did the honors club, the honors society [National Honor Society].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did, we did some, some art, a little bit of art, dancing, and, and those kind of things that my ninth grade teacher--at the time, he was a ninth grade teacher but he encouraged us to do things in art.  Did some writing, writing short stories, always I, I always enjoyed that.  And witnessed, witnessed sports events like basketball and field days where we had track and field.  That's the, that's the limited exposure we had in high school.
Story_ID: 487133
Speaker 1: So had you decided that you were going to be a teacher?  Is that the reason--the major that you were gonna take when you went to college [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No when I, when I got to college I knew I didn't wanna be a teacher (laughter).  So I kept searching, what is it that I can do?  But I knew I wanted to be a scientist because I did well in science.  And, and so I, I pursued science when I got to college.
Speaker 1: What, what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960].  Okay.  Now tell me about the, the civil rights climate on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] during the time--the, the island was mostly black, there were a few whites.  When you left the island, is this when or was there a time that you ever experienced blatant prejudice?
Speaker 2: We were very sheltered from that until we went to Savannah [Georgia], and I got just a little bit of it.  I went to Savannah once with my father [Reginald Campbell] to get some clothes, because I was in a contest of some kind and he was fitting me.  He was gone take me to Savannah to fit me and I, and I noticed him rushing me to the back of the bus, you know, as he kind of, you know, kind of escorted me right along hurriedly to the back.  And now that I--you know I reflected on that over the last twenty, thirty years and why he did that.  And, of course, there were signs, but I didn't, didn't, I didn't--I just went got the water wherever there was a colored sign, didn't pay much attention to it.  Over here we never, we never had any such things.  The first time I saw colored and white sign, it was 1964 here on this island.  And that's, that's--I was twenty-two, twenty-three years old.  No, I was twenty years old then, twenty-one.  But it, it was, it was there, it was placed there because the Public Accommodation Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II] was about to be passed.  And the state put that sign up--must have been about June of 1964 on all the beaches, colored beach.  Singleton [Singleton Beach, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], colored beach, (unclear), colored beach, and, and that's the first time I saw it.  Got also some inkling of the differences when we went to school in Bluffton [South Carolina], because the--our bus went to the black school, Michael C. Riley [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], and we'd follow the white kids every morning from this island.  By that time there were a few white kids living here.  The bridge had been put in and so development had begun, and so the white kids would have their bus load of white kids going to Bluffton and we'd have a bus load of black kids going to Bluffton.  And they'd go left and we'd go right, and we'd be waving at each other.  In the afternoon, one afternoon the superintendent followed us because both buses would follow each other.  And when the white bus would stop to put out kids we'd be waving and waving.  And so the principal, I mean the superintendent followed us one afternoon and he stopped our bus and he got on the bus and he said, "What are y'all following that bus so closely for?"  He, he talked to the driver.  He said, "He blinking and you're blinking.  And I'm gonna see to it that y'all don't follow each other anymore."  And from that day on we didn't see the white buses (laughter).
Story_ID: 487134
Speaker 1: And then the other time there was an incident, the white kids had stopped to the bridge, we had to pay a toll every afternoon.  You know, there's a toll bridge the first time.  So everybody--the bus, bus drivers always had to pay the toll.  And the white kids, of course, stopped to the toll and tendered and they just played and talked for ten, fifteen minutes, you know, (laughter) the white kids this is a white toll, toll, toll tender.  And so our bus driver blew the horn (laughter) and so he, so he finally did the, the toll attendant finally let the white bus go after he waving the kids.  So when we pulled up there, you know, it's a difference, ain't no laughing and talking.  So he said, "Why are you blowing?"  And my bus driver said, "Man, it's hot on this bus.  Don't you know it's hot here?  You holding us up playing with those kids?"  (Laughter) I thought we were gonna, I thought he was gonna call the cop on us (laughter).  He say and he said, "Look, we don't want any blowing on this bridge."  And then my--our bus driver said, "We don't wanna any talking on this bridge."  (Laughter) But those were, those were two incidents, the only two incidents we had with race.  But it was clearly, you know, clearly a difference in how we were treated by them.  We started looking at difference in people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about your books and, and things at school did y'all have new books in Bluffton [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina] or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no.  We had, we had the old books.  We had the--we had one microscope in our chemistry class.  We had one microscope, and we were hearing that that every white kid had a microscope over in the other school but we never knew.  You see nobody never told us.  Nobody had ever made an issue of it.  All they kept telling us, "Use what you have and you twice, you gotta be twice as good."  But we got little inkling of it.  But folks seemed to have been trying to not having us use that as an excuse.  Although we had to pay 'em rent for our books, and we knew our books were older.  Yeah we had to pay for our books.  We had to rent them.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I don't know whether the white kids had to do the same then or not.  I never went back and researched that, but I know we paid.
Story_ID: 487135
Speaker 1: So it was like being--I guess your family would be considered poor, but did you feel that you were poor?  Did you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  We--you see there was so much support.  People, people came together on every issue, you know.  If it was a food issue, people came together, and we had various people always in the rivers getting food and they always shared it.  And I mean, even if you paid for it, they were willing to have it for you.  Same thing as farm food, farm products, you know, once it's, once it's produced it was available.  And if you didn't have the money you still got it somehow.  So the, the basics of life was always available to you.  And you could also produce your own basic stuff.  You had skills, we had skills within our neighborhoods.  I never saw anybody else come to this neighborhood [Spanish Wells, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and build houses except people who were here.  Never saw anybody build boats other than my folks.  Never saw anybody even made a headstone for the graves other than my folks.  So I didn't, I didn't know any, any difference.  I thought everybody, I thought we, I thought we were well off (laughter) in terms of, in terms of production and, and all that.
Story_ID: 487136
Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back and put on the record that actually the high school that you went to was Michael C. Riley [Michael C. Riley High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], and it was named for a black man.  Do you know who he was?
Speaker 2: Michael C. Riley?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Michael C. Riley was a distant relative of ours and served as an appointed member of the school board.  In those days, they didn't elect school boards, school boards, and so in this county, this county was divided into two districts and he was a member of this school district board.  So he used to come to our middle--our elementary school down in Spanish Wells [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] there.  This old black man used to come with the white superintendent and he'd sit on a desk.  And all the time he was there I didn't know he was my cousin.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But it was inspiring to see, you know, a black person in official position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated in 1960 and went to Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did your world open up even more now?
Speaker 2: Another larger world.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: We, you know, we always visited Savannah [Georgia] and people from these islands, particularly Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], would go down there to work and then some people settled there.  A lot of my relatives settled in Savannah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --since way back.  And so when I went to Savannah it--my brother, my older brother, George [George Campbell], my oldest brother, George had, had been living there for a couple of years so I--that was, you know, the reason--that's another reason why I could go to Savannah State because I could stay with my brother and didn't have to pay out of state fees, got an in town address and went from his house to, to Savannah State every day.  And getting on campus was quite an eye opener.  We--I'd never been, you know, excepting for visiting for a short period of time on a college campus, I'd never been, I had never spent any time on a college campus.  And so I met--again I was called country (laughter).  And--but, but I had other country people around Georgia, you know, we, we hooked up.  We got very close.  I had another Geechee out of Charleston [South Carolina], they used to call us Geech.  And so my Charleston brother, Leroy Major and I got along fine (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And then we had some, some local people who had relatives on Hilton Head.  My physics professor had a relative of Hilton, on Hilton Head.  He--his folks had grown up right here in, in, in Stoney [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] the first part of this island.  So when I, when I got into his class he knew my, he knew my folks.  He knew folks on Hilton Head, and I'd take, I'd take oysters to him from his cousin.  Not that, not that it helped me with any grades, but I did well in his class, and, and all the kids start admiring me because I knew physics and I could make an A in his class.  That was (laughter), that was something.  But I--at Savannah State I, I concentrated on biology and chemistry and did well in those subjects.  Where I failed, where I fell down was in history.  Believe it or not, I didn't like it, didn't like the way it taught, I guess.  I never paid that much attention in history.  And so as a result I always tell people I flunked history.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: My first course (laughter) in United States history.  And never knew I'd, I'd like it so much as I do now.
Speaker 1: Well, anything happen at Savannah State?  Were there any teachers besides your physics teacher that might have been encouraging to you?
Speaker 2: I think my geography teacher and my, and my--all of my biology, all of my--all the teachers in biology and chemistry.  And I was very inspired by them.  Dr. Griffith [Booker T. Griffith] who was the head of our biology department, you know, he was almost like a, he was almost like a physician in terms of knowing his biology, and he was very, very strict on, on your, your knowledge of, of your biology.  And so we had to go before him and do oral presentation on the cat, as we dissected the cat, you know.  We had to point out all of the various blood vessels and all of the bones and all of the muscles.  You had to learn all that, and you had to draw it all.  In those days, you had to draw them all on, on, on plates, we call 'em plates, and pass them all in.  So it was very hard work, very hard work.  Dr. Griffith and Dr. Robinson [Margaret C. Robinson]--she later became doctor, but she was Mrs. Robinson and she was quite a firecracker in terms of (laughter), in terms of teaching biology.
Story_ID: 487137
Speaker 1: Who was the president at that time?
Speaker 2: President of Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] (laughter) was Dr. W.K. Payne [William K. Payne], and students protested against him.  The thing that I remember about Savannah State was, was the, I guess, that, that the biggest--the memory, the most memorable occasion was me hitchhiking from here because after two years I began hitchhiking from Savannah [Georgia], I mean from home to Savannah every day and back.  And so I, here I go hitchhiking to Savannah to get my 8:30 class.  We'd go to Savannah and then you'd get the bus and you drive and the bus, you take the bus down to Thunderbolt [Georgia] that's where, that's where Savannah State is.  And I'm rushing to my class and there were kids--everybody on campus demonstrating.  And had, had this little effigy hanging from a tree.  I thought it was a real person (laughter).  They had the president in effigy hanging, because--protesting against the president because the president had fired a teacher for applying for superintendent of Chatham County [Georgia].  And we thought--the students thought that they fired him, they fired the teacher because that was a white's man job and he wasn't supposed to be applying for.  And he was--so our president, our president decided to fire him.  And so we protested against that or the students were.  I was ready to graduate from college and I didn't want anybody deterring my graduation.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was a junior that year, but I knew that was really gonna mess us up.  But that was in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement and everybody was protesting everything that we thought were unjust.  And so, boy, that was one shocker for me because I didn't know that, that Savannah State student body would ever strike.  But we, we, we struck and, and cut the, cut the semester short that year.  We left school in about April that, that year, I think.  And closed the school down.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: The only other civil rights activity directly I was involved in was, you know, watching out.  Actually we used to stand downtown Savannah to, to boycott stores.  And students would take turns in standing at doors to not let anybody come in, and so the, the black student--I mean the black shoppers when they saw us standing at the door, it was a quiet protest against going in.  And some people would have signs going up and the street but we would be doorkeepers.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: But that's as close as I got to going to jail for civil rights.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Do you ever have the opportunity to listen to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a matter of fact, I think it was two times during my college days we, we went from here [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] to Savannah to hear him speak.  I'm trying to think, where did he speak?  I don't know whether it was a church or an auditorium but that's--we, we drove from here one night to go to hear him speak.  And as usual, you know, he fired us up.  (Laughter) You'd come back and you wanna make everything right.  But Dr. King was quite an inspirator.
Story_ID: 487138
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I was in French class, I was taking French, struggling with it.  And sitting up there and then somebody came to the teacher's door, Mademoiselle Morton [Althea V. Morton] was her name; we had to call her Mademoiselle.  And she went to the door and she came back and she told us in French (laughter) what happened.  Most of us didn't know French well enough to know what she said.  Unless--until she, she did she pointed like that and said, "La mort, la mort, la mort," and that meant death.  And, "Le president," she says, "La mort."  And I said, "Oh, my goodness.  Somebody shot the president dead."
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And so she finally told us in English what had happened.  But that was quite, that was quite a blow.  We didn't know what to think.  Everybody was so saddened.  And as we went into Savannah [Georgia], you know, and you saw people cheering, and then we expected that.  So but that was a sad, it was a sad year.
Speaker 1: Had you heard much about what was going on around the country?  Because there, I mean was the in '63 [1963], when Kennedy was killed, also the Birmingham [Alabama] bombings and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --had you (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were well informed.
Speaker 1: Informed, okay.
Speaker 2: To see the--see we did a lot of discussion in classes all the time, particularly in biology lab.  That's all we discussed, civil rights all the time.  Civil rights was our main discussion, who protested, which barrier got fell, you know.  By the time I got out of college we were, you know, the buses were integrated so we would sit on every different seat in the bus because the bus started at the college every day, that, that bus route.  And so white people didn't wanna sit next to black people.  So what, what we did as students was occupy every seat in the bus.  And so when we going back into town as white people got on the bus they had no place to sit, because they didn't wanna sit by us.  And so that, that was done deliberately.  But the, the news always carried, you know, civil rights activities.  And that was the, I think that was the difference between then and now.  The coverage of black people were very wide and very regular.  And so we knew what was going on just about every city where there was some activity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had a chapter on Savannah State College campus [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], and that's who led the boycott of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the first time that you voted?
Speaker 2: And you know what?  I had a hard time registering to vote because I lived in South Carolina, and I never could get to the voter registration on time to get registered to vote.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And so I didn't get registered to vote, I didn't get an opportunity to register and vote until I got to Boston [Massachusetts].  In, in my protest days, I protested against participating, because we didn't have any candidates to vote for.  And, and so I didn't vote until about 19- must have been 1968.
Story_ID: 487139
Speaker 1: So now, what were you thinking that you would do with a biology degree?
Speaker 2: I was thinking that I was gonna go into research, biological or chemical research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So after Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], tell me what happened?
Speaker 2: And I was frightened to death that I wouldn't get a job doing that.  Then I knew I wouldn't get a job around here because people just weren't hiring black researchers, and so I went--during my college career I went to Boston [Massachusetts] every summer because my aunt had left here back in the early '20s [1920s], migrated to Boston as most people did in those days, migrated to the North.  And so there was a kind of a steady flow of my family members going to New York [New York] and Boston.  So why was--while I was in college, my sisters, I had two sisters that migrated to Boston, Hattie [Hattie Campbell Bryant] and Regina [Regina Campbell Ragland].  So I'd go every summer and, and work.  And I worked around the complex of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health [Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], the Children Hospital [Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] and all those places.  Where there were a lot of researchers going on, researching and, and you know miracle kind of healing.  (Laughter) But I was a--all of us who were up there were college students working and working in the housekeeping, cleaning the floors, or cleaning the lab, or doing laundry.  And so I spent about three summers up there doing that and watching, looking at these people and looking at those labs.  And I said, "Boy, when I get out of school I'm coming back up here and work in one of these laboratories."  And so sure enough, I got out of school and I--because of history I had to spend an extra semester at Savannah State (laughter) and got out of school in December.  And had, didn't have an overcoat.  And so I said I'll go down here--you know Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] was just being developed--I'll go down here to Sea Pines [Sea Pines Plantation, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and get a job and worked long enough to get an overcoat, and every other day it rained.  (Laughter) I never could accumulate enough money to by an overcoat and my ticket.  I was looking for a bus ticket, I was gone get enough money to buy on overcoat, and then I was gonna have some money in case I didn't get a job right away.  Well it rained, the weather we got so lousy that I, I took I had to just gamble.  I said I'm going any way without on overcoat.  I started rationalizing that being up north if you get on the bus you'll work inside you, you don't have to work outside.  (Laughter) You get a job in a lab you can be warm all day.  So I went without an overcoat and had a hard time.  I think I spent about four weeks up there without getting a job, I spent searching, searching, searching, beating the pavement.
Story_ID: 487140
Speaker 1: Then there was the big--I think this is really what cracked it.  That, that Bloody Sunday that happened in Birmingham [Alabama], and so I went walking into Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts].  I had been there before, they didn't have any opening.  And I, I said, "Today I'm gone just go for a job in housekeeping.  I know I've got a lot of experience in that.  Everybody's been telling me I didn't have any experience in research.  So I'm, I'm gone just get a job mopping floors."  So I go in there and I fill out the application and I put on there housekeeping and--but I put all my other credentials on the application.  And so the lady said, "What do you want?"  I said, I said, "Housekeeping anything."  She looked at it said, "Oh my god.  You have a degree."  (Laughter) I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Oh my goodness.  We've got about three or four different openings here that you can choose from."  She said, "Go over and see Dr. Such and Such.   And if he doesn't want you, I've got another one I can send you to."  And so I, I hit the jackpot.  That was the Monday after Bloody Sunday.  I think there was some sympathy going on. (Laughter) And so I got a job at, at Harvard School of Public Health as a microbiologist and I worked there for about, oh, I worked there for what three or five, let's see '65 [1965] until say--I worked there for three years as a research assistant to, to one of the researchers there.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the things that you worked on in research there?
Speaker 1: We were researching Rickettsial diseases.  Those are diseases that are caused by a, by a microorganism known as Rickettsia.  That, that organism was discovered by a man named Dr. Ricketts [Howard Taylor Ricketts].  So they call it Rickettsia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a little bigger than a bacteria.  Actually it's a little smaller than a bacteria, somewhere between a virus and a bacteria under the microphone--under the microscope.  And so we, we researched as to whose got it now.  You know, where is it being, where is it located in the world.  It used to--the disease that I worked on used to, used to cause, cause havoc with soldiers during World War II [WWII].  It was called trench fever.  It was caused by a louse, louse carrying this, well louse carrying, louse carrying the Rickettsia that caused it.  And so we did research on that.  Kept me out of the Vietnam War because it was an [U.S.] Army project (laughter).
Story_ID: 487141
Speaker 1: So wh- you work on that for three years, and what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I got--I actually during that time got an offer to go to the Harvard School of Pu- Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].  And of course, the, the crazy man that I was, I was twenty-seven when I got that offer and I told the man, I told him I was too old to go to med school.  I had been, been married then [to Emma Campbell], I had a car, was expecting a child.  And I said, "Gee, I don't wanna go to med school.  That's gone take too long."  Looking back I was like my, my boss had told me you were just a, I'm just a--I was just a baby. And so eventually I, I looked for a job that would pay me more.  So I went to this other private research company called Process Research [Process Research, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they were processing--they were actually experimenting on water softening processes.  How do you get the hardness out of water?  So then I put my chemistry to work, 'cause then we had to develop membranes that could pull hardness out of water, the hard chemicals like calcium and magnesium.  And so we'd make these models in the lab on, on how you could transfer that model into a big city model.  And then we got a contract from Southern Rhodesia [Zimbabwe].  And, of course, I was wide awake by then.  I knew about everything in the world was going on.  Who were being oppressed, where all the segregation was, and by that time, by that time my philosophy had gone international in terms of my militancy in injustice.  And so I said, "I ain't gone work on this project, because I know no black people is gone drink this water (laughter) in Southern Rhodesia."  And so I said, "Well, what I'm gonna do?"  I guess I better try to get on back into grad school (laughter) 'cause I don't wanna work on this project.  And so I started searching for graduate school.  And one of the schools that was offering and recruiting, actually, they were recruiting black people and they were offering fellowship and that was Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  After turning down Harvard this was, I had a little more sense this time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I said I'm going after a fellowship at, at Tufts University.  And that's when I went and applied and sure enough they had fellowship.  Environmental health engineering was becoming a new kind of discipline.  Everybody was interested.  That was 1969, 1970.  Everybody was conscious of the environment.  There was a new initiative going on.  And so this engineering department of Tufts University had started the new program on environment.  And that's when I got the fellowship on environmental engineering.
Story_ID: 487142
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you had a family.  When did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met this young (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Met this young lady (laughter), Emma [Emma Campbell], from, from Natchez, Mississippi.  We worked at--in the same complex at Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] and that's where we met.  And we dated for about a year, year and a half and got married, and it's continued to work.  We didn't--we, we worked in Boston [Massachusetts] and didn't have our first child until three years later.
Speaker 1: And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: We have two children.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: We have Ochieng [Ochieng Campbell] who is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Say it again?
Speaker 2: Ochieng.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: O-C-H-I-E-N-G. Ochieng was, was born in 1970 after we had--after I had, or just about the time I was in school [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]. He was born while I was still, just about finishing up my, my graduate work.  He's named for one of my Kenyan friends, but actually he was, he was named, he has a Kenyan name.  One of my Kenyan friends gave him name.  In those days, back in 19--the '60s [1960s] we were as, you know, as you might know we were very conscious of African, African roots and we were reaching out for 'em, and we were wanting to know where we came from and everybody wanna know.  We used to use the term, identity, self-identity.  And so we wore dashiki, we wore Afros and we, and we yearned to name our children African names, some of us did.  And so we befriended Africans, and so I met these Africans, and I didn't have a clue then that most of us came from West Africa.  This was East Africa all the way on the other side of the continent (laughter) but I embraced them as my friends.  And so we'd go, I'd go to their house every weekend and every Saturday night, you know, Emma never wanna go.  She'd go and play bridge somewhere.  And I'd go and meet with the Africans and we'd sit around the table, and we'd eat, you know, dip out of the plate together.  And so I said, "Agweno [ph.], I want you to name my baby when it's born."  Did a--his name was Agweno.  He was from the Luo tribe.  And so Emma goes to the hospital and, and Emma made about three false trips so last time I took her in, I said, "I'm gone go back home.  I'll be back to pick you up."  (Laughter) Knowing that she not gone have the baby.  And but sure enough, I go back home and Emma calls me.  She said, "The baby is here, and the baby needs a name."  (Laughter) So I, so I call, I dial the phone and call Agweno right away but Agweno was out and his brother was there though. And his brother said, "Now when was the baby born?"  I said, "One o'clock.  "He shall be called Ochieng.  (Laughter)  He shall be called Ochieng, yes. He shall be called Ochieng that mean child of God and we worship the sun.  And so as the sun is high, he is of sun."  Chieng means sun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of sun.  So that's Ochieng.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Ayoka [Ayoka Campbell], after we moved home, Ayoka was born.  We moved back to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], built this house pretty much, my father [Reginald Campbell] and my brother and I built this house.  And we did you know some, some subcontracting out, like the plumbing and some of the brick work.  But Emma and I were in here hanging curtains and putting the finishing touches on, on New Year's Day.  After building this house, I had some material left and I sent it up the street to my brother, had two of my teenage nephews load the truck to send it up to my brother's house, giving it him.  One of my teenage nephews sat on the load and fell down the, fell on the highway and injured himself.  So they took him to Savannah [Georgia].  That was about two weeks before New Year's Day.  So I said to Emma I said, "Well I better go and see Calvin [ph.], see how he's making it in the hospital."  'Cause he was recuperating pretty good.  She said, "Well I don't feel too well.  I better ride along with you."  I said, "Come on, you not gone have a baby."  So she said, "Yeah, I don't know.  I better ride along with you.  So I--."  She said, "Drop me off at the hospital, then go see Calvin."  And I said, "Okay.  I'll be back to pick you up," (laughter) knowing about the first experience.  So I go to see Calvin, came back by the hospital and the nurse said, "You're a papa."  (Laughter) So Ayoka had been born.  And that's--we found her, her name in a book.  It means child who brings joy to all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That's Nigerian.  That's a West African name.
Speaker 1: That's We-, I was gonna say, that's a West Africa, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we got, we got the eastern African and the western African.
Story_ID: 487143
Speaker 1: Tell me about grad school.  What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was joyous.  I, I enjoyed--I enjoyed grad school.  We had a chance to--I was older, you know, in, in terms of the other students.  There were a few of us that had been out and had had experience of working and had experience in some of the, had experienced some of the, some of the subject matter that was being taught.  And so our, our, our experience helped the other students as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I found some of it to be repetitive because I had, I'd had experience in some of the subject matter, but we took courses in public health courses.  We did--I did--we did a lot of the mathematical programs and you know figuring out chances, and doing--did a lot of rate, rate of disease and incidents of diseases.  There's a--I had an opportunity to do a field study and that was most enjoyable.  Went down to Mississippi where my, my wife's [Emma Campbell] home, well not we were about two hundred miles from her home because we were up in the Delta. And that's where Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] dealt--Tufts had started a health center, it was real, real poverty there in 19--the late 1960s.  So by 1970s that was a real model center for dealing with poverty and disease and ignorance as well.  So it was a program that was really addressing all of the ills of societies in that one region, and so people were seeing that as a model and everybody was coming.  You had sharecropping going on then.  So did the health center was in the middle of the sharecropping area.  It's now, it's now all casinos down in that area now (laughter), but it used to be all cotton and all poor people.  And kids were, you know, driving tractors and working in the fields.  And kids were being sprayed on with pesticides by, by the airplanes.  You know, they had these dust crop, crop dusters that were keeping the, keeping the crops dusted from, from disease.  And so we, we went down there to study the environment, and about that same time DDT was outlawed.  And so farmers were kind of upset about that, and I was--well we chose the project to study the practices of, of, of applying pesticide and herbicide.  And so that mean we had to go out and interview these farmers (laughter) who had people living on their farm as sharecroppers.  And so the one thing that we got respect from is that we, we, we rode in a government vehicle.  And so we, you know, we checked out the vehicle at the health center and we'd go and ride throughout this, this was, you know, this was some five hundred square miles of nothing but cotton.  And so you would wander out there and you, you would interview farmers and you'd keep notes on what they're using for pesticide and when do they spray, and because many of the kids were coming into the clinic with rashes and we attributed that to the pesticides spraying because the airplane sprayed right over them.  And so everything went very well except this one day when we got into this field and I was interviewing and this man drove up in his pickup truck and asked us what in the heck we're doing there.  And my partner was answering him, I was some distance away and he cussed the man, my partner did (laughter), he cussed the farmer because the farmer, the farmer talked rough to him, so he cussed him.  (Laughter) And the farmer got behind us and he started chasing us and so we--he said, "You wait here until I get back."  (Laughter) So when he got back, we were gone.  (Laughter) And so that, that ended that, that ended that research.  We, we just didn't finish the research.  Of course, we were almost finished then and we had been then about nearly three months doing the research.  But that was one of the, one of the eventful times of my, my graduate school.
Story_ID: 487144
Speaker 1: So when you finish, now--well, okay.  Tufts, you had been in Massachusetts for a number of years now, right?
Speaker 2: That was--yeah that was about my fourth year.
Speaker 1: All right.  What was life like in Massachusetts (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Cold.  This time of year it was cold.  And, of course, Massachusetts people compared to southern hospitality was cold too.  (Laughter) But I found Boston [Massachusetts] to be very, very good for education.  You know, you can learn so much.  You, you just, you just get into the flow of reading and, and going to educational programs to listen, to learn.  Every, every night there was something being, you know, taught.  And so you could go to these programs where you had free lectures and you could learn about just about everything, any subject matter that you were interested in.  International politics or local politics or civil rights or science, any, anything that you wanted to.  We used to look through the--we used to look through the listing of things that you could go to and we'd go to something just about every evening.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So I loved, I loved that part of it.
Speaker 1: Did you have any problems as far as civil rights living there during this time?
Speaker 2: Of course, there were, you know, the, you know, I never, I never imagined when I lived here [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], that when, when people used to say, "Ooh, such and such one has a nice place."  I used to think that they own the place but I never imagined that it was so hard to get a nice apartment, even to rent a nice apartment back in the '60s [1960s].  That was hard to do, because everybody was ghettoized and so people land- landlords and renters put you where they thought you should be.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so we're you're talking about ghettos, I know exactly what that means.  That means that, you know, you are, you are restricted.  And so I, I met a--we, we experienced a couple of times when Emma [Emma Campbell] would call and, you know, looking for apartment and they said yeah.  Because it was, you know, I guess nobody imagine that now but it was, it was, it was, it was an accomplishment when you could find a place that you could even afford that, that would, that you could rent.  And so you go there and we had a couple experiences where she called said, "Oh, yeah."  I said, "Yeah, well I know that's gonna nice because it's nice, certain, certain parts of town."  And you get there and in those days, you know, you didn't have any protection for housing discrimination.  And the lady said, lady saw us and she said, "Oh, we just rented that place."  (Laughter) And you knew she hadn't.  There was nothing you could do.  But that, that was definitely one part of the, of the, of discrimination that I faced, that I saw in Boston.  There were no blatant signs that say white and colored, but there were lots of discrimination in jobs as well as apartments, housing.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you ever work in any of the Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] or near Roxbury, Jamaica Plains [sic. Jamaica Plain, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know what that--? Tell me about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's where Bromley Health Community Center was in Jamaica Plains, just near Jamaica Plains, just outside of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what type of area was that?
Speaker 2: Jamaica plains?
Speaker 1: Jamaica Plains.
Speaker 2: Jamaica Plains was just changing.  You know, it was, it was mixed.  But it's not, it, it was, it was mostly white, Jamaica Plains was.  But just on the fringe was Roxbury and black people were moving toward Jamaica, Jamaica Plains when I left.
Story_ID: 487145
Speaker 1: So you leave Boston [Massachusetts] then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right after graduate school [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  I, I had always thought I was gonna return home.  I always wanted to.  And I--that, that I had set three goals when I left, I wanted to get another degree.  I wanted to take my brother [Benjamin Campbell] up to, up to Boston Children's, Children's Hospital center [Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] where I worked during the summer and saw all those miracle treatment, so to speak, and I figured he could get treated there well and get, get some of his problems solved as a paraplegic, and I wanted to take him up there which, which we did.  And, and then I wanted to return home after doing that.  I also, while I worked up there, I wanted to help my parents [Sarah Williams Campbell and Reginald Campbell] build a, build a better home and so we did that as well.  So just about the time I got my degree, there was some--a health center being built here, rural health center addressing the needs of water and sewage and housing and, and, of course, direct medical care.  It was a comprehensive health service and so I got a call from a friend Tom Barnwell [HistoryMaker Thomas Barnwell] and asked did I wanna come back home because he needed an environmental engineer, and just about the time I got, got out of grad school.  And so I returned, and began working in the Sea Islands on health issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did that for ten years.
Speaker 1: And what were a few of the major accomplishments during that time, during your tenure with that?
Speaker 2: Well we, we wanted to address the, the water, the portable water needs of residents.  Because much of the, the health problems were coming from, you know, unsanitary water sources, I mean, the way we got water sources from unsanitary conditions, sewage disposal.  Whatever we could do with the house to stop it from leaking or to stop, stop the cold winds from coming in.  And, and then we also tried to help economically by helping to organize cooperatives, business development, and so that was pretty much my job.  And we had a whole department to deal with all those issues.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So we put in water systems in areas like Jasper County [South Carolina] areas and which has now got fire protection and everything.  We came into the Bluffton [South Carolina] area and do the water system there.  We went into St. Helena Island [South Carolina] area, did a complete city water systems.
Speaker 1: During that time also, going back to the Gullah language.  Did you work with a team to translate the Bible to Gullah?
Speaker 2: That's after I left, after I left the health center, I went over to Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --as its executive director.
Speaker 1: What, what year did you leave?
Speaker 2: I left the health center, I got there in 1971 with the Beaufort-Jasper Comprehensive Health [Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina] where I dealt with water and sewage and I left there in 1980 and became director of Penn Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent twenty-two years at Penn Center.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Story_ID: 487146
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about this translation of the Bible.  What was that like?  I mean, how much work (laughter) did that take?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  Well you see after I got to Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] as its director we--I found that just about every other person who came to Penn Center was interested in the Gullah culture.  I went there with the idea that we really could do more about economic development at Penn Center, because the health center [Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina] had more emphasis on healthcare and I always thought both of 'em linked, but the government would fund--the, the government agency that funded the health didn't see the linkage.  So I was, I was very happy to get to, to Penn Center so that I could do more concentration on economic development and, you know, what people can do with their land in the midst of all the development that's going on.  But what I found was everybody who came through there (laughter) wanted to study the Gullah culture.  And so we spent a lot of time helping scholars with, with understanding the Gullah culture.  And then two of the people who came through were translators of languages, and they had spent a lot of time translating the Bible in South America in the different languages down there.  Just about, oh, must have been about three or four years before I got there the previous director at Penn Center had started a program on English, English was--as a second language.  And he was concentrating on high school graduates, teaching them how to speak English better so that they could get a job on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  Well, he got, he got a grant from the department of labor to do it.  And everybody who really, you know, people who really loved the Gullah language condemned him for doing it, but he was interested in the kids' economic well-being, because people weren't hiring people who spoke Gullah.  And so these linguists who had been translating the Bible throughout South America read about that program and contacted him said, "We wanna come and translate the Bible into Gullah."  Well, he didn't pay much attention to that, John Gadson [John W. Gadson, Sr.] didn't.  And so they ended up coming here to Daufuskie Island [South Carolina] and beating about on Daufuskie awhile and then they decided to come over to St. Helena Island [South Carolina].  And so they struggled over there a bit before anybody would accept them.  And then somebody came from the University of California [University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California], a professor [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake] who was a mutual friend of, of mine and one of my other friend, and he asked me about the Gullah language.  And I said, "There are couple here trying to study that thing but I don't know anything about helping with Gullah language because everybody had always condemned Gullah."  And so we went to their senior citizens center and he talked with them about different words and language that he could trace back to West Africa.  He had been studying West African languages and culture and comparing it to Gullah.  That afternoon after going to the center and talking with those folks he convinced me to meet with these linguists.  He said, "You need to meet those people."  And those linguists, we sat down for about two hours, and they had a big language book we used and we could trace the language, the Gullah language, back through West Africa.  They showed me the difference in languages and they showed me the roots of many of the Gullah words, and so I became very convinced and I joined the team.  At that time they had about four or five people on their team.  We ended up with about fifteen people and we met every week.  And they would send out, you know, they would write the scriptures and then would send it us to correct, and we were correcting Gullah based on what I heard spoken by my [maternal] grandmother [Rosa Brown Williams] way back when she babysat me.  And that's how we got through that whole New Testament, just by remembering--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --how the language was spoken.
Speaker 1: So, there's a--were there copies produced?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Gee, I wish I had brought a copy for you to see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you can take a shot of a copy.  We have--we, we finished it back in 2005.  It's published.  It's online.  It's on Amazon.com.  You can--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a wonderful work.  Now we're getting ready to record it in audio.  And that project's going to begin in March.  When we--as we speak here now I'm thinking of who I can recruit.  We need twenty voices, twenty male voices and five female voices to record the, the Gullah language.
Story_ID: 487147
Speaker 1: Now the director of the Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina], how about giving us a little information about the Penn Center.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And how it began and then the tran- how it, it changed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know from being a school to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what it is today and the significance of what they're doing there now?
Speaker 2: Well Penn Center itself is, is, is, is a very important spot in relationship to our history in America, United States history.  It's a landmark district.  It's a historic landmark district, and the reason why it's a historic landmark district is because it played such a pivotal role in the transition from slavery to freedom.  Eighteen sixty-two [1862] is when it got started by two Pennsylvania missionaries [Laura M. Towne and Ellen Murray].  It became a part of what is known as the Port Royal Experiment which sought to answer three questions.  The Port Royal experience, experiment did.  One was, would black people fight for their freedom?  And black people who were in this region organized right here on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], one of the first black regiments was organized, one of the first black in the South.  Will they, will they be able to own land and take care of a family?  And that was proven.  You know, when people got land here and began gathering and redeveloping their family life.  And could they get educated?  You know, it was a prevailing thought that, that black people couldn't learn, you know, they had to be told what to do all the time and, and they couldn't formally get educated.  That was another myth.  South Carolina was one of the states that denied slaves to, to read, and so this school, Penn School [Penn Normal, Industrial and Agricultural School, St. Helena Island, South Carolina] was among many little schools that got started.  But because it sustained itself and did so well, it became also a focus of the Port Royal Experiment.  And so that particular sight today is, is, is an evidence, is a piece of evidence of what took place in 1860, 1861, 1862, and people were in a confused state and, and, and that particular school helped to settle.  You could call it a settlement school.  But the other thing that's so important about Penn School is Penn Center and that historic district is that 1862 it was assisting transition from slavery to freedom.  By 1962, it was the spot where Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and other civil rights workers could gather and you were making the transition from segregation to desegregation. And today it's, it's assisting people in making the transition from rural life to resort living, and so it's a very important part.  And we--when I worked there between 1980 and 1982 we dealt with the latter part in terms of current activity.  How do we help people adjust to this new resort community life?  And how do you change land use?  You know, how do you make it more profitable in today's economy?  And at the same time, we spent time teaching people about the other eras, the era of slavery, the freedom and the era of desegregation to, segregation to desegregation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where the language came in, because (laughter) people wanted to know about the language as well.
Story_ID: 487148
Speaker 1: Is there any more information that you can share about the connections between Gullah and the people of Sierra--Sierra Leone?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that was interest, of interest to me when I was there was--came of interest to me when we, when we, when we trained Peace Corps volunteers  because that was one of the other activities that went on at Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].  And while in the midst of training Peace Corps volunteers there was a Peace Corps volunteer over in West Africa who had been there for quite a while who knew the, who knew that we were training Peace Corps volunteers at Penn Center so he contacted us and said, "Please tell the Peace Corps volunteers that they have got a lot of similarities right there on St. Helena Island [South Carolina] that they should take advantage of before they come to West Africa."  One of it is, one of it is the speech.  But the family life and the fact that St. Helena was so predominantly black that they can definitely learn about the culture there, and so when they come here they could be more easily adjusted.  And so he came eventually because he said that he found out when he went to West Africa, being a linguist, that the West Africans had some of the same words in their language that we had, and the food, the rice dishes were very similar.  And so he eventually came over here and shared that information with us, and then we got very, very busy then and started making linkages.  And one of the, one of the things that we did we went to West Africa, a whole entourage of us.  Some fifteen of us from the different islands went there back in 1989 on a, on a kind of a family visit.  And that got documented in a video called 'Family Across the Sea' and it tells our whole story of Gullah and the West African connection.
Speaker 1: And you were made an honorary chief, weren't you?
Speaker 2: I was made (laughter), I was made an honorary chief, yes in a little village called, Taiama [Sierra Leone].  We, we took about three hours to go from Freetown [Sierra Leone], the capital of the country, down to Taiama and that was one, that was one great day.  I, I just enjoyed it so much.  We, we were treated like, like chiefs.  (Laughter) We all were treated like chiefs, and I got an official chief robe, got an official chief robe and got crowned Chief Kpaa Kori [Kpaa Kori I] (laughter).
Speaker 1: That had to be exciting.
Speaker 2: Very exciting.  I was so excited I came back and shared it with my, shared the, the, the, the proclamation with my wife [Emma Campbell].  I said, "I was, I was crowned a chief, and they said I can have nine wives."  And then she looked back at me and she said, "Did you tell them you can't take care of the one you got (laughter)?"
Speaker 1: Did you ever find out what tribe you might have come from or your family line has come from?
Speaker 2: We have not done that yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I really wanna do it in a way other than DNA.  I'd like to do it through historical research, and, and hopefully we'll get around to doing that.
Story_ID: 487149
Speaker 1: What else was published about Gullah?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: There were some books, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that was translated back around 1994?
Speaker 2: A number of books, a number of books.
Speaker 1: 'The Good News About Jesus Christ'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Good News About Jesus Christ' was one of the books [Gospel of Matthew] out of the New Testament--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that we published ahead of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We published it before the entire New Testament was completed.  But, but there has been so many books and articles written about the Gullah culture.  It is, it is, it is just, it is just exhaustive, the number.  I, I think 'A Peculiar People' ['A Peculiar People: Slave Religion and Community Culture among the Gullahs,' Margaret Washington Creel] is one of the best books that one could read regarding the spirituality of Gullah, and how it connects to West Africa.  It was done 1980, I believe, by a lady named Creel [Margaret Washington Creel], did an excellent job in explaining our spiritual life and its connection to West Africa.  And we've got, gee whiz, so many books.  We've got books after books been written about Gullah people, the food ways.  One of the best, one of the best books on the, on Gullah life in these islands I think has been written called, 'God, Dr. Buzzard, and the Bolito Man' by Cornelia Bailey ['God, Dr. Buzzard, and the Bolito Man: A Saltwater Geechee Talks About Life on Sapelo Island, Georgia,' Cornelia Walker Bailey and Christena Bledsoe] who, who writes about Sapelo lifestyle, I mean about her life on Sapelo [Sapelo Island, Georgia].  And it is so much like our life here on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  I, I just, you know, read that book all the time and see myself and see our folks here on Hilton Head.
Story_ID: 487150
Speaker 1: So you have gotten, of course, a number of awards.  Do you wanna tell me about any organizations that are important to you?  I mean, I know all of them that you belong to but--'cause you belong (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I can't even--I can't even remember.
Speaker 1: --you belong to so many, but--
Speaker 2: I can't even remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What stands out? I know that you got a--you received the Carter G. Woodson Memorial Award from the National Education Association for your lifelong work preserving the Gullah heritage.  What other things (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I just got an award this past weekend for lifetime work in preserving history and culture.  And I, I think they all are very meaningful to me.  I, I don't know that any of, any one of them stand out, because I think there's so much still needs to be done and I don't know that we have made an impact to the extent that we can, that we can be rewarded (laughter).  It--the Gullah culture is so land based and I got interested in preservation of our culture, I guess, as far back as when we started working in, in healthcare, environmental healthcare, when I saw that it was so important to keep people on the land, because it's, it's a healthy environment to raise family, these, these rural land, this, this coastal area.  People--Gullah families tend to, tend to bound together, tend to be bonded.  As I said earlier we, we know our fortieth cousin, and so it takes a village to raise a child and unless we retain the land we, we can't retain the culture.  Unless--and so I said I don't know that we have accomplished enough, because we have not put policies in place that will allow for people to maintain ownership, because taxes.  The value of land is, is rising because of what's going on around us, and therefore taxes are being raised and, and people who are no longer with the family on the land and living somewhere else say, "I'm not gonna pay that kind of tax for land I don't live on.  So sell it."  And so many of our family are being disrupted because sales are taking place.  And so we hoping that the Gullah corridor act [Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Act of 2006] that was passed just last year signed by President Bush [President George Walker Bush] as an act that designates that area between Wilmington, North Carolina and Jacksonville, Florida about from the ocean some thirty to fifty miles inland is where many of the African slaves quote unquote, former slaves, settled right after the Civil War because that was the stretch that was gonna be sold off to black people.  That was the forty acre and a mule stretch that never got implemented, and that wasn't gonna be given, that was gonna be sold.  That was the proposal by Mr. Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman].  After Lincoln's [President Abraham Lincoln] assassination that got rescinded and never took place, but many people still settled in that corridor and that's where you find the Gullah culture existing.  But by the same token, that's where you find most of the high class development taking place, and so this Gullah, Gullah corridor act aims to at least recognize the fact that you've got Gullah people living in that area and there should be something done to recognize their existence.  And we're hoping that that something will be policies that would protect the lifestyle, the land, so that they we won't have to be roo- uprooted.
Story_ID: 487151
Speaker 1: Are there any organizations in place to pass the torch, I guess, to, to say, so that the younger generation or the next generation can understand and appreciate the Gullah traditions and, and are able to continue to fight to make sure that the--it's fulfilled what, you know, our generation would, would want to happen?
Speaker 2: We're hoping that organization is Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But this corridor act [Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Act of 2006] also provides for two other centers along that same stretch, and we're hoping that those centers could very hastily get organized enough so that it can be the--they can be the places where people can learn, young people can learn their heritage, and hopefully policies can be in place that could be implemented.  Young people could implement the policies that would, that would allow for them to learn and teach others an appreciation of the heritage which, which include the art forms, the, the family lifestyle, how to raise children, how to become self-sufficient, how to use land.  And we're hoping that that'll be the thing.  Nowadays, there's no such thing.
Speaker 1: Even the idea of cooperatives was an idea bringing people together.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Do you hope to see and get that materialized again among the, the Gullah people?
Speaker 2: I hope that would, that would, that would, that would materialize.  It takes, it takes deep thinking, and it takes, it takes kind of independent kind of thinking because you know we're being bombarded with rugged individualism (laughter) and individual wealth.  And coming together as group thinking and group building of economy, and families coming together.  It's almost being, you know, a kind of a put-down now.  You, you do it yourself, you know, but in the, in the long term that's the only way it's gonna happen.  We gotta come together to, to save our assets, I believe.
Story_ID: 487152
Speaker 1: What about the change in the culture on the island [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] with immigration?  Of course, the Hispanic community is growing everywhere and they are our laborers.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So they're here to help build, you know, the, the plantations (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you see that the culture is going to change on the island because there are so many Hispanics immigrating here?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Our island's culture is changing fast and all the time.  The, the family land is shrinking and so family members are moving to other places.  We, we gonna now have to think a different way in terms of how we are connected as, as Gullah people.  We gonna have to connect ourselves probably by cell phones or whatever (laughter).  But, but you know we, we expect cultures to change, and we expect, you know, different aspects of the culture to change, but we have to find a way of sustaining the culture through those changes.  For example, the food ways.  We once did our own meals and did everything in terms of enjoying the food, but now we have to think of sharing the food with everybody and therefore you get restaurants.  And, you know, we have to put those rice dishes into restaurants and we gotta be able to employ Gullah people to prepare them just like we have the Hispanic restaurants.  And, you know, no other people--you hear people going, "Gee, I would kind of go tonight and we have some fried beans," you know.  So the same thing with Gullah.  We gotta be able to say, "We going tonight and we gonna have some shrimp perloo or some crab rice."  And, and everybody can enjoy it.  Shrimp and grits has made it into the mainstream restaurant and nobody knows that that's a Gullah dish.  I used to despise eating okra, shrimp, and tomatoes over grits on Monday morning breakfast that's left over from Sunday.  You know, I saw it the other day in a restaurant for $19.95, (laughter) you know.  And so--and so we have to now think differently on how are we gonna, how are we gonna preserve the culture and how does it enhance our life?  How does the culture, how do different aspects of the culture enhance our lives?  Well, you--restaurant and employment as well as you still enjoy the food.  The basket that we once made that were used as hampers and sewing kits and waste baskets is now commemorative art.  It's now two hundred for one the size of my fist.  And the visual art, you know, people used to paint all the time different, different things.  Sam Doyle was called a folk artist.  He lived down the street from Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].  His art, you know, he used to let 'em go for four or five dollars.  And now, you know, because Mr. Doyle has passed away, his art is worth, you know, twenty-five to fifty thousand dollars.  But the, the key now or the other key part of our culture that is so essential is family.  It's family life, you know.  How, how do we--now that we're losing the land it's not gone be land based any more.  How do we use the cell phone and the video and the other means of communication to pass on those valuable tradition and--traditions in raising families, raising children?  We may have to write 'em, or we may have put 'em on a video but we gotta, we gotta teach it.
Story_ID: 487153
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: (Pause) We talked about spiritual life, didn't we?  Yeah, yes we did.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: What church do you attend now?
Speaker 2: First African Baptist [First African Baptist Church; Historic First African Baptist church, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: But you still attending that, that same church that's wonderful.  And that was one of the first churches here, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think we've covered everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back over your life, do you think that you might have changed something or done something differently?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) In other words, hm.  You mean if I had to do it all over again, what would I do different?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh boy, it's hard to look back.  (Pause) I probably, I probably would have gone to med school if I knew what I know now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know that I would've--that, that I would have still accomplished some of the same kind of things but I probably would have.
Story_ID: 487154
Speaker 1: Because this is gonna be shown for generations to come, what message do you wanna send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: And I know I'm talking, you know, about future which means there may be things that will, that I would say would not be relevant in the future.  But I, but I think, I think time and learning lessons are gonna always be central in one's life, managing time and learning lessons.  And so I would wanna tell people to set priorities based on circumstances of the time and make strong commitment to achieving those priorities.  And that's gonna require you to commit yourself to knowing, to know.  We've got to commit to know.  We gotta know, and once we know, we should serve with our knowledge (background noise).  We should not hesitate to serve and that is serving mankind for good, for the good.  That's what I'll leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 487155
Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy. (Laughter) Now you sound--
Speaker 1: I mean you're gonna be around for a very long time.
Speaker 2: How to be remembered.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Sound like (unclear).
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as one who was interested in the well-being of every human being, who would--one who would contribute to the, the betterment of, of people.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, we wanna thank you for taking this time to share your story.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: The generations to come will be inspired as I was inspired listening to your story.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: So we wanna thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 487156
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us about this.
Speaker 2: That's our wedding day at, in Brocks- Brockton, Massachusetts back in 1987.  My wife, Emma [Emma Campbell], and we had, we had gone out to Brock- Brockton to our friends' house who was a pastor and his wife was a very good friend of Emma's.  Broke down on the way to that wedding that day.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: That's my paternal grandfather, the Reverend Solomon Campbell who also taught, taught school here on the island, on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Reginald [Reginald Campbell].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) ready (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sorry. That's my father, Reginald.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 1: That's me after college [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], about two years after college, about 1966.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about this one, please.
Speaker 1: That's me getting an honorary doctorate degree from Bank Street College [Bank Street College of Education] in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.  And when was that?
Speaker 1: That's in 2002.  I'm sorry, 2000.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.  Tell us about that one.
Speaker 2: From right to left that's my daughter Ayoka [Ayoka Campbell], Ochieng [Ochieng Campbell], my son, myself and the wife, my wife, Emma.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's the same day as receiving your honorary--
Speaker 2: Same day, same day when we received the honorar--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is me at the home of one of the, the descendants of one of the relatives of the descendant of, of one of the, one of the relatives of, of one of the founders of Penn School [Penn Normal, Industrial and Agricultural School; Penn Center, St. Helena Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Bill Jenks [ph.], J-E-N-K-S, Jenks.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: Now, this is my mother and all my siblings.  From right to left there on the front row is George [George Campbell], my oldest brother, my mother, then my oldest sister, and then we have the next row Regina [Regina Campbell Ragland], my sister and then my sister, Hattie [Hattie Campbell Bryant] next to her and between them is my brother, David [David Campbell], and then next to Hattie is Morris [Morris Campbell], then Melvin [Melvin Campbell], then Leroy [Leroy Campbell], and Irvin [Irvin Campbell], then Herb [Herbert Campbell], then me and then Ben [Benjamin Campbell].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Perry Williams my maternal, maternal grandfather, the net knitter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my maternal grandfather Perry Williams.  He was a net knitter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Those are my parents, Reginald and Sarah [Sarah Williams Campbell].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: That's my grandparents, my maternal grandparents, Rosa [Rosa Brown Williams] and Perry Williams and the cat.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's, that's me and my wife after about, oh, twenty years of marriage.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's a family portrait when the kids were still in elementary school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about that one, please.
Speaker 2: That is a photograph of us going to the Atlanta Braves baseball game.  Gosh, must've been way back in the early 1970s.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's just, that's one of our, one of our casual outings one Sunday afternoon in, in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and the one below that.
Speaker 2: This, that's Ayoka graduating or just got, just got accepted into Maryland bar after, after finishing law school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: That's Ochieng graduating from Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama], and that was a joyous time.
