Story_ID: 17207
Speaker 1: My name is Johnnie Colemon, J-O-H-N-N-I-E, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.  Johnnie Colemon.
Speaker 2: I'd like you to state your position here at the church?
Speaker 1: I am the Founder/Minister of Christ Universal Temple, 11901 South Ashland Avenue.
Story_ID: 17208
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Now, it has changed, because I'm supposed to be eating healthy food, so I don't personally like it, but they say it's good for me, so whether I like it or not, I eat broccoli and I eat carrots and I eat all of the health foods there are to eat and only chicken.  That's what I'm supposed to eat.  My favorite food is the food I can't have and that's good barbecue ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: February, because that's my birth month.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any time that I can get away, that's my favorite time and that is perhaps once a month.  That's what I'd like for it to be, but I'll take it whenever I can.  My favorite time is any time I can get the time.
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm a minister, so a phrase isn't--I talk all the time, so any phrase is okay with me, any time is okay with me.  Whatever comes out, it comes out and everybody understands that.
Story_ID: 17209
Speaker 1: I'd like to take us back to Centreville, Alabama where I'm told you were born.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where is Centreville?
Speaker 2: Centreville is outside Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your parents.  You were the only child.
Speaker 2: Only child.
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about your parents.  I'd like you to talk about both your mother and your father.
Speaker 2: All right.  My father was John Haley, and he wanted a boy, and I came.  So it didn't make any difference with him.  You have to be a boy and a girl.  I did all the things that boys do, shooting marbles, playing basketball.  He put a basketball court in my yard, but with the understanding--The boys would get a lecture when everybody would come over and that is don't hurt her, she's really not a boy, she's a girl.  If you hurt her, you're going to be in trouble.  So the little boys were always afraid to do anything but let me win all the time in whatever we were doing.  You see when I was born, I didn't have any hair, and so you can imagine what I looked like and people would come over and look in the little buggy and say gee, what beautiful clothes she has on, because they didn't want to say the other.  I was always really dressed because that was all that there was to talk about.  My mother [Lula Parker] always wanted a girl, so here I am being a girl, being a boy and my father was the first black brakeman on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad.  So I have to go with him and get up in the boxcars and ride with the rocks and whatever it is they had in there and he was always bragging about here is my girl, but she's a boy.  I lived that double life and it was very good, and because my mother wanted a girl, then I had to do all the girlish things and go to school and be on the honor roll and do this and do that because that's what little girls do.  I've had a wonderful life being girl and boy.  I was an only child, treated like an only child, which was very unique.  I moved from Centreville, Alabama to Columbus, Mississippi.  I moved to Columbus, I think I was two or three years old, so I was really raised in Columbus, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Let me ask this.  I was the oldest and my father [Julius Richardson] wanted a boy too.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: My father used to say if he had a boy, he would have taken it out and put it in cold water and--So you know, there's that feeling of pressure.  I want to understand a little bit about what you know about your folks.  What was your father like in many ways?  What kind of man would you describe him as?
Speaker 2: He was a very kind, loving, positive man that at that time, I did not know anything about truth, so he would meet everybody on the level that they were on and he always--One thing, don't bother my baby and that was Johnnie Mae Haley.  So he protected me in every way, in everything.  He was a man that was a well dressed man all the time with money in his pocket all the time.  He had what we call a prosperity consciousness and he took care of his family.  My father and I were very close, because my mother was a part of the Methodist church and she was gone all the time and the little hair that I did have--Once she went to this conference and I said to my father, I'd like to have this little haircut.  He said well, I don't see why you don't, let's cut your hair.  So my hair was all off when my mother came back from one of these big conferences, and I don't need to tell you what really happened between them about these two strands of hair that I had on my head.  He was a kind man, a person that nothing was too good for you to have, because she's your mother and you're my child, so you name it, and I named it.  One peculiar thing about him, he permitted me to do everything but ride a bike.  Now, he said the reason was on skates it's okay, but a bike you can't stop.  That really wasn't true and I dare not try to explain it to him, because that's what he said it was.  So I could skate, but I couldn't ride a bike, and that was always very funny to me when I got old enough and I remember my father passed when I was 15 years old, and because of our closeness, when I walked in--He had had this challenge for some time and medical science had said that it was going to be very soon.  So we grew closer together and when I walked in from school on that day when I was 15 and they told me that he had passed, I walked straight out of the back door and we had a neighbor that was kind of heavy and I would always go over to her house and just put my head on her shoulder and I would find comfort and the peace that I was seeking at that particular time.  So I walked over to that house and I went over and told her what had happened.  I lived with her for about a month, because I never wanted to go back home any more.  It took me an awfully long time to get over my father's death because of our closeness.  I loved my mother too, but she was never there.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: You understand?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.  My mother [Margaret Richardson] was there, but I was always much closer--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had to shoot pool too, because boys would shoot pool and he loved to shoot pool, so I would shoot pool with them and all those things.
Story_ID: 17210
Speaker 1: Did you grow up around your grandparents on your father's side?  What do you know about their background and how were they?
Speaker 2: I was the only grandchild for many years.  Their love added to my parents' love, made me a spoiled anything you want to name it.  Now, I would come from Columbus, Mississippi to Centreville, Alabama, and remember I'm the city girl, because I'm from Columbus, Mississippi and Centreville was just about as big as a cup, and whenever I would come into town, the whole city knew I was there.  I loved to dance, so on Saturday evenings my grandfather would look at us and say--You see, I had an aunt and we were the same age, and of course, when they would have these affairs, this was a big thing, so we would go on Saturday nights to this big thing that they were having, but we'd get ready all day Saturday.  My grandfather would come in and say what are you doing and we told him we're getting ready to go and he would look at us.  One time he decided you're not going, and here we had been getting ready all day to go to this place for this social.  This is really something.  So if your grandfather say you can't go, you can't go.  I remember if I was at home with my father [John Haley], all I'd have to do is ask him three times and he'd change his mind and say go.  So I got up the next morning and I packed my bag and I went home to my father and I didn't go back to see my grandfather for a long time until he could learn how to tell me yes and anything that I wanted to do.  My grandmother lived for an awfully long time.  She came to Chicago and visited with us.  What can you say about grandmothers other than she was very kind and I got my way with her like I did with everybody else.
Story_ID: 17211
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Lula Parker], what would you say about her?  She was very active in the church, but what kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: My mother was a unique person, born in October, must be a winner, must be number one in anything that she was going to do or think about doing.  Because my father [John Haley] would do whatever had to be done for either one of us, she couldn't do any more than I could do.  She couldn't cook so good, because she really never had to cook.  We always had a maid, we always had somebody to do whatever had to be done.  So she couldn't do all those things well and I was glad when she didn't cook, because it wasn't good anyway.  She was that kind of person.  She was very fashionable.  She looked better than I did when she made her transition.  She was a lady, quite a woman.
Story_ID: 17212
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?  Did they ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what struck me about the pictures up there is that contrary to what people think a lot of times, it looks like a very prosperous family.
Speaker 2: We had the only house in Columbus, Mississippi with a living room all the way across.  That was really something.  People would come from the north side and the south side to see our house with the living room all the way across and my mother [Lula Parker] was the kind of mother that--I don't know if you ever heard of Alabama College and they had a band and an orchestra, and my mother was that way.  We would always go to the dances because she loved to dance and she enjoyed herself, and then they would come to my house because that's headquarters and the whole band would be on the front playing or in this long living room playing.  We had the fun house.  She worked with young people, she played tennis.  She was just an active lady all the way through.
Speaker 1: Who would you say you're most like, your mother or your father [John Haley]?
Speaker 2: My mother.  Now, I'm like my mother.
Speaker 1: And why would you say that?
Speaker 2: Because I'm persistent, because I don't know how to be in second place, because she always was in first place and first place certainly did look good to me, so why should I go in second place when I was trained and I looked at her and she was in first place.  Even in Chicago in our present churches when she was the leader of October and October was always number one in our fund raising.  Everybody said is Lula--my mother married again.  Is Lula Parker in this?  Yes, she is.  Well, we might as well give up, because she's got it and she'd stand up and say you're right and sure enough she was always the winner.  I am very much like my mother.  She's very honest and whatever she felt that's what she would tell you and that's who she was.  You either liked her or you didn't like her and I'm the same way.  You either like me or you don't, and it's okay with me which ever one it is.
Story_ID: 17213
Speaker 1: From your childhood memories--a lot of times I like people to share childhood memories.  We've got a couple so far, but what was life like growing up in Columbus, Mississippi?  How large a town was it?
Speaker 2: Columbus was very small, but it's one of the largest in Mississippi.  What was it like?  I always knew because my family told me that the white school is on the hill, the black school is down here.  Since you know where your school is, that's where you go.  I never had any problems in trying to go up on the hill because my school was not on the hill.  We lived on the south side.  They explained to me all about the color thing and what it's like in Mississippi, but remember, I was John Haley's daughter, so I could walk in any store and all they would say is this is little John Haley, so you give her whatever she wants.  I never went through all the things that they say that they have gone through in Mississippi, because of who I was.  That's the way it is, that's the way it was in the power.  If you are known and you're a certain person's daughter or son, then everybody knows who you are and everybody recognizes whatever it is you want to do.  So I never had any of those real hard problems that people talk about in Mississippi.  In fact, sometimes I feel I was better in Mississippi than I am in Illinois.
Speaker 1: Now, what was it to be John Haley's daughter?  Why was your father known there?
Speaker 2: Because he was the only black brakeman on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad and because of the prosperity life that we lived.  I don't know.  That's just who we were.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about how he got that position?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 17214
Speaker 1: What was family life like?  Do you have any early memories, any memories in the elementary school years, around family, church?
Speaker 2: Not at that age, not in growing up in Columbus, because they knew who I was and they knew that they didn't mess with me any time for anything.  So I had a good life.
Speaker 1: What about let's move to let's say between 12 and 18.  Any memories around that period?  Any instances, humorous--
Speaker 2: I really wish I could help you with that, but I can't tell you anything but I had a good life, a good happy life, a good prosperous life, just a good life, and again I knew who my friends were and that's where I--the only time that I went back to Mississippi during those days.  I went to the bus station to buy a ticket to go some place, not come back to Chicago and while I was standing there to buy the ticket, the lady asked me a question and she was a light expression lady and I answered her no, and she said what did you say.  Well, you see I've been in Chicago, I really forgot you're not supposed to say no, you're supposed to say no ma'am, and she said to me, what did you say, did you say no, and I just simply turned around and walked away and went home and got my bag and came back to Chicago.  I just never--Again, I say to you, when people talk about the things that they've been through Mississippi, I can't join them, because I didn't have those experiences.  My mother [Lula Parker] taught at the high school, so they knew who she was, and I just didn't have it.
Speaker 1: I'm not even talking about racial experiences.
Speaker 2: What are you talking about?
Speaker 1: I was just talking about experiences or family incidents or--
Speaker 2: We didn't have any.  We just had a good time.  My mother wasn't there, my father [John Haley] was there and we just did what we wanted to do whenever we wanted to do it, however we wanted to do it, and it was just a happy time.
Story_ID: 17215
Speaker 1: Let me ask about how the young Reverend Colemon was.  When we're young we may dream about certain things or want to be certain things.  At that point in your youthful years were there things that you sort of dreamed about?  What were you like?
Speaker 2: I wanted to play a saxophone.  That's all I wanted to do.  Being a minister never came into my thoughts.  I loved to dance.  In college, I was always in a dance contest.  Those are the things I wanted to be.  I wanted to be on stage.  I wanted to be in a Broadway show and above all, let me play a saxophone, and that was the kind of thing I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: What about the saxophone?
Speaker 2: What about it?  I practiced my saxophone last year, because two years ago one of my churches and one of my best friends is Della Reese and she knows that I've always wanted a saxophone, so at one of the conventions they gave me a saxophone and I practiced all last year, because I was going to play my saxophone at our convention last year.  The convention was in Jamaica and all I could play was 'Mary Had a Little Lamb'.  That's all I could play.  I was just really practicing because I was going to play, and then the news came that they wouldn't let you bring instruments to Jamaica.  Thank God.  I can't play it because they won't let me bring my saxophone and I put the saxophone back in its case and that's where it's been all the time.  So the man that was teaching me, he is a lovely man.  He had all the patience.  He said that's all right if that's all you can play, just go play 'Mary Had a Little Lamb'.  I was going to play it, but they wouldn't let me bring my sax, and I think that's good too.  I may play this year, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I wanted to do, play a saxophone.
Story_ID: 17216
Speaker 1: What kind of person do you think you were as a young person?  Some people are precocious, some are spoiled.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I was all of that.  I'm still that, and people have to understand that.  That was how I was born, that was how I was raised, that was how I was trained.  I can't be anything else but me, and I still say I am spoiled, but I do know there are other people in this world and I have to know how to live with them and how to help them try to understand me and I try to tell everybody that's going to work with me that I am unique and different.  Probably you never worked with anybody like me in your whole life, and of course, with the new age and the new technologies and all of this newness, I think it's wonderful.  I'm Johnnie Colemon and come of the things that--They brought me where I am, which is 43 years.  Some of those things I will always do, because I know the background, I know what's needed, I know what it takes.  I've had these experiences, I think, and if whatever worked to bring you where you are, if it worked for you, why fix it.  So some things I don't fix, because they're good for me and there are certain things that a leader has to believe in, know, stand firm, stick with.
Story_ID: 17217
Speaker 1: You're at age 18 right and you graduate from high school.  Was there always interest--Did you take time off or did you go directly into Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] and why Wiley?
Speaker 2: In Columbus [Mississippi], the high school there ended in the 11th grade.  I finished the 11th grade in Columbus and then I went to Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi to finish 12th grade.  My year at Rust, I knew that was not the place for me, because at that age I liked a lot of boys and I thought that was supposed to be what you were supposed to have at that time.  At Rust, they were very, very strict and sometimes you were under this or that and because I wouldn't go to church on Sunday mornings like the students were supposed to go, they would cut my privileges all the time.  I wasn't the best child.  I'm spoiled, so I think I should do what I want to do and I don't want to go to church on Sunday mornings and as long as my legs worked, I would hide in the top end of the closet and the lady would catch me all the time, because my legs wouldn't really get in the closet.  Then they would make me walk down the streets in Holly Springs, Mississippi on a Sunday morning walking to church while church is going on and go all the way down to the front seat and sit down.  This was the place.  Then they would ask me to get up at 6:00 in the morning and wash somebody's clothes, the teachers or somebody's clothes.  I didn't wash my own clothes and I'm not going to wash the teacher's clothes.  So they would have to call my mother [Lula Parker] and she would have to come to the college all the time and then she discovered no, this is not the place for you, so you will not come to Rust College next year.  We decided Wiley, it's a Methodist College and I went to Wiley.  Wiley was just the opposite to Rust College.  You could do anything at Wiley, didn't nobody care, they didn't even ask a question.  I stayed at Wiley because of the freedom and it was my school, so I finished college there.  Now understand, I'm still almost as tall as I am now, I wasn't the prettiest young lady that you've ever seen and going to Wiley in Marshall, Texas, it was then based on the oil well girls.  You had to have an oil well, which meant that you had money.  The second qualification was that your skin was light.  I had none of that.  Therefore, I had to outshine in lessons and everything, and then I became the most versatile for four years, which meant I had to play tennis, I did basketball, you name it.  Track, everything I had to do.  Plus, stay on the honor roll.  They had to respect me whether they wanted to or not, because if you didn't have the color and you didn't have the money, you were at the bottom of the list.  So therefore, I found out the next thing you had to do and that was outshine and be smarter than anybody there.  I was that.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find out about Wiley?  Was there certain patterns for people going to college?  Then I'm very interested in high school going to 11th.  Sometimes the black colleges, a lot of them were started versus religious--
Speaker 2: Methodist churches.  My mother [Lula Parker] was very active in every part of a Methodist church.  She was in New York at a conference and she met this multi-millionaire lady that would give scholarships and understand I don't have a father and she was ready to do all of those things.  This woman somehow liked my mother and said okay, if you send Johnnie to Wiley, I will do this and I will do that for the three years or four years or whatever.  So that's why I was there.
Story_ID: 17218
Speaker 1: We were playing doubles.  It was a big conference college kind of thing and these two gals came out and they hit the ball so hard and so fast, we didn't even know that we had been out there.  I'm sitting over on the line wondering what happened, it was so quick.  By that time the coach came over and said Haley, get up you're running track today.  Well, now I don't want to run track because you got to put on shorts, and so there was too many of my boyfriends out there to put these shorts on with my legs how they were.  You know what a coach is like, and he said I don't care if you cry, it doesn't make any difference, get in those shorts and get on that track and run.  Tears streaming down my cheeks, I cried all the way down the track field and it didn't make any difference.  Run, he kept yelling.  We all came off the track with medals from the track training.  I was so happy.  I didn't care about my legs then.  It was all these things that I did, because I had to do them.  Always in a dance contest--with this little gal from Galveston, Texas, with light skin, very cute and she could really dance, but I made sure that I out danced her all the time.  So I was tops for the four years that I was there.  In the sororities again, they came to me on reason, not because of looks, because that's what it was like at Wiley [College], but because of my position and how hard--Now, this didn't come on a tray.  I worked.  I had to study. While everybody else was asleep, I'm probably out in the hall on the steps doing my lessons to make sure they were where they were supposed to be.  It's a great day and a great time.
Speaker 2: It's interesting because there are two sides.  There's the spoiled side and yet there's the side that worked very hard.  Sometimes when people are spoiled, they never really think that they have to work.
Speaker 1: No.  Being spoiled is--I still am.  I don't do any of those things.  I was trying to take one of the sororities--the reason I was not accepted, because again I never washed by myself and when she told me that I had to go and wash and do all those things, no thank you.  See, I'm spoiled in that way.  I didn't do it then, I've never done it, I don't do it now, because I don't want to and I don't have to, so I don't know anything about doing all those things.  Sometimes people don't like it because you haven't done those things, but to me it's important in my life.  I think there are people that love doing those things.  I burned my hands and all that happens to me when I go try to do those things.  I study my lessons, I know how to treat people and I work with loving everybody and everything.  That's what I am.
Story_ID: 17219
Speaker 1: I want to go back to--well, you know--just the death of your father [John Haley].  You said that that was traumatic, as it would be for a child, and especially your father in many ways, while he may have wanted you to be a boy, was very close, maybe your best--a friend.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what was that whole experience like and how at that point in your life, how did it change your life?
Speaker 2: As I keep saying it was good in some places and other places it's not good, because he's not here with me now.  He was not here from fifteen years old up to where I am now and I needed him during those times, but it was good while it was good, but it wasn't long enough.  When the real hard times came, he was not there to protect me and to do all the things that he thought should be done, so that made it really rough for me in another way.  Because of my nature, I can adjust to whatever situation I find myself in.  I had to really undo a lot of things and realize there was only one John Haley, there are no more John Haley's and probably never will be any more.  There was only one.  Since that John Haley is not here, don't expect it from anybody else.
Story_ID: 17220
Speaker 1: You touched upon college and the sorority, the whole color issue and that's been a big issue in our community in many ways.  It's an issue that I'm hoping that as time goes on, and these interviews go on, that there will be some things that come about, because it's been so prevalent in black society.  How does that make you feel?  I mean in other words--How large was Wiley [College]?
Speaker 2: Big college, large.
Speaker 1: How was it at the time, 1,000, or 100?
Speaker 2: At least 1,000.
Speaker 1: And I read something where you were saying you were very aware that you were dark-skinned.
Speaker 2: The reason I was so aware of it--Remember, my mother [Lula Parker] was light and so was my father [John Haley] and I kept wondering where did I come from and all she could tell me was I had a brother that was very, very dark and he irritated me all the time.  That was the only reasoning she could give me.  So therefore, I was very conscious of my color, because of my mother and father being another color.  Does that answer you?
Speaker 1: Yes.  But I would say you're brown skinned really.
Speaker 2: My darling, during those days they didn't know how to do what Mr. Landis (ph.) has just finished doing.  If you had seen me before he put all this on me.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: No, stop it--I'm looking at your hands.
Speaker 2: He probably put something on my hands, too.
Speaker 1: The whole color thing, do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Not any more.  Wait until you get to the church part and you will understand why my assignment from God is to be exactly what I am, the color that I am, because of the marvelous things that he has done through me because of my color.  I'm just trying to wait to get to that part, and I think you will understand a little better too.
Story_ID: 17221
Speaker 1: You graduate from Wiley [College].  Is there any thought--Your mother [Lula Parker] was a teacher.  Was there any thought that that's what you're going to do at that point?
Speaker 2: I've already done that.  When I finished Wiley College, I taught school in Canton, Mississippi and coached for basketball and all that stuff.  I taught a year.  I came to Chicago with a friend.  We were just coming to visit, because she had a sister here and after we got here, we liked it, so we decided let's stay here and she was a college graduate and we started looking for jobs in Chicago and everybody said oh, we can't hire you because you have too much education.  So where else is there to go but teach school?  I taught school in the public school system in Chicago four or five years or something, until I found out I'm not happy doing this, and I had finished what I was supposed to do.  I've done that.  Thank God I did it before these children that's here on this earth at this time.  But anyway, I've done all of that.
Speaker 1: So what didn't you like about teaching at that point?
Speaker 2: What I didn't like about teaching in Chicago--Because I was from Mississippi and when you did not obey, you got a whipping.  You could not touch the children and you were not supposed to give them a whipping.  So the discipline and the order that I was accustomed to, that irritated me.  Of course, when I finished talking to them and when they found out that I was not playing and again, because I was so thin they thought they could come in and--I remember I was a sub then at [James R.] Doolittle [Primary School] and one of the guys walked up and said well, we can handle you.  I stood there and said you do that, drop me out the window if you think you can.  I stood toe to toe with him, and if you stand toe to toe, they know that you can take care of yourself.  That was the thing because of the discipline and you could not really do what you wanted and needed to do in the classroom.  That's what I did not like about the teaching.
Speaker 1: What appealed to you about Chicago?  It was a bigger city and--
Speaker 2: You try coming from Mississippi to Chicago, you wouldn't ask me what is it.  The lights, the buildings, the everything.
Speaker 1: I'm from a small town.
Speaker 2: Where are you from?
Speaker 1: I'm from a town called Newark, Ohio, about 35 miles southeast of Columbus.
Speaker 2: What excited you when you came to Chicago?
Speaker 1: Well, it was a big city.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: It's a nice city in many ways.
Speaker 2: They had told me all the wonderful things that you could do in Chicago that you couldn't do in Mississippi and as I say, after I think about it, some of my best and happiest days was in Mississippi.
Story_ID: 17222
Speaker 1: When I stopped teaching, then I began to work for the government.  I became--
Speaker 2: An analyst?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Understand, you're asking me things that happened 900 years ago, so it's very difficult for me to remember them, because where I am and what I am in now, there is no past and I cross everything out of my mind that happened in the past.  There is no future, there is only the now.  If I don't remember these things it's because I don't want to remember them, because I do not want to attract them in my life, in my world any more, so I'm doing the very best I can do in remembering this 900 years ago stuff that you're asking me about.  I'm doing the best I can possibly do in remembering them.  Now, what are you asking me now?
Speaker 2: You were saying that when you left teaching, you then became--
Speaker 1: An analyst at the Chicago Market Center.  I worked there and I kept working there for one reason only, because when I began to study religion and finding out where I'm supposed to be, the supervisor on that job knew what I was trying to do and he said to me get your work done, then go where ever you can find a place, do your correspondence, do your writing, because I know what you're doing and he gave me those privileges and I stayed there until I finished doing my correspondence at Unity School of Practical Christianity [Unity School of Christianity].
Story_ID: 17223
Speaker 1: It all had its beginning then when I received the call in 1952.
Speaker 2: Why do you think--What caused you to receive the call?
Speaker 1: Because medical science had examined me and said I had an incurable disease and I had six months to live, and that was medical science calling me at 8:00 a.m. when I'm sleeping to tell me that I had six months to live and when I walked away from the telephone through my living room, there was a cocktail table there that my mother [Lula Parker] always put Unity [Society of Practical Christianity] materials and literature all over the house, hoping that I would read it, which I would not read it because I didn't want to read it, and when I passed the cocktail table, this magazine fell on the floor and I picked it up and a line on the page jumped off and I read it and the line said God is your health, you can't be sick.  Well, how can you tell me magazine that I can't be sick when the doctors have just told me that I'm going to die in six months.  I stood there arguing with the magazine, and my mother came out and said what is wrong, what are you doing.  Then I told her and I said to her who wrote this.  Since you're into this and you know all about it, who wrote it.  She said why don't you get on the train and go and ask them the questions that you're asking me, because I don't know, and I said fine, I'll do that.  I got on the train and I went to Lee Summit, Missouri and that's the location of Unity School [of Christianity].  When I walked through the gates, I knew that this was the place to get the answers that I needed about God, because I had been a Methodist all of my life and I had been taught that God was in the sky and I had been taught all the things that they teach and because I didn't know any better that was wonderful to me.  That was what I needed at that time.  Now, I really needed something that was going to set me free one way or the other.  The moment that I walked on the campus, I met the teacher, one of the teachers.  She introduced herself and I said to her why I was there and how it had happened, and she said fine, you don't have to die.  I said, "I don't?"  She said no, try coming to school here.  Enroll in summer classes four summers and you will find the principals that will heal you and will set you free from any seeming problems that you might have in your life.  I said wonderful, can I start this summer?  She said you certainly can.  I enrolled in the school and found myself there four weeks for four years and they taught me the principles that I wanted to share with the whole world.  The moment and the hour and the day of the month that I was healed, I can't tell you, because this automatically came and there was no more pain in my body and no more anything, so I was just healed.  I knew principles.  Then I discovered really why I was there other than to live.  Every morning, you would have to drive 15 miles to Kansas City, Missouri to live there, because if you were black, you could not live on the farm, and there were other students there, about three, and I couldn't understand how they could teach, preach and write about love and have me driving 30 miles or more every day.  I couldn't understand that.  I went there three years and I knew that this was the place for me, because of the healings that I began to receive.  Money, relationships, the total man.  I discovered who and what I am, who and what God is and my relationships to God.  I knew then that I wanted to share it with somebody or everybody.  The first summer that I came back to Chicago from Lee Summit, Missouri, from Unity, the minute that I walked--My girlfriend was a beautician and the moment I walked into the beauty shop they all screamed and said what has happened to you, where have you been.  I said why do you ask me that and they said you're different, and they began to describe how I looked, and I thought to myself God, if this has changed this much, I know I'm going there every summer.  I said why don't you come over to my house today and I'll teach you what I learned.  I hadn't been but four weeks, but I taught around that table, at my dinner table.  My girlfriend came and she said I'm going to bring my husband.  They all came and there was six of us around the table and that's how I really started being a Unity teacher.  Doing those summer classes,--When it rains, it rains in Kansas City.  This is my--Next year would be my fourth year.  I'm in my third year when this rain came and I was driving from Kansas City to Lee Summit and my car flooded.  I didn't know what to do to a car.  I'm under a viaduct and I had to say all the prayer statements that they had taught me to say before my car would start.  When I got to the school, I was wet and I was very upset and I walked in the cafeteria and I threw my wet things down on the table and I said you can have it, I'm finished.  All my friends were there and they ran over and said what's wrong with you and I told them.  My friends were all--I said I'm finished, I will not take this and I'm not going through this any more, it's not worth it.  They said we will have a petition, you can't stop now, we're going to do everything that we can possibly do so that you can stay at Unity Farm.  I said fine, do whatever you have to do, I know what I'm going to do and with that, I came home and they did have a petition that my fourth year I could stay at Unity Farm and they placed me in the workers cottage that was way under the trees, way over there.  By this time, I realized that God has me here for a definite purpose and it didn't make any difference if I was way, way and how far I had to walk, because my mother was that kind of person.  She said if you go, I'm going.  So she came with me that year and we stayed in this cottage and went through all the wonderful things that you had to go through in order to go to school.  I was the first black to live at Unity Farm, opening the pathway for the other black students to come.
Story_ID: 17224
Speaker 1: They made me everything--after that fourth year, when I became the vice president of the Association of Unity Churches and the association consists of all the Unity [Society of Practical Christianity] churches nationally and internationally.  When I became vice president, that meant that the next year I was supposed to be president.  Well, something happened to keep me from becoming president, so I thought well, I can just wait it out until my turn.  They could see I wasn't going any place.  So two years later, I became the first black president of the Association of Unity Churches.  I was praying for an idea that would be different for Unity, and the idea came have a convention.  They hadn't had a convention for about 40 or 42 years.  I said we're going to have a convention and I made the mistake of having it by invitations.  One of the gals was an artist that was my friend and she drew me as a queen and with all the things that goes with a queen giving the orders and all of this.  They decided they didn't like that and they were not going to come to the convention, they would fix me.  When I found out what was going to happen, I simply said to my congregation, we're going to charter six planes and we're all going in to the convention and six airplanes flew into Kansas City and we were well dressed and we were well everything and they knew who we were.  You can't stop God's ideas regardless of how you try and this was definitely his idea.  We had a convention and at the convention it was never mentioned whose idea, who got the idea, Johnnie Colemon was never recognized or anything else.  That was fine, because I had been through so much.  At that particular time, my children were not allowed to swim in the swimming pools until I had to come and get on their level to let them know that if my children were in the swimming pool, the black would not come off in the water, so they were going to get in the swimming pool because I pushed them in the swimming pool and they've been swimming ever since.  So I was a first for a lot of things at Unity School [of Christianity].  A great experience for me too, because then I found out why I was there, and I did a lot of things for Unity to try to work through this thing, such as they sent me on a tour and I would never do that again alone, because it was so rough and it was so wonderful and by wonderful I mean I had a lot of experiences going to many places where really they've never seen a black person before.  I was on TV in this little place.  I'm not going to name it.  I'd never go alone again.  You need somebody with you.  Those were my assignments.  The real hurting part about this whole thing--It really didn't bother me too much about the attitude of the light people, but what really hurt me was my own people turned against what I was doing, trying to do, and they got very upset and made the statement if you were not here taking all the bows and getting all the credit, then they would recognize us.  I said yeah, maybe you got something there.  So I let them have it and I came back to Chicago to find out what is my assignment here, what am I supposed to do.  It was 1974 that I decided that I had finished all that I was supposed to do with the Unity movement.  My feeling then/now is when you have your own, you are the boss.  You do it according to your feelings.  You do it according to what you feel that God wants done.  By this time, I know that it is time to organize my own organization where we are about people, black, yellow, green people.  All people are children of God.  That's what I wanted to have.  In 1974, we organized the Universal Foundation for Better Living.  At the present time we have 24 study groups all over the world, Trinidad, Canada and all in the United States of America.
Speaker 2: Your mother [Lula Parker] actually had the literature there about the Unity Church.
Speaker 1: Right.  Everybody in the world used to read and I think, they still do, the Daily Word.  She was a reader of Daily Word.  I wasn't reading Daily Word.  (laughter)  She had Daily Word and Unity Monthly and the Weekly Unity.  Just name it, she had it all.
Story_ID: 17225
Speaker 1: When the doctor told you that you had six months to live, what did you really sort of feel at that point?  That's very frightening.  You're young and that's--.
Speaker 2: I only knew that I did not want to die, because I didn't know how to live, so why would I want to die and that was all that I was saying.  I don't want to die at this particular time, because I don't really know who I am.  Surely, I didn't come to go to college and go to school and do all of this to die.  So that was my feeling.  Of course, I was frightened, because again I had been taught that God was outside of me and I was trying to find God or whatever this is that could heal me and that was my feeling.  I found him through my mother's [Lula Parker] literature.
Speaker 1: Why do you think God directed you to the Unity Church [Unity Society of Practical Christianity]?  Have you thought about that?
Speaker 2: Why did God direct me?  In order to teach them that we are all people regardless of what color you are.  That was my assignment at Unity School [of Christianity] and I was the one that did that.  So now anyone can go to Unity and stay where ever they want to stay and they kept building while I was at Unity.  The last thing they built was hotels.  They were trying to have an attitude about you couldn't live in the hotels.  It was a little while when I had to fight that and I kept fighting that until they said okay, Johnnie Colemon, you can live in the hotel.  I spent one night at the hotel, because I looked up at the ceiling and it had rain marks and stuff.  I didn't want to stay there in the first place.  I just wanted to be able to stay there if I wanted to, and when I had the permission and knew I could stay, I didn't ever stay there.  I stayed in a hotel that was near Unity School.  I had an experience with the hotels too.  Highway 50, they would not allow blacks in hotels, they would not allow blacks in cafeterias or in the restaurants and my light-expression friends said we're going to take you to lunch in this certain place where they did not allow blacks.  They said are you brave?  I said I'm brave enough to do it and when we walked in, every knife and fork fell on the table.  I sat at the table, I couldn't swallow the food, but I just held it in my mouth and they didn't know whether I had swallowed it or not, and I held it as long as I could.  Then before I could get back to the school, the restaurant had called and said who is this tall black woman that's in our restaurant, why is she here.  They said we don't have to guess, we know it's Johnnie Colemon.  They became my best friends.  I like strawberry pie and every day they had a strawberry pie waiting for me when I would go there. I went to the hotels and did the same thing. The man told me, "You can't live here." And I said, "Why can't I live here?" And he said, "Go down the road and about one mile there's a place that'll take blacks." I went down the road, and there was nothing down the road, no kind of--I came back and I came to him and I said, "I will stand here the rest of my life until you give me a room." So he said, "I've never seen anything like you in my life. Here." And he threw me the keys. And I took the keys and I went in the room. And I went to bed and I lived there. And now he calls me up when people come and says, "Is it all right if I take people in the hotel?"
Story_ID: 17226
Speaker 1: So I work all the time.  It's very difficult in the year 2000 and 1999, because everybody's determined to let everybody know who I am.  With me, I don't deal with that.  I don't care what color you are.  To me, I see you as a child of God.  God created it that way.  He didn't even create two leaves alike, not even two flakes of snow alike.
Speaker 2: I was asking about religion and racism.
Speaker 1: And I was saying to you that we all are different, because we all are expressions of God, and if did not create two leaves alike or two flakes of snow alike, he certainly did not create his highest creation, which is man.  We are individuals, we are not alike, we all are expressions of God.  I express God according to my understanding of who and what God is, and my relationship to God is son, daughter, father.  We are oneness.  I am all that God is, and all that God is, I am.  I don't expect anybody else to be like me, because there's nobody else.  He has us all in different colors.  If you notice the flowers you can see how God creates and the same thing with man, and until we learn that regardless to what color you are, we are one.  We're the same, made out of the same substance, made out of the body of God, because there's nothing else for you to be made out of.  My skin just happens to be the color it is, yours happens to be whatever it is, but we all are children of God.  There's nothing else for us to be, which means in this oneness and in this sameness, that we are to love each other and I am to give you the freedom to be whatever you are.  I should not try to make you be like me, because it's impossible.  That's how I see everybody.  It's very difficult today, because everybody's trying to prove who they are, when most of us don't know who we are, and we keep separating ourselves and we keep being this and that, and I keep announcing our church is a church for all people and everybody does not like that.  In being a church for all people, then African Americans, you are African American, whoever is here, Jewish, whatever you are or whatever you call yourself, be what you are, but have the freedom to be that.  Our church for all the people.  I may not ever get that over, but that's what I am, that's what I believe, that's what I want to believe and that's what I want to express.  All people, everybody welcome here.  I don't care if you've been to church, I don't care if you never go to church, I don't care what church you belong to, we are non-denominational, teaching people one purpose in life, to teach people how to live a better life.  When I came back from Unity School [of Christianity] on fire with the principals that were taught by Jesus Christ.  It's what they taught me, which made me a different creature.  It made me a new creature in Christ Jesus, and I'm burning up, I'm on fire.  I'm still singing in the Methodist Church--St. Mark [Methodist Church], I think was the name of the church in Chicago--in the choir, and a person that was like my mother [Lula Parker], she cried through the service, and I said what is wrong with you and she said my husband is going to die in a month.  I said he is, does he want to die and she said no.  I said well, I'll be over at your house at 4:00 today, here's an opportunity for me to share with this person and because I've had the experience--It's not something that I read in a book, it's something that I have had to prove, that God lives inside of me, which means health is inside of me and all I need to do is recognize where that health is, believe it, because Jesus always says what you believe is what you receive.  I was at her house at 4:00 that afternoon talking to her husband, getting him to understand some principles, and before I left, he felt so much better and looked better, because something was happening inside of him.  They were so excited, they said why don't we invite some people over on Thursday and you teach us, and I said fine.  They came over, 15 people.  We started really around my dinner table and we grew from 6 to 8 and from 8 to 15 and from 15 to 18 and when we got to 18, it's time to move out of homes and we went to the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], one of them, starting our classes, and very soon we had outgrown the Y and it's time for us to have our own place.  We went to 6156 Cottage Grove in a business commercial building on the third floor and that's where my first church was.  We tore up that man's place and we knocked out all the partitions and everything because people were coming and they were coming because of the demonstration that they were able to make in their lives from the principals that we were teaching.  People began to come and come until we discovered that we had to have a church.  We began to look for land.  We bought four acres at 8601 South State Street and we built the first Unity Church in the city of Chicago.  We were not the first Unity [Society of Practical Christianity] group in Chicago, but they were all in offices and in buildings downtown, so we had the first church.  We outgrew that church in about two years and we had to expand that church and build the second church.  We are now seating 1,500 people and we are doing three services, until God spoke to me one morning and said you can't keep doing three services and I said fine, I will not do three services, what do I do God, and God said find the land and build another church, and I said fine.  We found 15 acres of land at 95th Street and it was beautiful and we decided we'll build here.  I said I want to always help people, so why don't we build homes, because I'm not happy with what people tell me where they have to live, and let's build a really large homes, nothing small and HUD [Housing and Urban Development] said okay, we'll let you tell us what you want.  I told them what I wanted and HUD said sounds great to us, okay, we will build homes for people and the church, and it will be universal city.  I said good, it will be Christ Universal City.  I said fine, that's great.  Then when it's almost time to really get down to business, HUD said to me, you know we're going to build houses on the front of this property.  No, I didn't know that, because the kind of church I want has to be on the front and they said no, we are going to take the front.  I had already had problems in getting that land, and I had to go to city hall, I had to fight to get the land, because there was a lady that I called the bird lady, and she thought birds were much more important than people having some place to live, so we had to go through that.  When they told me that they were going to do that, I said well no, I will not put my church in the back, and that's when I decided we're not in our rightful place.  The reason I thought that was the right place is because the morning that we were going to break ground for the homes and the church, we woke up that morning--It started raining really that Saturday and my assistant and assistant to the minister was the Reverend Helen [Ward] Carry, that knows how to do all these things.  The shovels had bows on them, everything was so beautiful and so everything.  It started raining on Saturday afternoon and I said don't call me and tell me anything until you can call me and tell me it's not raining, because now everything is dripping, all the ribbons are wet.  Sunday morning she called me early and said Johnnie, I hate to tell you, but it's still raining.  I said I can't believe it.  In driving to 95th Street, I was so upset with God, because it was raining on our special day.  We had 4,000 chairs all waiting for all the officials and all the people, the mayor and everybody that was supposed to come, the choirs and they're wet and the chairs are wet.  I came in very upset and went up on the platform and sat down very upset.  When it was time for me to come off the platform and put the shovel in the ground to turn the earth for the first time, I'm angry with everybody and everything.  When I put the shovel in the ground, the rain stopped, the sun came out and it was so strong, it was burning me on my cheek.  The mayor was so frightened, he said well what is it.  I said it's God.  No more rain, sun came out, the sun is shining and then I knew this is the place, because God has said yes, build my church here.  There's always that other side that's always standing there to challenge the spiritual part of anything that you're going to do.  After we had worked that out and I said the sun said yes and that was God's answer to me, we were ready to move.  When I found out I couldn't put my church where it was supposed to be, then God--You see God speaks to everybody.  Sometimes we are so busy with our own reasoning and our own this, that and the other, we don't hear him.  I had not heard him and he speaks to me early in the morning.  He spoke that morning and said I did not tell you to build homes, I told you to build churches.  Yes God.  Now, I am finished with it.  So where am I going to find the land.  Three days after I got the message from God that I was not supposed to build the homes, my architect called me that had built the churches at 86th Street and said how would you like to have 52 acres of land, and I said I beg your pardon.  What do you mean how would I like, I'm looking for some place where I can build my church.  He said there is a company that wants to build a church or religious organization that has the reputation of being whatever you're supposed to be, they want to give it to them and you are in first place, would you like it.  32 acres of land on 119th Street, 20 acres on 120th Street.  I said give it to me, and they gave it to us and we began to make our plans to build the church that we have at the present time at 119th and Ashland.  I will never have to build another church, I asked the seating for 4,000 people.  I don't want to have to do a second service, so let's build it large enough to accomplish whatever we need to do.  Then the church--You go through all the wonderful things that you go through when you build.  I've been through all of that.  When you're a woman, it's three times as hard, very difficult to do what you have to do, but the church is going up and it's finished.  We had our dedication.  Now, we need, I feel, a restaurant so that we can have this fellowship-like consciousness.  We can have fun, because that's one of the many things that I liked about Unity.  They are not churchy, churchy.  Christ Universal Temple is not a churchy, churchy church.  We enjoy life, we have fun.  It was not a religion that said you cannot look the best you can look.  You can use lipstick and when I saw that they had on nail polish at Unity School [of Christianity], I knew this was for me, because I believed that my God wants me to look nice all the time.  So here we are, let's build a restaurant so that we can be in the same consciousness whenever we're out for our social times.  So we built the annex, a banquet facility and it worked wonderfully well, but guess what, I'm in charge of the restaurant and I can't toast toast nor boil eggs.  Something is wrong with this, I don't know how to do this, let's get somebody that knows how to do it.  Making a long story short, we have had challenges with the annex, and just recently, I believe that I do have the answer to my prayers, that we do have the right manager now.  That is, we will reopen the annex during the month of July year 2000, and this man has 17 restaurants and what have you all over the city of Chicago, so he really should know.  I'm giving thanks with the reopening of the annex.  Now, I discovered after we built the annex, that in the building, the church, Christ Universal Temple, I really did not remember my young people.  They don't have any place to have their meetings and to do the kinds of things that they like to do, because they are always with the adults.  Now, I've got to build another building on to the building that we're in for my youth.  We built the youth wing that consists of three rooms for our youth.  We built, I think it's 300 and something in square feet for a bookstore, which is huge.  In that, we tried to include everything that we had forgotten.  Now, I have built another church.  When you're finished with how many churches and how many buildings, after that comes the Johnnie Colemon [Elementary] Academy, which is an elementary school and that was--we had the opening of the Johnnie Colemon Academy September 7, 1999.  When you're finished counting all the buildings that I have been a channel for God to use and build, you will end up with a count of six and it's wonderful.
Story_ID: 17227
Speaker 1: Really when you think about what you've accomplished it's really amazing.  I want to go back to--At what point when you were holding these--You said you started out with six and then grown into 4,000 or even more than that.  What made you realize that you had the potential to be a religious leader and that that was going to be your role in this life?
Speaker 2: Because of the healing.  Once you have that kind of experience, in order to receive the kind of healing that I was in need of, you had to be very acquainted with the realization of the presence of God.  My whole world changed.  I became a new preacher, living what I really believed in, this Christianity, and we are new thought Christians.  There are certain things that you have no desire to do any more once you have decided, and for this cause, I came on this earth.  Everybody's here for a real definite reason, whether you know what it is or not.  Whatever you are doing at this particular time is your assignment from God.  When it's time for you to move, God simply moves you and gives you another assignment.  My assignments all come directly from God.  How do I know what they are?  Because I know where to make the contact, not on the outside, I go within, make my connection, listen and after I hear what God is saying--It is not always in a voice.  God does not speak to you always like we are talking now.  It comes to me as a feeling.  You can feel God and you know the difference in feeling the presence of God and feeling the presence of something else.  I cannot explain that to you, because it works differently with all people.  Once again, we are all individuals created out of the body of God and we all are channels for God.  The only reason that he's using me to build buildings is because by myself I can do nothing.  I am a channel chosen by God to do this.  Now, don't let me go try to do something else, that's not my assignment.  When I realized what I was to do, I put my whole heart, soul, mind, because lives have been changed from the principles that we teach at Christ Universal Temple.  Some people let you know, most of them do not let you know until--It's so funny.  Just this week I had an appointment and I needed a town car to take me where I had to go.  When they told the man who had to go some place, that it was Reverend Colemon, he really came to get somebody else.  He said if it was Reverend Colemon, the other person would have to wait, I've waited all these years to get to say to her what I want to say, come on Reverend Colemon.  I got in the car and he talked to me from where I was coming from to where I was going to say that when he walked in Christ Universal Temple at 8601 South State Street, he had a big problem and my sermon that Sunday answered all the problems and questions that he needed to change his life.  My question was have you been back.  He said no, I haven't, because I received what I needed at that time.  Many people are that way and that's okay, as long as you receive what you needed at that particular time.  He was so excited and to say thank you.  I said fine, you don't know how much this has helped me.  So that's my assignment, to help people understand how to live better lives.  If it's healing of the body, if it's prosperity and prosperity does not just talk about money, but it does include money.  At my church, I try to have a total program of teaching money substance, teaching health, teaching how to get along with yourself first, how to love yourself first, how to love other people, the whole program.  Total wholeness and health, wealth, joy, peace.  They call it new thought and I agree.  It was a new thought when they told me that I didn't have to die.  It was a new thought when they told me there are no incurable diseases.  It was a new thought because I'd always been taught that you had to be sick, you were supposed to be sick and because of what you done and all of these other things that I had been taught.  We teach you how to change your thoughts.  You change your life.  Change how you think, because you are the thinker that thinks the thought that makes the thing in your life, world and affairs.  If you say something to me that I call negative, it will not effect me unless I begin to think about what you have said to me.  That's how I know.
Story_ID: 17228
Speaker 1: When you speak of God, you speak of a very personal relationship.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You talk about talking with him.  You've also talked about conversations.
Speaker 2: Yes.  He's my friend.
Speaker 1: Conversations about being upset with him.  It's almost right, that he's a good friend.
Speaker 2: Best friend I've ever had and so I talk to him like I talk to you.  I say more to him than I do to you.  Some things I don't need to say to him, because he is it.  He's all of it.  You see, I believe that there is only one presence, one power.  I believe that God is our mission, omnipresent, present everywhere.  I pray for people over the telephone.  They might be in California.  That does not make any difference.  Where ever they are, God is.  All healing comes from God.  Medical science, doctors, they all know this, but God has doctors, hospitals.  We do not teach that you do not go to doctors and hospitals and take the pills and whatever it is that you need to do for yourself at that period of your growth.  You do that.  Go to any doctor you want to go to, because all healing comes from God.  There's no other place for it to come from.  When you make that contact and realize that I am the father of one.  This is one of the prayers that Jesus prayed at all times.  I am the father of one.  When you thoroughly understand that oneness means sameness, that I am the same, whatever God is.  The healing breaks forth and you go back to the doctor and the doctors can't find anything, because there's nothing to find.  That's how you know that you've touched the hem of his garment as we say.  But it comes through prayer, meditation and the silence.  Sometimes we talk too much.  Many times you just need to be quiet, be still and know whereever I am, God is and I'm realizing a realization of his presence, and you have to know that God cannot be sick, God cannot be broke, God cannot be unhappy, God cannot be any of these human things that we think and have said that God is.  God's none of that.  He's too pure to be whole in antiquities of any kind.
Speaker 1: So though you talk about him, actually you believe that God resides inside--
Speaker 2: Yes.  God is within me.  In the mornings to make sure that I believe that, every morning I get up, I thank God that I know I am one with you.  This is your day, I am your child, you have already created every good thing for me, but it's up to me to open my mind and be healed.  That is my first published book, 'Open Your Mind and Be Healed,' and once you open your mind and receive God, accept--You see, it's already done, but that's very difficult for us to accept and you have to keep saying what we call acclamations.  An acclamation is only making firm in your mind, because everything begins in the mind and God created you and Jesus was an elder brother in our example.  Jesus had twelve disciples.  Those twelve disciples are located throughout your body known as mind-powers.  Peter, the disciple of Jesus, represents faith.  Faith is located in the middle of your head, and you have to keep talking to Peter all the time, because Peter will have faith in things in the outer as well as faith in the things that's within, in good things, in wonderful things and indifferent.  Whatever you believe in is what you receive.  Many times when people came to Jesus with a disease and said Jesus please pray and heal me, Jesus would ask one question, not where you been, not how many people had it in your family, not with what the doctors said, he asked one question, do you believe.  If your answer was yes, he said go your way, it's already done.  As you believe, so you receive.
Story_ID: 17229
Speaker 1: When you feel that you're actually healing someone, is there a certain feeling that you get?
Speaker 2: Yeah, get out the way, because of yourself, you can do nothing.  So I work with getting out of the way, becoming a clear channel for God.  And I don't need to try to do anything.  I can't anyway.  Some people believe that--you know, there are many different ways of healing.  Some people believe in laying on of hands.  I believe in laying on of hands, but it doesn't have to be.  So if a person believes that if I would lay on, my hand on them, they would receive, I do that; not necessary.  And when I lay on hands, I remind myself again, "Of yourself, you can do nothing".  Know that the power of God flows through you into the person that you're praying with, not for, with.  There's a difference.
Speaker 1: Now, what, in those cases for people who can't be healed, what are those--cause sometimes people blame themselves when they can't be healed.  What are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that they should have the freedom to make their own choice.  God created us to make your own choice.  If you have served your, whatever you ought to do on this earth.  I do not believe in holding a person in that body because you need them, very selfish because they've been with you 900 years, and because of very selfish reasons.  And many people hold people because they don't know how the rent's gonna get paid if John or Sue is gone.  They don't know how they're going to make it, so they really want to keep 'em here for that reason.  People feel guilty about many things.  You must let people make their own choice.  When people are ready, and nobody goes out of the body until they make the decision.  When they decide that they are now ready--you see, there is no death.  There is only a transition.  Example, you think about it like a huge mansion, with a lot of rooms.  And you only move from one room to the other room, still moving in the presence and body of Jesus Christ because there's nothing else to do.  If you have made your choice and, and they kid me a lot, they say, if you don't want the person to go out of the body, don't let Johnnie come and pray for 'em because when she prays for them--because I free people.  And if the person is not ready to go out of the body, they won't go.  But if people are holding a person in the body when there has been medical help; there have been prayers, everybody's praying with them, around, then the person--it's time to make the transition because there's no spot where God is not.  So the person with or without a body lives in the body of God.
Story_ID: 17230
Speaker 1: Life is eternal.  It does not end because you decide to lay your body down.  And this is not the first time that I have been here.  You see, I believe in reincarnation.  Why are you smiling?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just wondering.  That was what was in my mind, did you believe--I was wondering if you believed in reincarnation because I had read that you don't really believe in the, you know, in, you know, a lot in our, the Baptist traditions, you know, it's that, it's the after, and we're always waiting for the after.  But, okay, so you believe that you've been here before.
Speaker 1: Yes.  One time I was an Egyptian princess.  That's what they named me at the Unity School [of Christianity].  I accepted that.  That's nice.  Yes, I've been here several times.  I pray that I will finish what I am to do this time.
Story_ID: 17231
Speaker 1: Why do you think religion is such an important thing for someone who has stresses, in their life?  I mean why do you think it's so important?  And you've--this has been a career for you, and then I want to ask--but why do you think it's important?
Speaker 2: Why do I think what is important?
Speaker 1: Religion, belief.
Speaker 2: Belief and religion?  Well, we just call it religion.  Everybody has some kind of belief.  We believe something, good, bad, negative or whatever.  We all have--again, you're God, in a body, in expression.  So you can believe--we're not parents.  We're not creators (ringing)--.
Speaker 1: So I was asking about belief, and you said everyone--you were saying that everyone has a belief system.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's why we encourage people to come to the Johnnie Colemon Institute.  That is the teaching arm of our church because we teach you.  We have definite lessons on denials, affirmations, beliefs, individuality, personality, which is an outstanding chapter in your making, your overcoming and becoming a new creature; making the change that we all need to make because most people still deal with personalities.  And many of our churches deal with personalities, and I understand why, because when you don't deal in personalities, then the people, you, you--I don't compromise with people.  I don't care who you are.  I don't care if you are a so-called celebrity.  I don't care if you give a million dollars.  I do not call your name.  I don't deal in personalities.  I deal in individuality, and that is not easy because people are accustomed to being recognized, talking about my mother [Lula Parker].  When we had the small churches, if she did not get there on time and get a seat in the church, well, she stood up like everybody else.  Get here on time if you want to sit down, mother.  She knew that, but the only way she would get a seat is an usher would whisper to the other one, that's Johnnie's mother.  We got to let her sit down.  And one day I caught 'em doing that, and right from the platform, I told them what my policy is, how I am, and this goes for everybody.  I'm easier, I'm softer now.  And I find a difference in my congregation because they tell me that it must move to another level, and you can't do that.  Well, you don't tell me what I can't do either.  So I'd say, fine, you got it.  You do it the way you want to do it; that's still not my way.  I still do not believe in personalities.  I still do not believe that I have to, because you are--I can use this person's name because she's my best friend, because you are Della Reese-Lett, if you come in my church, sit down somewhere.  I mean don't expect me to say, wait a minute, congregation, the movie star is in here, Della Reese-Lett, and we have to have a special seat.  No, I don't do that.  Sit down if you can, and I hope the church is so crowded, you have to stand up.  That's wonderful.
Story_ID: 17232
Speaker 1: There're not many women in the church who've had--and I don't want to say, I mean maybe the term--well, have had success.  It's, the, the black--well, the church, period, church period, has always been very male controlled, is it--you had to be male to be a leader of people.  So my question is, why have you been successful in this role?
Speaker 2: Because God is the source of my supply, not a person, not people, not whatever, God.  We were in the charter program, public school system, before we built the Johnnie Colemon [Elementary] Academy.  And being a part of a public school system, that it meant that we would receive the money substance that they give to operate the school.  And I guess it was a month or two months, a very short time, before it was time to open the school.  I was told that the charter program was on hold because they were having some seeming problems.  And what do you mean, on hold?  That means that we're not giving any money for opening the school.  It's time for my school to open.  I've told the congregation that we're opening.  Now, I've got to go to God and see, what am I going to do, God?  And God said to me, the school, the charter program is not your source.  Who is your source?  And I said, God is the source of my supply.  So Sunday morning I announced to my congregation the Johnnie Colemon Academy will open September 7, 1999 without the charter program, which meant that I had to have the faith to know that God, this whole year, is going to supply our needs.  We operate, God operates CUT [Christ Universal Temple] and this is a huge organization.  God supports and supplies the Johnnie Colemon Academy, which is a different thing altogether, different staff, different requirements, different everything.  So I have been successful, and when I answer this question, everybody looks at me very strangely and wonder, is that all?  That's all.  God, G-O-D.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking you as a female.  This is what I'm saying.  How--.
Speaker 2: So what?  God does not know male nor female.  So he gives to me the same thing that the gives to the male.  He gives the support, he gives the money substance; he sends what you need when you need it.  He doesn't care that I'm a woman.  Only these churches care that I'm a woman.  God does not care.  He chose me.  So he said to me, I will not leave you, nor will I forsake you.  And the places I know that do not really, you know, they're not in tune with women ministers, well, I'm a woman, and I'm a minister for forty-three years.  So I don't go over anybody's anything.  I'm from Mississippi.  I have to have an invitation to be invited wherever I go.  If I happen to go and they don't want a woman coming, I'm at a--this is a service.  I was at one service.  This minister's not on earth any longer, and I was to give remarks, and I had to walk from the audience, seated in with the congregation.  And I started to the platform, and he stopped me.  And he said, the microphone is there.  And I said, why?  He said, because you're a woman.  I had no choice but to go to the microphone and say what I had to say.  But the next morning, I called him on the telephone.  And I said what I had to say (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now--.
Speaker 2: --that God has expressed through me, will say to women that with God, all things are possible.  If you keep your faith and trust in God, you can't do anything but be a God success.  And I walk around all the time saying to myself, it's all about God, not about you, Johnnie Colemon.  It's not about anybody that's in your congregation.  It's all about God.  God is the source of my supply.  I have a rich God.  That's what God is to me, rich in every way.  And because I believe that, I express that; I demonstrate that, and I keep my thoughts lifted above what anybody might think, say or do, the protecting presence of God watches over me.  The light of God shines as me.  The love of God enfolds me.  And I walk and talk, live and breath, God, God, God.  Therefore, God, I, I believe that you will only send into my experience those that can help me grow and get a better understanding of who and what I am.  When I say this, I don't mean to say that I don't have experiences.  I do.  But I realize the only reason that they are in my life is to teach me some new lessons so that I can grow.  It's all about growing, growing in the understanding of who you are.  And it takes all my time trying to learn my own lessons.  So I don't have time to be involved in your whatever, cause I'm growing, and I'm busy working on Johnnie Colemon.
Story_ID: 17233
Speaker 1: What, as a person who's had a very rich life in many ways, Reverend Colemon, what are some of the things that are very memorable for you, I mean that you feel, you know, particularly proud of or that you, you know, have touched you in any way or that you've touched people, but that are, you know, if you sort of glanced through your life, what are those memorable, you know, some of those memorable moments?
Speaker 2: Whenever I have helped anybody make an overcoming or have understanding, how to think because, you see, it's all about thoughts when it comes to us.  And if I have helped anybody understand that when you hate, when you say anything negative about anybody, it does not hurt them.  You hurt yourself.  So I don't want to hurt myself.  I don't want to be sick.  I don't want to have to have needles and all of that.  So therefore, I love you in spite of, and I'm loving you because, I am loving you because of me.  Whenever I can help people understand that they do not have to be sick, that they do not have to be broke.  They do not have to be unhappy.  They do not have to be any of the things that they don't want to be.  There are people that are happy being whatever they are.  I bless them and let them be who and whatever they want to be.  But I'm very happy when we get letters.  There are people that call.  There are people that say you have changed, you have changed my life.  I'm very happy then, but when I can get it over to them, I can't do it for you.  You must do it for yourself, everybody.  Once you get the principles, once you read the books, once you read the Bible, once you get into the new thought writings, and there are many helpful books.  There are many churches now that I'm very proud of.  In the early years of my ministry, they were not speaking and talking the words and speaking what they speak now.  And people call and say, did you hear so and so?  I said, yeah, I had a problem.  I didn't know whether it was one of my teachers or if it was an orthodox church because we all are put here to grow and to learn and to accept.  My very, very good friend, that is very popular in the city of Chicago, we love each other madly.  He does not believe what I believe.  And I don't believe what he believes.  And we are friends.  He allows me the privilege to be and believe what I believe.  And when I get to that part, he says, you know I don't believe that.  Fine, you don't have to, but that's what I believe.  And we will stay friends as long as you let me be me, and I'm going to let you be you because you're happy in waiting to die and go to heaven.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, who is that friend, who's that friend.  Anyway--.
Speaker 2: And I'm in heaven right now.
Story_ID: 17234
Speaker 1: You've spoken of Della Reese and also it's been reported about Ben Vereen, those are two, you know, well-known people.  And you have touched their lives in many ways, and even to the point where Della Reese went and became a minister, and--.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Right, and I want you to sort of talk about that.
Speaker 2: Della Reese, we were friends before this challenge came into her life.  And when it happened, she called me, and explained to me what had happened to her, an aneurysm.  Well, I had heard the word before.  That's really what my father [John Haley] made his transition, from an aneurysm so I knew what she was talking about.  And I got on a plane immediately, and when I walked in the hospital, as alive as Della Reese always is, she was in a very dark room.  And I said to the doctor, bring her out of here, and bring her out now.  And he brought her out of this dark room, and I talked to her and put her back on the track to know that God is your help.  You can be healed.  He's the physician that can do it, and we had prayer time together.  I prayed with her, and God healed her.  And she can tell the story so beautifully.  They needed a certain instrument that nobody in the States had to perform the surgery that her body seemed to be needing at that time.  The only place that they could get the instrument was in Canada.  The day that she was to go to Canada, she said to me, are you going with me?  And I said, no, I'm not.  And she said, why not?  I said because you don't need me.  God will be with you.  So when they got to the hospital, they took her to surgery on that morning.  When she went in to surgery, she was singing her favorite song, and when she got in, she said, that I was in the room already waiting for her, which is no news to me.  It happens now.  And I was there with her at her bedside everyday and every night or whenever she needed me, I was there.  So if that was the kind of healing that she received and she was healed perfectly in every way, and that was the kind of thing that happened with, with Della Reese.  I didn't need to be there, not in this body, and God works with me, with my spirit with people.  People come to church now and say, thank you so much for being in, with me last night.  And I don't know anything about it.  And I say, well, what are you talking about?  Where was I?  You were in the room with me.  What did I say?  And they tell me what I said?  And I, I stop--what is this?  Why do you work with me in this way?  And my answer was, because you have not learned how to be in ten or fifteen different places at the same time.  So therefore, I work through your spirit.  And that's just the way that God has chosen to work with me.  Ben Vereen, it's the same kind of thing.  Della, it has been easier for her to make the change than it has been for Ben Vereen.  But every once in a while, he will kind of need some help, and I'm always here for him.
Story_ID: 17235
Speaker 1: Reverend Coleman, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy, after people hear my story, it's up to them to decide, what have I given?  What do you want to remember a Johnnie Colemon as being?  Again, it's all to me in the teaching.  It's all in believing and knowing that it's God for everything.  My legacy is to continue to prove and to be what I understand God to be as me, at this particular time.  The buildings are here, the everything--you don't have to question anything.  Get in your car or walk.  I don't care how you get there, to a 119th street, and it's standing there, and God has made this possible to say to people that it is possible for you to do and be anything that you want to be, and that you want to do.  So, I keep wondering, what's next, God?  What else am I supposed to be?  What else do you want to be through and as me?  And all I have to do is stop questioning, be still, get out of the way; let go, and simply let God.
Story_ID: 17236
Speaker 1: Do you have any particular hopes for either African Americans in general or mankind?
Speaker 2: Do I have to answer that?
Speaker 1: Oh, you're not gonna answer (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not.
Speaker 1: I thought you were getting all positioned to answer (laughter).  I said at the beginning you didn't have to answer.
Speaker 2: That's what you told me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I did.  Ah, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Because I know the things, some of the things that I'm saying you're in total agreement with them.  You have believed that for 900 years.  Many people believe it, but nobody is bold enough but me to walk out here and say what it is.  You believe in it.  I can tell in your expressions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--.
Speaker 2: Your face keeps changing, and I keep say--wanting to say, you know the answer already.  What are you asking me, write it down and just say it, and say, Johnnie Colemon said it, fine.
Story_ID: 17237
Speaker 1: You know, actually, in a lot of ways, Reverend Colemon, and as I was learning about the principles out there, this project which came to me really--I often say that it's God given because it came at a time when I had a lot of doors closing to me.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I feel that, you know, I am on a mission, and--.
Speaker 2: Definitely.  That's your assignment.
Speaker 1: That's my assignment.
Speaker 2: And you have to do it because if you don't do it now, you're going to do it, and you might as well do it now.  It'll come easy as you continue to know "Of myself, I can do nothing".  Whatever you have to do, Father, I am so thankful that you have chosen me to be your channel, and then just let him do it.  You might not understand it.  You don't need to.  Just do it, just let him do it, and keep reminding yourself, and if it looks kind of funny, remind yourself, this is not my idea.  This is God's idea, and God answers every prayer through ideas.  And that's where we miss it.  We're praying for a Lincoln, and we're sitting waiting for the Lincoln to fall out of the sky.  The Lincoln's gonna come through an idea that God's going to give you.  So God answers through ideas.  This is his idea.  And give it back to him when you find yourself getting into it too much.  And I have to do that all the time because I get so excited about what I can see and I think and what--and another great thing that we have to always work with is to not be so human.  You are a spiritual being, having a human experience, but you are spirit.  So stop being so human and be what you're created to be, and that is a spiritual being.  And you affirm that, you say that, you think that; I am pure spirit, perfect, whole, in mind, body, soul.
Story_ID: 17238
Speaker 1: I have one last question.
Speaker 2: Well, I hope so.
Speaker 1: And that is, your mother [Lula Parker] got to see your success and see you come this way.  Your father [John Haley] didn't in the, didn't in the same way, and I'm wondering what you think your father would say looking back on you right now?
Speaker 2: What would my father think about me now?  He would be in total shock because he never expected me to be what I am today.  But you see, that's God's business, and not your business at all, and if he was here, he would certainly be trying to protect me from all of the criticism, from all of the condemnation, from all of the whatever they think about and say about me.  I would have to pray and pray awfully hard to keep him calm with all the things that's said about Johnnie Colemon.  So I'm, in a way, I'm glad he's not here cause he couldn't take it.
Story_ID: 17239
Speaker 1: I don't even waste my time trying to answer that question.  I don't really care what they think we are.  Whatever it is, if it's this good, I'll always be this.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Okay, but people say, you know, it's a cult.  There's a lot of that discussion out there.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  It always has been, and I guess it always will be.  We are not a cult, never have been.  We teach the truth, and because we teach the truth--and the only reason we teach the truth is because Jesus said, "The truth shall set you free", if you know the truth.  And who's to decide who knows the truth.  You see, I think the talk comes because we are metaphysicians.  We teach metaphysics.  We teach, we go beyond the word, the letter, and we teach the spirit.  And because they don't understand metaphysics, or our being metaphysicians, they call us anything and everything simply because they don't understand that everything in the bible has an inner meaning.  John, the disciple, John, the real meaning is John represents love, and we teach people how to express that disciple.  And so we're a cult because we do not teach the same thing that they teach and because we go beyond the letter and get the inner meaning, you know, so--and it throws me off to have to talk about what they think and what they feel, because personally, I don't care.
Story_ID: 17240
Speaker 1: Now, mind-body connection.  This is the last question.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: The mind-body connection--mind, body and spirit.  What is your feeling on this?
Speaker 2: We are threefold.  We are spirit, soul, body.  Spirit is the real of us that never changes, does not age, does not die.  Spirit is the real.  You have a soul.  Within your soul is your complete everything.  Within the soul, you have the conscious mind, the super--the subconscious mind and the super-conscious mind.  The super-conscious mind is the spirit, is the real part of you.  The subconscious mind is the tape recorder.  The subconscious mind records everything that you think, say and do.  The subconscious mind, that's what we're going through now, playing back to us what we have recorded, yesterday, last year, this morning, whatever, the tape recorder records it.  And if I say anything that I don't want on the tape recorder, I cancel it right away because once it get on the tape, it's gonna play it back.  The super-conscious part of you is that perfect part of you.  So you are a threefold being, spirit, soul, body.  And the soul has the mind and all of its characters.
Story_ID: 17241
Speaker 1: One last question, what are your hopes, you didn't answer, but what are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hopes for the African Americans are that we are the same as everybody else.  What do you hope to be?  That's exactly what we are.  Our hopes are no further than twenty-five cents this or going in the basement to buy whatever you have to buy.  Well, they've got a tenth floor in the store, so if that's where your hopes are, that's your basement consciousness, that's where you will always be, because you feel when you get on the plane you're supposed to ride in, whatever that is back there.  And then when I discovered that there's a first-class on the plane, well, my hopes is to ride in first class.  First class don't care nothing about whether African American or what you are.  It's your thoughts about you that makes your world.  You make your own world, and I don't deal in the African Americans.  I don't deal in the blacks.  I don't deal in the white.  I keep telling you I know I am a child of God, rich in every way, and I make whatever it is.  I decide, you know--and that's why I don't like to talk about it because they talk about me enough, and if they really knew my real feeling that would--they could write another book about it.  So I'm just a child of God that, that is black and don't care if I am black.  I'm glad I am the color that I am.  Please don't ask me nothing about that no more.
