Story_ID: 267539
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sanford Cloud, Jr., S-A-N-F-O-R-D, C-L-O-U-D, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Do, do you have a nickname?
Speaker 2: Sandy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 27, 1944, Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney at law and have been an organizational executive over the last decade and now I'm a real estate developer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February the 18th.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Farmington, Connecticut in my home.
Speaker 1: And this is 2005, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  This is for history so.
Story_ID: 267540
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we are compelled to ask, that only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes.  That would be jambalaya.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it would be when I say goodbye, I generally say ciao.
Story_ID: 267541
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history, your mother's side and your father's [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Inez Morgan Cloud.  It's I-N-E-Z, M-O-R-G-A-N, C-L-O-U-D.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is March 10, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and where--
Speaker 2: Americus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Americus?
Speaker 2: Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what can you tell us about her side of the family?  Well, how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can only trace it back to, to her, to her and her mother [Florence Morgan].  They are from, the family was from, from Americus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't know your, you, you knew your grandmother but--
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother but I did not know anyone before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories of the ancestors on that side or about what they did for a living way back and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not really.
Speaker 1: --any stories about slavery or, or that era?
Speaker 2: Well I assume that they were in slavery but my mother left Americus, Georgia as a young child with her parents and came up here to Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they didn't, they didn't really talk about life in Americus--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --and the history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because she was a very young child when she left Americus to come up here to Hartford.  She was mostly raised here in Hartford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did she talk about growing up here in Hartford and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did talk about it.  She had several brothers and sisters, some of whom obviously ended up being born here in Hartford.  And to the extent that I recall her talking about her childhood it was a good, rich, warm, childhood in an area of the city called the North End, mostly on Bellevue [Street] and, and Warren Streets in, in Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did her parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: They were, my, my grandfather [Monroe Morgan] was just a laborer and my mother, my grandmother basically stayed at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have a chance to, to finish school and go on to higher education or--
Speaker 2: She went up to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well can, can you tell us what her personality is like and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well she passed a few year ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And she was a very gentle, loving, soft-spoken woman, who had a great smile, and a great spirit, and enjoyed all kinds of people and was very close to her family.
Story_ID: 267542
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's full name is Sanford Cloud [Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, Sanford Cloud.  And he was born--
Speaker 2: He was born October 13, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in the Stone Mountain area of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what do you know about his side of the family?  Can you trace the ancestors back on that side?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Both his father and his mother [Lois Cloud] were from the Marion County area of Georgia.  And my, my grandfather, Robert Cloud, was the child of a miscegenation to a horse trader in Georgia.  And my great-grandmother took her maiden name and gave it to my grandfather which was Cloud, refusing to take the father's name, which was Stembridge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the father was white, basically and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the natural father was, was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I, I take it he didn't have much to do with raising the--
Speaker 2: He did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So she took Cloud.  And now Cloud is an unusual name in the black community, you don't hear it much.  In fact, you don't hear it much in the white community but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is there a, any story behind the name Cloud that you can, that you can--
Speaker 2: Well as far as we know, it is Native American and probably Cherokee, since the Cherokees populated heavily in the Georgia area.  Most of the Clouds that I have come across over the years have a similar origin.  And so I'm pretty sure that that's, that's the, that's the background of, of, of the family name.
Speaker 1: Were, were any of your ancestors Cherokees that you know of?
Speaker 2: That would be my great-grandmother, my grandfather's mother was a, was half-Cherokee, half African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So was it her name that was used?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now did your father have any stories about the Cloud family, any other stories about the Clouds in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well no, not, not too much.  My father's family came up from Stone [Mountain], Georgia to Hartford [Connecticut] very early.  He was a very young man as was my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] when she came to Hartford, to the Hartford area.  So there's just not a lot of stories that, that he shared.  He was probably five or six years old when he, they left the Stone Mountain area so there's just not an awful lot that he remembered as a child down there.
Story_ID: 267543
Speaker 1: Did he [Cloud's father, Sanford Cloud, Sr.] talk about growing up, did, did he grow up in Hartford [Connecticut], too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were some of his memories of growing up in Hartford?
Speaker 2: Well very much like my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud].  My father was the oldest of eleven children.  And when they first came to the Hartford area they were east of what we call the river, east of the Connecticut River in East Windsor Hill [South Windsor, Connecticut] and, and East Hartford [Connecticut].  My grandfather [Robert Cloud] was a farmer.  And so he brought his produce into Hartford every week, horse and wagon, and my father would accompany him all the, all the time.  And eventually they moved into Hartford in the same area where my, where my mother grew up in North Hartford [North End, Hartford, Connecticut], again on Bellevue Street and Warren Street, Wooster Street, which is where the family, the Cloud family residence was for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a--oh, did your father have a chance to finish high school and go on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He finished eighth grade as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well a, a principal part of his, when he was a young man, he was in the, he was a, worked for a men's clothing store in downtown Hartford.  And, and then he got attracted to automobiles and became an automobile mechanic, went away to World War II [WWII] serving in the Pacific.  And came back and ended up working at several of the car dealerships in the Hartford area, and that's what he did most of his adult career.
Story_ID: 267544
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] and father [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: I believe that one of my father's sisters introduced my mother and father.  And, and the rest is history.  They, they started dating and my father was about ready to go off to the war [World War II, WWII] and they ended up going down to Maryland to get married, and then he went off to the war and nine months later I was born while he was, while he was serving in the Pacific.
Story_ID: 267545
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory of any kind?  My earliest childhood memory I think is our being in an apartment, living in an apartment on a street called Wolcott Street which is off of Park Street in Hartford [Connecticut].  And it had a backyard and we played a lot in that backyard with my brother [Gilbert Cloud] and sister [Janice Cloud Senturk] and neighborhood children.  And I remember also that it was the place that I walked from to get to the Hartford Public Library [Park Branch, Hartford, Connecticut] which was on Broad Street.  And I always so remember that my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] trusted me to be able to walk several blocks as a five year old to go to read in the library.  That's an early vivid childhood memory that I still cherish.
Story_ID: 267546
Speaker 1: Tell me what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Good food, fried chicken, green beans, turkey, fresh air.  In the wintertime, sleigh riding down Lookout Mountain in Keney Park and other parks in the Hartford [Connecticut] area.  And family reunions out on, on a farm in, in Manchester [Connecticut].
Story_ID: 267547
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a, as a little kid, I guess, you know, what were you like, what you were interested in?
Speaker 2: I was shy more than anything else.  I was a, I would describe my, my childhood as a, as a, as a happy one.  I was very engaged in learning.  I loved to read which is why, which my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] got me started on by having me, have the discipline to walk to the library and to read and get interested in books.  I liked school a lot.  I really liked my teachers a lot.  And I enjoyed school.  And at some point in time I was involved in, in being the newspaper boy and I liked that a lot because it allowed me to earn money.  And so I had early in my life a value for discipline around work and the benefits from hard work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In, in that our family was, on my father's [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] side, it was historically connected to the oldest African American congregational church in the state, Faith Congregational Church [Hartford, Connecticut].  Our family homestead was next door to the church for many, many years.
Speaker 1: So this is the historic church that [James W.C.] Pennington was the--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: --pastor of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --J.W.C. Pennington.
Speaker 2: That is, that's exactly correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're still members there today.  But that was a big part of, of my life.  Then the other experience--that was a congregational church--the other experience was that regularly we would, my father would have us go to Shiloh Baptist Church [Hartford, Connecticut] which was another old African American church in Hartford whose pastor was the Reverend [Robert] Moody.  And I, I remember him well because he had the strongest handshake than anybody in the world.  And if, I took the strength of my handshake today from him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So there are people that do this and you (unclear) I often wonder why they do it, but they, he had this, he'd really squeeze your hand, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now his was much more painful than mine but I do believe in a strong handshake.  It, it was an interesting, it was an interesting educational experience for me to take that from him.  He always looked one in the eye and he always, he always had a strong handshake upon greeting or, or parting and that, that always impressed me.  And I thank him even today for that, for that learning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you involved in church activities a lot, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not too much.  We would go to Sunday school but here and every now and then to main church service but I wasn't, I wouldn't say that I was fully engaged in church or church activity and, and matters around the church, no.
Story_ID: 267548
Speaker 1: How large a family did you have, or your core family, it's you, and you've got a brother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a younger brother [Gilbert Cloud] that's two years younger than me and a younger sister [Janice Cloud Senturk] who's six years younger.  And then we had two half-brothers who were older than me by my mother's [Inez Morgan Cloud] former marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did they live with you or did--
Speaker 2: They did not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --live with us.  But we had regular contact with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did you have a lot of cousins around?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We had a lot of cousins on both sides of my family.  But we spent more time with my cousins on my father's [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] side primarily because we all lived in the same, same area and several of us are about the same age, so we spent a lot of time together.  And our, our pattern as a family was that on Saturdays, my mother would gather me and my brother and sister and put us on the bus and we would go over to my, my mother's, mother's place, my grandmother's [Florence Morgan] place, on her side of the family.  We'd spend all day Saturday there.  And then on Sunday we would go to church generally and then my father would take us to his mother's [Lois Cloud] place and it's where we gathered and that was the, the pattern for most of my, most of my childhood, so we're, we, we're a very close-knit family.
Story_ID: 267549
Speaker 1: Oh, now you were coming along, I guess, around the time that television emerged.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that a big deal when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  It was a big deal.  As a matter of fact, I remember that one of the things that I particularly did was that on Friday nights I would go and collect the money from the subscriptions for the newspaper on my route and I would then take what I earned and go up to Baltimore Drug Store on, on Albany Avenue [Hartford, Connecticut] around seven o'clock to get potato chips and soda for the family so that at eight o'clock we could begin watching the shows on a Friday night, that was what we, that's what we would do.  And that's a fond memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Music was a big part of growing up.  While my father [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] didn't play an instrument, several of his brothers did, very accomplished musicians.  My Uncle Paul Cloud was an accomplished saxophonist.  And my Uncle Moe [Cloud], his youngest brother, my father's youngest brother, was, played the bass and, and all very accomplished musicians.  I actually played the clarinet until the beginning of high school [Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut] and stopped playing the clarinet because my uncle and father wouldn't let me switch from the clarinet to the saxophone.  I mean after all I was going to high school and I needed to play the sax and I wasn't about to continue playing the clarinet so I stopped playing the clarinet and turned my attention to sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what sports did you participate in for the most part?
Speaker 2: Well as a child, baseball, Little League was a big part of my life when I was a, when I was a youngster, nine, ten, eleven, twelve years old.  I was a pitcher and a, a pretty good pitcher.  And I think I still may hold the record of seventeen strikeouts out of eighteen batters for a game.  And, and then I, and, of course, basketball was a very, very high and important.  And then when I turned twelve, thirteen, I, there were two things that I, I started running cross country and enjoyed that a lot and ran cross country in, in high school.
Story_ID: 267550
Speaker 1: In the Hartford [Connecticut] area during the summer, tobacco was the big summer job.  And--but you had to be fourteen years old in order to work tobacco and I was a, a year and a half too young.  And, and I was a young entrepreneur, I had, I enjoyed making money by that time.  I had been a successful paperboy and liked having money and a little extra money in my pocket to do the things I wanted to do.  And I didn't know what I was going to do one summer between my seventh and eighth grade actually and a friend of mine came up to me one day and said, "Why don't you come caddying with me?"  And I said, "Caddying, what is caddying?"  He said, "Oh, well you go out to this golf course and you carry golf clubs around the golf course for nine or eighteen holes and you get paid for doing that."  I said, "Oh, that's interesting."  I said, "I'd be prepared to try that."  So, he and his mother, Gary Herman and his mother one Saturday morning picked me up and took me up to what was then a very prominent Jewish golf club in Bloomfield, Connecticut called Tumble Brook Country Club.  And that exposure allowed me to come to know and to love the game of golf.  And I became a golfer at that age and I went on to play a lot of golf and became captain of the, of Weaver High [School, Hartford, Connecticut] golf team.  And then went off to college thinking that I was going to play professional golf at, at some point.
Speaker 2: Now, now there's some social dynamics to this.  Now this is a Jewish country club?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And there's a reason for having a Jewish country club, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And what is that reason?
Speaker 1: Well it was discrimination in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], when the Jewish community had to form their own golf clubs because they were not allowed to join Protestant or Christian golf clubs.  There were three major golf clubs in the area, one was the old, what we called the Old Protestant, Old Yankee golf club and then there was another that was Catholic oriented and then there was this Jewish club.
Story_ID: 267551
Speaker 1: You were talking about the country clubs and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and being a caddy and stuff.  Now did you, did you have an opportunity to kind of figure out, you know, the dynamics of your community by, I mean at all in terms, terms of the discrimination against Jews and where the Protestants fit in and where the, where black people fit in, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As, as I, as I got exposed to that world in, in the country club [Tumble Brook Country Club, Bloomfield, Connecticut] and obviously with listening to the conversations of the people for whom I was caddying, it was clear to me that they were discriminated in, in many ways.  But they were also, they had broken through their, that discrimination by being sure that education was a high value and they went on to run their own set of businesses and, and get engaged in the professions.  So I had my whole world just opened up as a very young person being exposed not only to this great game that I love today, but also to a people, their value set, and the opportunity that was out there for me.  My mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] had always said "Reach for the stars." It was a constant message from her.  But when I got exposed to golf and the, and the country club environment, I, I saw the reality of that, that if you pursued your education and pursued the excellence of that, that there was an opportunity even though there might be some barriers ahead of you.  Well, I had the opportunity as a youngster to caddy for one of the best golfers in the club and in the state.  So I met so many people but I also caddied for lawyers and judges and prominent business men and even the governor of the State of Connecticut at that time, the late Abraham [A.] Ribicoff.  And so my world changed, my world opened up to a, a whole new level of understanding and possibility.
Speaker 1: Now this is from age--
Speaker 2: This is from age twelve, thirteen, through [Weaver] High School [Hartford, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 267552
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to take you back to grade school.  And we always, I hope this doesn't seem tedious, but we always go back to grade school.  And, and you said you were an avid reader and, what were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: What, what kinds of books did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I don't, I don't, I don't know that I recall any particular kind of book that intrigued me more than another.  History, government was, you know, things, issues around those subjects were, were interesting to me.  The science was not all that intriguing to me, math was just okay.  But I don't have any particular memories of any particular books that really kind of stick out for me.
Speaker 1: Did you like adventure books more or did you like, I don't know the different kinds of books, biographies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I just liked, I just liked reading.  It didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't really matter (unclear) I liked all kinds of books.
Speaker 1: Well some kids read about dogs, some horses, (laughter) you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and some different things like that, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't, I don't, I just don't have a memory of that from, from early childhood, any particular books.  I guess adventure books that you, you, categorize that as an area certainly would be one that would have been attractive to me.  History would have been attractive to me.  But I don't have any present recollection of any specific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now did you read any [Mark] Twain coming up, you know, Hartford [Connecticut] being the home of--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, yes but, of course, most of us read, read Mark Twain and because he also spent so much time here in Hartford, all of his books were, were, were of, of importance to us, and we would visit The Mark Twain [House &] Museum [Hartford, Connecticut] regularly.
Story_ID: 267553
Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend?  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: My first school, from kindergarten to second grade, was Burns School, B-U-R-N-S, Elementary School [Dominick F. Burns Elementary School, Hartford, Connecticut].  And then we moved from Wolcott Street over to a brand new public housing complex called the Westbrook Village [Hartford, Connecticut] which was over in the west and northwest side of Hartford [Connecticut].  And from there went to Northwest Elementary School and then Northwest-Jones [School; Northwest District School, Hartford, Connecticut] which was the junior high and then on to Weaver High [School, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were all, you know, just a block away from, from each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about, now you, you moved into public housing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In, in those days it was a little bit different from, I mean, the connotation that people have now for the projects is, you know, is a place of doom and gloom--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's a, it's a dead end.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it was a little bit different in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, very different.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give us--
Speaker 2: That, that was, it was a brand new apartment in a country like setting with a lot of land all around it, what we called the Hog River [Park River] across the street.  It was idyllic setting as a, a youngster could possibly have, with swimming holes not to connected to the river.  Ice skating, being, being able to ice skate down the river in, in the wintertime.  A lot of open fields.  And a two bedroom apartment for a family of five and it was as a, a nice place to live and to grow up as I could imagine.  There was no connotation, I did not understand that at all any connotation around public housing until, you know, much later in life, going, you know, into the, you know, after I went away to, you know, college and, and understood a little bit better what public housing had or, or was becoming but it was not like that today, you know.  So people, you know, when I tell them that I'm a product of public housing they have one thing in mind but my own, one of my own memory is a very rich and engaging and wonderful environment in which to grow up.
Story_ID: 267554
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers or, or mentors when you were growing up in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all along the way.  From, from first grade Miss, Miss Crotty [ph.] who was my kindergarten teacher [at Dominick F. Burns Elementary School, Hartford, Connecticut] to Miss Hill [ph.] who was my third grade teacher, to Miss Crotty's sister in fifth grade, to a Mr. Andrews [ph.] in junior high [Northwest-Jones School; Northwest District School, Hartford, Connecticut] who was a very dear mentor who just passed away this past year.  And, and George Thomas who was an African American, actually the first African American teacher, administrator that made a major impact on me.  He was a history teacher and also guidance counselor.  And he was probably my strongest mentor that I had in, in the high school, high school days [at Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 267555
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut], did you get involved in clubs and that sort of thing in high school and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was on the student council and was pep rally chairman and played a major role in the, in the student body governance at the, at the school throughout, throughout my years of high school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, and you played, you ran cross country.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you play football?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) how about basketball, baseball (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played junior varsity basketball and then in my junior and senior year really focused on golf as my, as my sport.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And excelled at that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's kind of unusual for those days--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very.
Speaker 1: --especially 'cause you didn't, you, there weren't that many black--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --golfers in--
Speaker 2: Oh, very unusual.
Speaker 1: --in prominence in those days, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The only name that you really heard of was Charlie Sifford.  Now there were a few others but Charlie Sifford was the, was the primary idol at that time.  And we played high school golf at my home course was Keney Golf Club Public Course [Keney Park Golf Course, Hartford, Connecticut] which still exists today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when, so when you were a senior in high school, what, what did, well tell me something about your high school days.  Were there, was it a mostly black high school?
Speaker 2: No, it was mixed.  And all throughout my childhood I went to school with, with all different kinds of people, very mixed, very diverse neighborhood and school environment.  And that was also true in, in high school, Irish, Italian, Polish, Catholic, Jewish, African American, it was a very mixed environment, very rich, and very mixed environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now in terms of social things like dances and proms and that sort of thing, was, was there any separation?
Speaker 2: No, no, we were all, we were all together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 267556
Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut], were, were you, what were you thinking about as a vocation and--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --and what were you prospects then?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I had, there were two things that were going on, on in my life at that point.  One was through the country club [Tumble Brook Country Club, Bloomington, Connecticut] I had met the owner of one of the fine men's clothing stores in town at which I used to shop.  And I ended up asking him for a job and this was in West Hartford Center in a place called The English Shop [West Hartford, Connecticut].  And as a youngster, fifteen and a half years old, I started working there as a, a clerk and part-time assistant and just fell in love with the clothing business and along the way ended up becoming a pretty good salesperson.  Many of my devoted customers were, in fact, from the country club so that was, that was always great.  So when I went away to school, I had thought that I was going to, I knew I was gone major in business but I thought it was going to be with a focus on retailing, that was the, I, I was thinking about coming back and be involved in the retailing clothing business.  And the second piece that was going on was my love for the game of golf.  And so I picked a school that I knew I could play golf at all year long and that was The University of Arizona in Tucson [Arizona].  And so my dad [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] one, one morning put me on a Greyhound [Lines] bus at age seventeen with all my bags and my golf clubs and sent me across the country on a Greyhound bus to go to The University of Arizona.  It was the only time that I ever, as a child, I ever saw my father cry.  It's a fond memory.
Speaker 1: So this, had you ever been very far away from home before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Who counseled you about The University of Arizona? Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I just did some applications.  I had applied to San Jose State [College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California] because at that point Ken Venturi was a very prominent name in the golf world and I liked him and I liked that and, and The University of Arizona and I just figured well, if I'm gonna try to become a golfer then I need to go to a place to, to go to golf.  And interesting enough there was another set of forces that were trying to encourage me to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I said no, I don't wanna go down, down to [Washington] D.C., I wanna go out, go out west.  And that was a very different experience for me to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what year is this, this is when you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: This would be 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Summer of 1962 I went out.
Story_ID: 267557
Speaker 1: How did you like Arizona when you got out there?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the, the trip across the country was quite an extraordinary experience.  And while growing up I knew about discrimination against African American people and would hear my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] on the phone from time to time in the summertime trying to see whether we could rent a cottage down by the shore in Connecticut, I could hear her ask the question "Do you accept, you know, colored people?" and invariably the answer would come back "No."  And so I was aware of, of that kind of discrimination.  But one morning going across the country in this Greyhound [Lines] bus we stopped in a little place called Lubbock, Texas and it was about six o'clock in the morning and we're all getting off to have doughnuts and coffee and I stood in line like everyone else and when it was my turn to order, the person behind the counter said, "You need to go around the side to order."  I said, "What are you talking about go around the side?"  "Oh, well we have to serve colored people around the side."  Well that was my first direct confrontation of, of discrimination against me as a, as a person, as a human being.  And I always remembered that and it, I think, even today was one of the reasons why I ended up doing the kind of work that I did when I finally, on my journey came back home and just started practicing law and being engaged in community.  So from there I did go out to The University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona] and I enjoyed The University of Arizona, very different environment.  It was the desert, I mean, I had grown up with, big, tall, lush trees and a lot of greenery and change of seasons and this was a place that people called beautiful because the desert was very hard for me to, to relate to that initially when I went out there.  And, and over time I did come to enjoy it.  Very small African American student population.  But, but very nice environment.  Very, very good school and met a lot of wonderful people and it's where I pledged as a freshman to become a member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there, there were enough black students there to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --make a chapter of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Kappa.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Delta Omicron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how many black students were on campus, do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember the number but oh, probably a hundred including those who were engaged in sport, football and basketball, principally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would be my guess.
Story_ID: 267558
Speaker 1: Well, how long were you at The University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: A year and a half.  A year and a half.  There were two things that occurred while I was there that made me decide to come back east to, to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  As I had met during, between my freshman and, and sophomore year on a leadership development retreat at Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana, a Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity] leadership development retreat in which I was, I had the opportunity to participate, it was the summer of '63 [1963].  And there I met the, there was then the dean of students at Howard who was a Kappa his name was [HistoryMaker] Carl [Edwin] Anderson.  And it was, these were young Kappas from all over the country and we were there for a week of leadership training and development.  And I liked Carl Anderson, I liked him a lot. And I figured if he represented the kind of African American leadership that was Howard that's where I, you know, wanted to be.  That was just my preliminary kind of, kind of thinking.  That was the same summer, that August of, that the March on Washington, we were all gathered there around watching the March on, on Washington and listening to [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] give his speech in, from Bloomington, Indiana.  So I, as I went back to The University of Arizona that fall of '63 [1963], the other things that were going on was one, I had found out that I wasn't as good as I thought I was playing golf.  I didn't think that I was going to have the opportunity to pursue a professional career, I wasn't going to make the team, just wasn't good enough to do that.  And secondly, unfortunately, there was the assassination of President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy in November of '63 [1963] and it, it had a tremendous impact on me for two reasons.  One, was that there was actually some joy and laughter by students who were attending The University of Arizona coming out of the student union building that day upon hearing of the assassination of President Kennedy and that stuck in my mind.  And then secondly, more importantly, I really thought that [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson was going to take our people back at least a good twenty years coming from, coming from Texas.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your experience in Texas had been so negative, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes, and on, on top of that that that's that--
Speaker 1: And then, I guess, another thing in keeping some perspective on some level, one of Kennedy's biggest critics was [Senator] Barry Goldwater who was a right wing conservative (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that is very true, that is--
Speaker 1: --senator from Arizona.
Speaker 2: That's, that's exactly correct, Larry [Crowe], that's exactly correct.  So that was weighing on my mind and it was at that point that I decided that I, I needed to become a lawyer and I needed to go back east and finish up school and go on to law school and represent the interests of our people.  And so I contacted Carl Anderson and I said I'm ready to come back east to go to Howard.  And in that fall of '64 [1964], I, I ended up being at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, Carl Anderson we've interviewed him before and he's a, he was a great ambassador for the school (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Was a--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --was just a great human being.
Story_ID: 267559
Speaker 1: So in fall of '64 [1964] you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did you, how, how did Howard impress you after you, you got there, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved being involved, being with all those black folks with similar, you know, value set from all over the country and different parts of the world.  The, the richness of the environment with respect to learning and, and also there are some of the most beautiful black women in the world were, were attending Howard University and so how could anybody not like Howard University.  The, the real challenge would be could you be focused enough on your studies so that you didn't, as we say, punch out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well, who were some of the personalities and professors at Howard that you remember, you know, that made that experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then graduate school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the two that really stick out, well maybe there are three, three or four, Frank [M.] Snowden [Jr.], who was the dean of the College of Liberal Arts, a classics scholar, and I learned classics from him and he was just the epitome of, of a scholarship and the, the best that we, we had to, to offer.  And then there was Nathaniel Hare [HistoryMaker Nathan Hare], sociologist, very prominent sociologist along the way, just an extraordinarily gifted, talent.  And then my professor in business, it was the Business Department at that time, a Dr. [H.] Naylor Fitzhugh, who was an extraordinary business professor who went on to be one of the first African Americans in a senior positions in corporate America at Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] and other places and, and went on to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to, to teach as well.  Those, those are really, those would be the people in, in, in undergraduate school that really stand out for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who had a meaningful impact on, on my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were a, what did you major in?
Speaker 2: Business administration--
Speaker 1: Business administration.
Speaker 2: --with a minor in economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what, was that your major in Arizona [at The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was.
Story_ID: 267560
Speaker 1: Did anything extraordinary happen at--now when you, when you went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I know it was at a time when a lot of students were volunteering down south with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you, did, did, did you know any of the students that went, went down south?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember who, no I don't remember anybody in particular who went down there at that time, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: And, in fact, I think that, aw yeah, was that that summer that, I guess, after the school year that a lot of people went down for--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for their Freedom Summer, you know, before the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --[1964] Democratic [National] Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Did anything, anything memorable from your, your Howard days that you remember that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of memorable, memorable things at, at Howard.  First and most important is I met my wife, Diane [Brown Cloud], there.  And we met on both of our first day on campus.  I was introduced to her by her roommate, Rosemary Brown [ph.] who I had met previously.  And so there were a lot of other things that happened but that's, I think that was the most important, important one.
Story_ID: 267852
Speaker 1: So you met your, your future wife [Diane Brown Cloud] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Did you get married while you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We courted for a couple of years, and I went on to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and at the end of my first year of law school and she was going to her senior year, we, we got married in the school of religion chapel [Thurman Chapel, Howard University School of Divinity] on the campus at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what year was this?
Speaker 2: This is 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: June, 1967.
Story_ID: 267853
Speaker 1: Now let me go back to undergraduate school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  You graduated from Howard--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, and what--what influenced you to become a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Well I was, well as I told you the, the assassination of President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy led me to the first thought and the fact that [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson was gonna become president.  Of course, as it turned out he was a great president for African American people, and, and, and our interests.  But just the, the sense of, I'd always been focused on issues of social justice and, and during that time at Howard, you know, not only were the Civil Rights Movement going on and gaining momentum but the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] was raging.  I became very involved in the student government and at the, my senior year ended up becoming president of the student body and so very involved in social related issues.  And I also had the opportunity to work for the late Senator Thomas [J.] Dodd, Senator Chris Dodd's father, while I was at Howard as a research assistant.  And that exposed me to the world of the United States Senate and that was an extraordinary experience.  So all of those, all of those experiences and the environment in which I found myself led me to, to the law.
Story_ID: 267854
Speaker 1: In terms of the activism on campus, I think now, was, was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stokely was around and about at those, at that time, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there, there were some others to I think from the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] group but I, I know Stokely Carmichael was the most--
Speaker 2: Stokely was the most prominent.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  He was volunteering with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC].
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And going to the South to, I think, basically Alabama, I think he was basically going to Alabama during those days, '64 [1964], '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And by '66 [1966], I think they were out of that, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they were out of that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in '66 [1966].  But now did, did you get a chance to meet some of the prominent, well, I mean, before going to law school were you influenced at all by the, the Howard's, you had all these prominent lawyers who worked on Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], you know, who were, in and around Howard or either attended Howard at one time or--
Speaker 2: Well Jim Nabrit [James Nabrit] was the, was the president of Howard at, at the time when, when I arrived and so I certainly was an admirer of, of him.  And, of course, he went on to be an ambassador [sic. deputy ambassador] to the United Nations [UN].  And, and there were others who were obviously around and about in the law school community, Herb Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], Frank [D.] Reeves, and, and others.  So but I don't, not, I can't say that, at least in the undergraduate days that, you know, they influenced me to go.  I had my decision I was going to law school and I also had made my decision I was gonna go to Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] because of its reputation around civil rights and social justice issues.
Story_ID: 267855
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started law school in '66 [1966], I guess, right, then--
Speaker 2: The fall of '66 [1966], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Any, any favorite instructors in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --experiences?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  At the top of my list would, would have to be the dean of the law school at the time the late Clarence Clyde Ferguson [Jr.] who taught civil procedure and was, ended up being a, a mentor of mine.  Next would be Oliver Morse.  Oliver "Red" Morse is what we called him, an extraordinary professor and human being.  He taught us evidence and also later on became dean of the law school for a period of time.  Dorsey [E.] Lane who taught us torts, was also an extraordinary teacher and, and someone who, who ended up meaning, meaning an awful lot to me.  Professor Newton Pacht would be another person.  So there were, there were a number of professors and you challenge me some, you know, started naming some but you forget others who were, who were important too.  It was a, overall just a, a very, very high educational experience for law school.  I loved the study of the law.  And we ended up having a group of, of people who studied together for three years.  We called ourselves the Magnificent Seven.  And in part that's because all of us graduated within the top ten of the class.  So we had a great time studying law and, and in, and enjoying law school very, very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you came out of law school in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --sixty-nine [1969].
Story_ID: 267856
Speaker 1: And what did you do when you graduated from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well in April of that year, as I was completing law school, Diane [Brown Cloud] gave birth to our twin sons, Adam [Morgan Cloud] and [HistoryMaker] Christopher [R. Cloud].  So that was a major significant and important event in, in our lives.  And as I left law school to return home to Connecticut to study for the bar, Diane took the children to her parents' place in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and, and spent the summer there so that I could focus on studying for the bar exam in Connecticut.  And I came home and I had two offers.  One was with a major law firm and the other was with the Aetna Life and Casualty Company [Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] in its law department where I had actually spent the end of my second year, summer there as an intern.  And so I ended up deciding to take the, the corporate opportunity at Aetna believing that I really wanted to have a corporate environment.  And I was there about six months, passed the bar, and ended up deciding that that really wasn't the environment that I wanted, that I really needed to be engaged in the full practice of law so as a private practitioner in a law firm.  So the law firm that had extended an invitation I had turned down, I went back to them and said "I'm ready to practice law now," and they were gracious enough to say, "Well we would, we'd love to have you," and so in January of 1970 I ended up going to a major law firm called Robinson & Cole [LLP, Hartford, Connecticut] and became the first African American lawyer there.  And, and later on it's, the first African American partner.  This is one of the two largest law firms in the State of Connecticut, at the time.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the second one, I'm sorry, the, the second law firm was--
Speaker 2: It's Robinson & Cole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --you gave another, a second one after, later one you went to another one--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No I just, I said it was one of the two largest law firms in the, in the state, is what I think I had said.
Story_ID: 267857
Speaker 1: So you were the first African American attorney at Robinson & Cole [LLP, Hartford, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well what--what was that experience like?  Was it a, you know, how did you feel going in there as the first one?
Speaker 2: Well I, I was very comfortable in who I was and what I was about and being first was, I didn't feel any additional special burden placed upon my, my shoulders.  I knew that I was the first African American lawyer and that meant that, you know, I had to be in the pursuit of excellence but it wasn't a burden for me.  And I was welcomed warmly.  It was an extraordinary place of law, of practice, and I, I had a tremendous experience there.  Learned a lot about the law there, had a few mentors who took me under their wings and, and helped me to become a good lawyer.
Speaker 1: Well who were these mentors?
Speaker 2: Well the first one, I guess, I would, I would lift up would be a fellow by the name of George Hastings and who is still a very good friend of mine today.  He, he played another important role in my life that we'll get to along the way but he was a very strong mentor.  Two other people, a fellow named Ed Hennessey [Edward F. Hennessey] who recently passed was a, just an outstanding trial lawyer.  He was so generous in his, sharing his knowledge, his understanding and experience with those of us who were young lawyers.  And then another lawyer by the name of Jim Wade [James A. Wade] who was, pract- did a lot of law practice work with, with Ed Hennessey, was also another mentor of mine who particularly helped me in the area of politics.  He was very big in politics and counsel to the Democratic Party in the state along the way.  And as I started getting involved in politics he helped, he was a tremendous benefit to me and is still a good friend today.  And then one other I would just lift up would be a fellow named Frank Chapman who was the senior partner who actually he had extended the first invitation for me to come and take a look at the firm and was a dear friend throughout, throughout the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well one of the, how long did you work for Robinson & Cole?
Speaker 2: Well I was there until, I was there seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two years as a, a partner and then I went off and I had gotten involved in a lot of community activity and then politics.  In, in 1976 I was elected to the [Connecticut] State Senate.  And left the firm because the, the state had a, a conflict of interest law, you couldn't be a partner in a major firm and serve in, in the, in the [Connecticut] General Assembly simply because the clients that were, the firms represented were all appearing before the major state agencies and it would just be a conflict of interest.  So I left with their blessing and formed my own firm with another fellow, and we formed the first African American and Latino law firm in the state called Cloud & Ibarguen.  A good friend, Albert Ibarguen, and I practiced law together for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 2: I-B-A-R-G-U-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Alberto.
Story_ID: 267858
Speaker 1: So, well, now how did you get involved in politics, I mean, it's not that, you know, big a jump, I guess, from being in law and then but--
Speaker 2: No, it isn't, it, it really isn't.  You know, this was, this was coming back home for me so and there weren't all that many black lawyers in, in, in the city [Hartford, Connecticut] and indeed in the state at that time.  One of the prominent lawyers, African American lawyers, was [Honorable] Boce [W.] Barlow [Jr.] who also just passed away a few weeks ago.  He was in the [Connecticut] State Senate at the time, he became the first African American state senator in the late, the late '60s [1960s].  And I ended up being a lawyer for a lot of community organizations and started new businesses and was involved in a lot of community organizations serving on their boards of directors with all kinds of, and was an activist lawyer, housed in a very big law firm.  And one of the things I ended up doing was to be a part of a political movement along with a fellow by the name of Wilber [G.] Smith who's deceased, who ended up becoming state senator.  We were the outsiders, new young up-starts and we ousted the established leadership.  And as a result of that I ended up becoming counsel to one of committees that he chaired, [Executive] Committee on Human Rights and Opportunities.  And I was his counsel for several years.  So I got a direct experience being in and around the state senate for several years as his counsel.  And then ran in 1974 when Ella [T.] Grasso ran for governor as the first woman governor, ran for a spot on the state's ticket, and lost to Henry Parker who became the state treasurer, elected state treasurer, there was not gonna be room for two African Americans on the state ticket at that, at that, in that period of time.  So I continued to practice law and in 1976 had the opportunity to run for the state senate to succeed Wilber Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, how many black senators were in the, the state senate at the time?
Speaker 2: Just one.
Speaker 1: Just one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Wilber Smith and that was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was the only one in the body of thirty-six when I succeeded him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about state representatives, you had like state representatives (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were there any African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were several African American state representatives from across the state.
Speaker 1: From what I understand, Hartford [Connecticut] is one-third African American and is that, is that pretty much true?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think today it's one-third African American, one-third Latino, and one-third white.
Speaker 1: In, in those days what was the percentage, what was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, it was, it was probably 60 percent white and 40 percent African American and the balance thirty, thirty, thirty five percent African Americans and the balance would be Latino, small but growing Latino community--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --going back to the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: So your constituents were pretty much all black people (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  My constituents were a mixture of the district in which I happened to represent was urban and suburban in the district so it was a mixture, it was the, the most wealthy, the most economically challenged, it was urban, it was suburban, it was big business, and it was small business.  So--a cross section of, of the community.
Story_ID: 267859
Speaker 1: Now what were the, the major issues when you were elected to the [Connecticut] State Senate?
Speaker 2: Well it, in those, at that time, the issue of community development was very, very big and access to opportunity, particularly for the African American community was a very large issue.  The issue of housing was very important as well.  And one of my major accomplishments while I was in the state senate was the creation of a separate department, a State Department of Housing.  Taxes were clearly an issue.  We're a long time state that did not have a state income tax and there was continuous battle about whether we would adopt an income tax.  And never happened on my watch although I did support it, it never happened on my watch.  But those were some of the bigger issues that were, that were on the horizon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  Was there anything difficult about, about being a state senator in Connecticut?  What's the hardest part of doing this job?
Speaker 2: I think two things.  One, it was a part-time job officially but it was really a full-time engagement and so it, it was really two jobs.  Along the way I changed from the, the, the practice of the law and ended up going back to the Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] law department in the beginning of my second term.  And, and the second thing was that it was so demanding, if you really were trying to do a good job.  It is very demanding and your family suffered from it, if you really were trying to do this job well in addition to, in addition to having a full-time economic job to provide for your family.  And at the time we had three children and, and well Diane [Brown Cloud] was left really with raising the children so its large, large part why I ended up leaving public life along the way.
Speaker 1: So how many terms did you serve?
Speaker 2: I served two terms.
Speaker 1: Two terms.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And a term would be--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were, by 1980 you were--
Speaker 2: I was, I had announced that I wasn't going to run for a third term.  I had been elected into a second term without any opposition and endorsed by both the Democratic and Republican Parties.
Speaker 1: Now that's something.  That doesn't happen all the time, does it?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I thought politics was really going to be my life, Larry [Crowe], I really did.  It was gone be my life's work.  And I ended up deciding that, that my family was, was more important.  And I remember the time that I, I decided, I was sitting there in the senate one day and I looked around the, the room and I could tell you who was going to vote on what on any given issue that came before that body and I asked myself, you know, what, what are you doing?  What are you doing?  With the children who are eleven, twin sons [Adam Morgan Cloud and HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud] were eleven, and a daughter [Robin Cloud] five years old.  You need to be going trying to find another way to make a contribution to the community and, and being able to be a part of your children growing up. 'Cause I had missed the first years of their, of their life serving community and being involved in politics.
Story_ID: 267860
Speaker 1: So I, I left it [Connecticut State Senate] and ended up having the opportunity to return to the Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] in its law department.  It was at a time when the company, through its chairman at the time, John [H.] Filer, was very interested in looking at the issues of corporate social responsibility.  And I had come to be engaged in issues around economic opportunity and social justice issues and concern about community development overall.  So the old issue of making a corporation much more responsible to its community attracted me and so I ended up going back to Aetna to head up this new area of focus within the law department and then in the company.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's interesting now, Aetna recently has been mentioned as a corporation that got it's, that insured slave vessels, you know, back in the 19th century.  And it's been, I know that there is some kind of lawsuit I think around that going on now but just the idea that a company would admit that it was, that it was involved in that back in those days and it made a lot of money off of slave trade way back when, that's a hundred years ago now, is, is interesting.  So with the company's interest in the social justice and--
Speaker 1: Yes.  It has--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a history of, it goes all the way back to actually 1800s when one of its chairmen was also governor at the same time and that always had a very public spirited leadership at the helm.  And when I came around, there was a fellow by the name of Olcott [D.] Smith who was a very philanthropic and community minded person.  And then John Filer who is known nationally for his work on the issues of corporate social responsibility and corporate philanthropy, really set the tone for a whole generation of leadership and focus on this issue and I was a, I was one of the point people to make that happen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what kind of, of things would you engage in to, in the community?
Speaker 1: Well first of all, as a, in the law department I ended up being involved with being sure that some of our business from the law department would go, go to African American lawyers and African American law firms around the country.  It's a lot of money that was being provided to lawyers representing the Aetna as defense lawyers.  So we made that happen.  That that initially, that program ended up becoming the centerpiece for the American Bar Association's [ABA] work on minorities in the profession and Dennis [W.] Archer was chairman of the ABA commission on minorities in the, in the profession [1986 Commission on Opportunities for Minorities in the Profession].  And then we did an awful lot of work around low and moderate income housing across the country, rebuilding neighborhoods in several major cities across the country.  As well as investing in minority-owned businesses.
Story_ID: 267921
Speaker 1: You're with Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] and involved, involved in various community activities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --development activities and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: One of the things that I was so pleased to have an opportunity to play a significant role in was the coming together of the African American church and Aetna to create an economic union for the first time in the history of, of the African American church in the country.  The Congress of National Black Churches [sic. Conference of National Black Churches (CNBC)] was interested in developing an insurance program that would allow its churches to have property and casualty insurances.  As you can imagine there was a lot of red lining going on over the course of the years and the, the issue of both the African American church representing some sixty thousand in churches across the country were directed toward Aetna and directed toward me to try to figure out whether there was something that they could do together.  And I was a part with some colleagues at the Aetna in putting together the first agency called the Church Insurance Partnership Agency, CIPA.  And I ended up being the first managing partner of that, of that entity for about two and a half years.  And it was just an extraordinary experience for me to engage in some of the most wonderful religious leaders in our country from within the African American community.  And so I learned a lot.  And it also drove me to wanna seek some more of my own knowledge with respect to scripture and religious understanding and so I ended up returning to theological school at the Hartford Seminary [Hartford, Connecticut] and secured my masters of art in religious studies as a result of that particular experience.
Speaker 1: Now this is around 1990 (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No this is--
Speaker 1: Earlier?
Speaker 2: --this is between eighty, this is between 1984 and 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984] and '86 [1986].  Who were some of the, the religious leaders that kind of inspired you?  I mean, can you give us the names of some (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, sure.  [HistoryMaker] Bishop John [Hurst] Adams and Reverend Marshall [L.] Shepard [Jr.] out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Bishop [Roy L. H.] Winbush of the Church of God in Christ out of Louisiana would be three of the people that I would lift up immediately who were very important in the work that we were trying to do and also important to me personally, impacting me in terms of my own views in, in developing values set around community and the church.
Story_ID: 267922
Speaker 1: What aspect of theology intrigued you the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think it was the fact that there were so many people who have a deep sense of faith that that we're a part of a, a broader universal understanding.  And that at least the three referred to great religions as referred to and by so many people, Christianity, Judaism and, and Islam all have very common principles with respect to humanity and how we're to treat one another, how we're to treat those who are challenged by their own circumstance and environment, and yet we can be so far apart from those common understandings represented by, by those three great religions.  And never so more meaningful to see this than in Jerusalem [Israel], where you got the holiest site, the church of the, where Christ was, was laid [Church of the Holy Sepulchre], to the, the Western Wailing Wall [Western Wall], to one of Islam's great mosques, Dome of the Rock, and where you can go from, from point A to point B to point C in a matter of minutes walking.  And yet, there are so far apart in terms of our understanding of everyday life and how we should be treating each other.  So that's to me the most intriguing and yet it represents still a powerful understanding and vehicle to bring people together.  And so I still have of, I have of a deep faith that religion can be a positive force in our world even though many times in our history and even today it is such a separator and a cause of so much pain, violence, and war.
Speaker 1: Now you, you visited Jerusalem, now didn't you, I, I remember something in relation to, to the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration where you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you went to--
Speaker 2: I was with President Carter and a delegation to oversee, monitor, the first Palestine elections, which I believe is back in 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, all right.  So this is when Jimmy Carter was--
Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear).
Speaker 1: It wasn't in the Carter administration--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --so I just wanna make sure--
Speaker 2: No, that's correct.
Speaker 1: --that people realize that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: As he was head of The Carter Center [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  For, you know, from which, which position he's done a lot of--
Speaker 2: Oh, tremendous.
Speaker 1: --social activism around the world.
Speaker 2: Yes, tremendous leadership, tremendous human being.
Story_ID: 267923
Speaker 1: So in 1986 now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was your intention, did you think about be, going into the ministry or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never really thought about that.  I, there was not, it was more educational understanding for me personally, something I had always wanted to do going all the way back to college days but I was so fully engaged in what I was dealing with in my studies and in student government and working for the late Senator Thomas [J.] Dodd, I really didn't have an opportunity to pursue that, that interest.  And so I, I did have an opportunity to pursue it along the way and also became very involved in the governance of Hartford Seminary [Hartford, Connecticut] and ended up becoming chairman of the board at some point as well for several years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well how did you immediately put the, the, your knowledge to, to use when you finished the, the seminary?
Speaker 2: Well, I it, the journey for the masters of arts degree was a several year journey doing it on a part-time basis because I had after the, being the managing partner of the, of the Church Insurance Partnership Agency [CIPA] I was asked to come back to Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] full time to become the vice president of corporate public involvement and head of the Aetna Foundation in late '86 [1986].  So and it was about that time that I also started down a track of, of securing a masters which finally I secured in 1992.  So as it impacted me in my own day to day life it just enhanced my understanding around commonality of, of, of themes across the different sectors of society or across all of the divisors, I call it a race, ethnicity, ethnicity culture, and faith and helped me in my decision making when I was head of the Aetna Foundation and the other community the both local and national that I was involved with.  It gave, it's given me a different understanding of, of meeting people where they were at a point in given time and, and have them, and, and then work toward commonality and it was an important lesson for me, important experience.
Story_ID: 267924
Speaker 1: You eventually became involved with the National Council for Christians and Jews [sic. National Conference of Christians and Jews (NCCJ)] and did, when, when did you first become involved with that organization?
Speaker 2: Well I was, ended up heading up the Aetna Foundation for several years and in 1992 I decided that I wanted to go back to practicing law.  I had been at Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] for fifteen years all told, and in that particular part of my journey with Aetna and, and, and just wanted a different environment, wanted out of the corporate environment at the time.  And my partners at Robinson & Cole [LLP, Hartford, Connecticut] invited me to return home.  And so I did and that's where I thought I was going to be, I had become chairman of the new foundation in the Hartford [Connecticut] area focused on children's issues called the Children's Fund [of Connecticut].  And so that's what I thought I was going to do, y'know go back to having a corporate and, and community practice.  And, and then in ninety--late '93 [1993], I received a call from a headhunter in Chicago [Illinois] it was just before Thanksgiving weekend.  And she said "I have talked to a number of people around the country and your name keeps coming up as the person that oughta become the next president of the National Conference [for Community and Justice]." Which it had, what it had become to be called simply the National Conference founded as the National Conference of Christians and Jews. And, "Would you be interested? It's an old human relations organization founded in 1927 and, and it's got some sixty regional offices in thirty some odd states around the country and, and oh, by the way it's headquartered in New York City [New York, New York]."  And I said, I said, "You must be kidding to think that I would leave my beloved Connecticut Valley to go down and work in New York City."  I said, "I like New York but I'm not going down to work and live there."  And I said, "But send me some information and I will try to find you an appropriate candidate."  And so she did and at some point over the Thanksgiving weekend I opened it up and what I opened up was the 1992 annual report.  And while I had known of the National Conference of Christians and Jews, we had a very active regional office here in Connecticut and led by some very prominent old friends of mine that I knew, I didn't even know what they did but I figured, you know, Christians and Jews are getting together it must be a good organization and, and that's how I viewed it.  Well I opened up this 1992 annual report, on the inside cover was the mission statement and the mission statement said, "And this National Conference, founders of the National Conference of Christians and Jews in 1927 as a human relations organization dedicated to fighting bias and bigotry and racism among all people and promoting understanding and respect among all people through advocacy, conflict, resolution, and education."  I said, "No, this can't be what this organization is about.  How could this be what its mission is?"  Well that mission spoke to me primarily because all of my life I've always been about trying to build community across all of the divides, the race, ethnicity, culture, and, and faith.  And, and in a quiet moment I said to myself, Sandy Cloud [HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] you oughta take your experience in the law and in public life and the corporate world and theological education and community building and go down to New York and, and focus on advancing this mission.  And so Diane [Brown Cloud] and I had a conversation about all of that and she said, "You do what your, where your heart wants to take you."  And so I ended up going down to New York eleven years ago in '94 [1994] and extraordinary run, I just retired from NCCJ at the end of December.  And it was an extraordinary journey for me and hope I did some good that was '94 [1994] to, to '04 [2004], '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to '04 [2004].
Story_ID: 267925
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues and problems that you worked on as the CEO of National Council for Community Justice, now it's called, right?
Speaker 2: National Conference for Community and Justice [NCCJ] we changed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) National Conference, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we changed the name in '98 [1998] as people were not convinced that we had gotten the name right in the first change, which I was not a part of, but simply calling it the National Conference for a lot of people didn't mean anything.  The National Conference, and then you say National Conference of what?  And you'd go back to its founding name [National Conference of Christians and Jews] and that tended to exclude people who wanted to be involved in fighting bias, bigotry, and racism.  So the first thing I had to do was just be sure that internally the people around the country had a really deeper understanding of our really broad and deep mission around fighting bias, bigotry, and racism.
Speaker 1: Now why, well, the obvious question, I guess, I should ask is why did the National Conference for Christians and Jews change their name to National Conference, why did they drop the Christians and Jews from the title in the first place?
Speaker 2: Well the reason was because the country had become much more diverse than it was in 1927.  The issues around discrimination had broadened beyond Christians and Jews.  And you had all kinds of people who wanted to be a part of this broad and deep mission that we had of fighting bias, bigotry, and racism among all people, broadening understanding and respect among all people, and so there were a lot of people who felt excluded from the organizational work because of the name.  And secondly, a lot of people felt it, it was a faith organization, a religious organization when it never was.  So they changed the name to be more inclusive to recognize that we were in a very different world and environment today in, in 1990s.  That was why the name was changed.  And then we did a further iteration and hopefully got it right in, in 1998 when we spent a year and a half trying to get through, the name right and end up coming up with the National Conference for Community and Justice but still being able to use the acronym NCCJ.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well that's, that's, that answers a big question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 267926
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues that you worked on, or problems that you worked on [as CEO of the National Conference for Community and Justice (NCCJ)]?
Speaker 2: Well mission understanding, strategic thinking and planning, the corporate identity, bringing technology to the organization and trying to raise its visibility and profile.  We developed a very strong programmatic emphasis and a, and a research unit and a public policy presence in Washington [D.C.] which we not, did not have so that we could work on issues of hate crimes.  We were very involved in the whole church, African American church burning issue.  We then were invited by President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton to organize a White House summit [President Clinton's One American Meeting with Religious Leaders] bringing together all of the different faith leaders in the country to work on his national initiative on race.  And through that work were able to have a, a broad section of the religious community in this country declare racism a sin, a problem of the heart, an issue that needs to be eradicated.  And now we're dealing with disparity of healthcare issues across racial and ethnic lines.  And also trying to be sure that gay and lesbian people in this country have equal opportunity in terms of reaching their full potential in our, our society.  And post-9/11 [September 11, 2001] we did a, the cutting edge work in trying to reach out to the Arab-Muslim and South Asian communities that for the first time as groups felt the sting of discrimination and, and hate crimes in, in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I know one of the first issues that probably, that popped up that I remember, I mean well you, you have an ongoing mission but I remember there was a sort of a crises in the, early '90s [1990s] around comments that [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan made from the Nation of Islam, Islam's pulpit or, or rostrum around Jews and there was, there were a series of meetings held with blacks and Jews around the country.  Was the organization involved in holding those meetings or--
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to get involved in that set of issues, I was strongly cautioned not to.  And the principal reason being that no matter what you did in that issue, one part of the constituency or stakeholders that we represented would not understand it, would not understand what we were doing.  And the second reason that there was a lot of concern as to whether you could trust whatever conversation you had and what you agreed upon whether they would be, whether they would be held.  So we didn't.  What we did do was to be sure that we had promoted dialogue within communities across the country with respect to some of the issue that had been raised between Farrakhan and, and the Jewish community in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in regards to the church burnings what, what did, what did the organization do in relationship to those (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we were, we were out again, asked by the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], to be involved in promoting dialogue and understanding about what was going on in the community, trying to be sure that from an advocacy point of view that community leadership in those communities were going to be about speaking out against this kind of activity as a, as an issue particularly among the faith leadership but not limited to the faith community leadership in, in the country.
Story_ID: 267927
Speaker 1: And likewise, I guess, in the, in the late '90s [1990s] or it may even be in the two--I'm getting my--there were, there were, there were, well, I guess, a whole series of hate crimes and it's, I remember one in particular in Chicago [Illinois] where in Evanston, Illinois, where a, a man [Benjamin Nathaniel Smith] shot members of various Jewish congregations, they were coming home from the Sabbath, he shot the basketball coach [Ricky Byrdsong] at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], black basketball coach, and he shot any number of people, you know, because they were either black or Asian or Jewish or something and- and, it was a big, you know, a lot of discussion about hate crimes and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --misunderstanding.  Did, were you, were you all [National Conference for Community and Justice (NCCJ)] involved in that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I'm not, I'm sure that our, our Chicago regional office was involved in, in, in that particular incident.  Our principal engagement was around dialogue across all the divides and advocacy.  And so we ended up being sure that hate crime legislation got addressed and passed in, in different states across the country and, of course, we're still working on hate crimes legislation at the congressional level to cover gender and sexual orientation issues.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now these issues often come out in incidents of, of not only community violence against itself, you know, different, various aspects of the community in, in war with, with the other aspects but also in terms of the police, you know.  I know in Chicago there's a, a big issue around police brutality--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of blacks, gays--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and anyone that, anyone that's different gets more, seems to be a victim of more police brutality than anybody else, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's, it's improved over the years.  We were very much involved in the issue of police community relationships particularly in the '80s [1980s] as an organization across the country.  I think we made a lot of progress along those lines.  But as new people particularly come into communities from different parts of the world, the cultural differences, and culture understandings that some of us may have and understand others who are different and don't, and so a lot of conflict continues to happen.  It's happening more than I would like to suggest that it is in the Arab-Muslim and South Asian communities today particularly in the post-9/11 [September 11, 2001] environment.  There is still racial and ethnic profiling going on within the African American and Latino community.  And you may recall there was, we were almost there in getting a racial profiling bill [End Racial Profiling Act of 2001 (ERPA)] in the Congress passed just before 9/11 happened.  And when 9/11 happened there was a, a great deal of concern as to whether that would restrict law enforcement agencies in being able to detain people who might be suspect and involved in terrorist acts against the United States.  So that's the, that's the situation we find ourselves today.  There's still work to be done with respect to police community relations.  And the real challenge is to how do we continually inform and educate our police people to be able to have the understanding around diversity and indifference so that they can do a better job and not injure people simply because of the fact that they're different.
Speaker 1: Now does, does the organization sponsor trainings and workshops?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We have a very heavy engagement around workplace diversity training, as well as youth leadership training.  We operate well over fifty leadership development training programs called ANYTOWN in many communities across this country where we take young people, generally in high school, and bring them out into a country, rural camp like setting and across all divides and of ethnicity and race and teach them about racism and bias and bigotry.  And, and they, they, they are transformed as young people and end up becoming better citizens and advocates for bringing people together.
Story_ID: 267868
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights then of, of the ten years that you were the head of the National Council for Community--National Conference for Community [and] Justice [NCCJ]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well I would say the organizing the organization in a way that that it had a more unified voice so that it could speak out on the issues involving bias, bigotry, and racism at a general level.  Secondly, the work that we did with President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton and his national initiative on, on race was a, certainly a major highlight in getting all of this diverse religious leadership all around this country to, to declare racism a sin, a problem, of the heart, an issue that has to be eradicated--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --and the programming that came out of that all across the country.  Because as you probably know, the issue of racism and race relations has gone to a back burner and we need the religious leadership in this country to have it, have it as a more central issue today if we're ever going to solve the race relations problem in our country particularly as we become a more diverse country.  So that was a pretty important work.  And then the work around post-9/11 [September 11, 2001] as it relates to reaching out to the communities of, of Arabs, Muslims, and South Asians where, you know, before 9/11 they were our neighbors like anyone else, they were our, our workmates and they never really suffered the common discrimination that African Americans or Latinos experienced and so on September the 12th they wake up and they find out that they're the new victims of discrimination in our country.  And I know we've done a lot of cutting edge work with them trying to get them to understand their rights, being advocates for their rights, and trying to promote dialogue and understanding about, about Islam.  The other thing that we, I'm very proud of doing, although painful, is being sure that in this new environment that the organization and other major nonprofit organizations dealing in this arena are, are stable.  And so we've had to do a lot of transformational work around being right sizing the organization and unfortunately closing some offices that, you know, just couldn't make it anymore so that the others could, could survive and, and continue to grow, painful leadership and management work.  But that's been done as well and so I, I, I retired knowing that this organization now has got a bright future.
Speaker 1: So the climate of the country, I mean, we're, we're involved in the war in the Iraq [Iraq War] now there's a, there's also a war on terrorism [War on Terror] going on and we have newer, new policies, the [President George Walker Bush] administration has new policies towards how and some people, some people feel rights are being threatened.  What, how do you feel about that having just come, you know, from this intense involvement with trying to promote understanding and, and justice?
Speaker 2: Well I have a major concern about the rights of people being engaged wrongly and abused and misused.  I mean, as a lawyer, my own principles and values set forth protection of those rights.  It's something I've fought for along the way.  Yes, do I understand and appreciate that we're, we've got a war on terrorism, and yes do we need to be vigilant about that, we do.  But even the courts today are recognizing that we still have a [U.S.] Constitution and a [U.S.] Bill of Rights within which we must act in the interests of all of our people.  And so I am one who believes strongly that we must come down on the side of protecting those rights even though they may be people that are involved in terrorist acts against us.
Story_ID: 267869
Speaker 1: We always ask this question what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I want us to, in this new global-oriented, technology-oriented environment, to have a continued appreciation how important the value of education is for our children.  That we don't become marginalized as a people because we don't have a, a constant engagement in the value of education for our children and be sure that our children have as much opportunity to receive the best education that they can.  And that we enforce the leaders of our communities to be sure that African American and other children, who may be challenged in some way in their environment, have the best opportunity for, for education that they so richly deserve.  I also have the aspiration around economic opportunity and that there is still a, a marketplace in which we operate, where there is still a lot of discrimination and not a level playing field for African American people to participate fully in the economic opportunities of our, of our country and I think we've gotta press forward on that despite whatever cause there might be against affirmative action.  I don't think that that level playing field has occurred yet and I think that we still have the opportunity to work at being sure that we get our fair share of the economic pie.  And then finally I, I think that the whole issue of how are we engaged with a much more diverse society.  Is it important for us to do that, we cannot be isolated as a people, that we must reach out and engage those who are different from us, those who are newer to the country than what, what we represent.  That we've got a obligation, responsibility to be sure that we advocate for others rights who are, who are different, who are newer to the country and embrace them in a way that we can make community better for everyone not just some of us but, but, but all of us.
Story_ID: 267870
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done so far, and you're still relatively young by our, our interview standards, what would you consider to be--wait, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think if there's one thing that I probably would love the opportunity to revisit is to have been able to spend a little bit more time with my children and my family as they were growing up in their, their tender years.  Fortunately, I came into their lives as still young enough so that our, our relationship is very strong and, and very whole and very loving and, and, and very rich.  But I've had the, the opportunity to be very blessed and into working in several sectors of our society at senior leadership positions in our society across all those sectors and I have enjoyed the journey of diversity, diverse opportunity, and I've learned from each one of them.  Could I have done things a little bit better each point along the way? Of course.  But when I look back at the whole I, I like to believe I've served my family well and, and also served community well and will try to continue whatever time is left for me going forward to serve community even better with the knowledge and experience that I have.
Story_ID: 267871
Speaker 1: In that regard, what are your future plans?  'Cause you're still, as I said, young enough to do some other things, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm doing some transitional work with NCCJ [National Conference for Community and Justice] but at the end of that period I'm returning home and going to be involved in what I call the renaissance of Greater Hartford [Connecticut] and play a, a role in real estate development and business development and, and try to play a positive role in, in bringing this ever growing diverse community together so that it can reach its fuller potential as a, as a community in our society today.
Story_ID: 267872
Speaker 1: I know we touched on your family, but tell us a little bit about your family.
Speaker 2: Well, my wife, Diane [Brown Cloud] of some thirty-nine years is an educator and is involved in as a principal of an elementary school and has been for several years.  I'm so proud of her because she raised our children and then went back to school and secured her master's [degree] and then went on to get her doctorate in education up at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and spent four years on the road doing that and so I'm so very proud of her and the difference that she's making in, in the lives of young people every day and it's just an extraordinary achievement.  She's been a wonderful wife and a wonderful mother and to our children.  Our, our sons Adam [Morgan Cloud] and [HistoryMaker] Christopher [R. Cloud] are, are now husbands and Adam is a father and Chris is hopefully about ready to become a, a father.  And they're both engaged in, in important work.  Adam is an investment banker involved in real estate development and very involved in community and the politics in life with the Hartford [Connecticut] community.  And Chris has been president and CEO of AMISTAD America [Incorporated], the educational schooner [Freedom Schooner Amistad].  It's a story about friendship as we all know and I'm so proud of the work that he's done to bring that rich educational tool to the country.  And our daughter, Robin [Cloud], is a historic preservationist in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and as a young person living a, a full and engaging life.  And, and is also an artist.  As a, a lover of the arts and music and in and, and art work itself.  And so we're, we're very proud, I feel very blessed to have 'em and now I'm a grandfather so I'm, I am I'm in, I'm in good space--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at this moment.
Story_ID: 267873
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point, and I don't know if you've thought about this, but what, what would you consider to be your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Well that I was a good husband, a good father, a good family man that tried to always inspire and, and protect and have other members of the extended family reach their full potential as, as human beings.  And that I served community across all the divides of race, ethnicity, culture, and faith and tried to make my community and the country and the world a better place for all of us.
Story_ID: 267874
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you achieve and, and become a lawyer and so forth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they did.  My mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] and father [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] lived full lives and my father died in 1996 at eighty-six years old and he was a simple, humble but proud man.  I learned so much from him and his value set, never was able to be as good as he was in so many ways but he was my hero and my guiding post.  And my mother was the gentle star in my heart and she died at eighty-nine in, in August of 2001.  Both of them had the opportunity to see their, their grandchildren grow up and which for, you know, just some African American families they don't, don't quite have that opportunity in terms of the time in which they were raised and, and grew up for them to live to eighty-six and eighty-nine is a, is, is really an achievement for African American mortality standards.  So, they were awfully proud of, of, of my work and the work of what they saw their, their grandchildren being able to do and, and I'm so delighted and feel so very blessed that they were able to do so.
Story_ID: 267875
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we haven't asked you about that you want to mention before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, Larry [Crowe].  I think you've done an extraordinary job in covering a life span and the different areas of my journey, quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who is simply trying to build community across all the divides and to make this world a better place.  As I like to say, for all of us and not just some of us.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 267876
Speaker 1: This is a poster that was made for my first election or run to the [Connecticut] State Senate from the 2nd Senatorial District in the Hartford [Connecticut] area.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) just a little bit.  (Unclear).  Okay.  Go ahead.  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: We can do this with him (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.  (Unclear) go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of, of me with our three children, Adam [Morgan Cloud], [HistoryMaker] Christopher [R. Cloud], and Robin [Cloud], down by the Connecticut seashore.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: These are photos of me and my daughter, Robin, with President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton at a Christmas holiday reception at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) slide that frame towards you, Larry [Crowe], so that, a little, okay, yeah.  (Unclear) keep going.  (Unclear) okay.  Got it.  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is me at the eighteenth hole sitting on the [Swilcan] Bridge at the Old Course at St. Andrews, [St. Andrews, Fife] Scotland.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is me and Diane [Brown Cloud] on our wedding day walking out of the school of religion chapel [Thurman Chapel, Howard University School of Divinity] on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] having just gotten married.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: You got married right there on, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) heard so many great stories about it.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's unbelievable.  This is me with President Clinton on, I believe, a September morning, I wanna say September 17th [sic. September 11, 1998], it was the morning that he apologized to the American people for the incident with Miss [Monica] Lewinsky and I'm sitting at a table with him with a number of other religious and faith leaders from around the country.
Speaker 1: It was a good idea to--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is we, me with President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.].  I'm a young state senator in the White House.
Speaker 2: Is that 1970--
Speaker 1: Uh--
Speaker 2: Between '76 [1976] and '80 [1980]?
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, we were both in office at the same time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Call it the Carter years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The joy of youth.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: This is me when I was a youngster, I guess, I was, I don't know, seven or eight years old at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a, a photo of my mother [Inez Morgan Cloud] and father [Sanford Cloud, Sr.] and I believe this was probably at their fiftieth anniversary celebration.
Speaker 1: So that would be what year?
Speaker 2: Let's see, '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture, a photo of me and my younger brother [Gilbert Cloud] and younger sister [Janice Cloud Senturk] when we were children.
