Story_ID: 635192
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Patrick Devlin.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: James E. Clyburn, J-A-M-E-S, E., of course that's for Enos, E-N-O-S, C-L-Y-B-U-R-N [HistoryMaker James Clyburn].
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born July 21, 1940 in Sumter, South Carolina on Sunday afternoon at 4:00 p.m.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, currently representative of the 6th Congressional District of South Carolina and my title is probably congressman.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date I (laughter) believe is--what's this May?
Speaker 1: Twentieth, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twentieth, 2014 [May 20, 2014].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office at the Cannon Office Building, Room 242, on what is called, commonly called leadership row here in the Cannon Office Building [Cannon House Office Building, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 635193
Speaker 1: Now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I suspect my favorite food, as any other southerner, would be fried fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color as can be told to you today is gray.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is probably Christmas, it's when I get with family members and celebrate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Hilton Head, South Carolina [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think my favorite saying would be South Carolina's motto: "While I breathe, I hope."
Story_ID: 635194
Speaker 1: All right now I'm gonna ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Enos Clyburn] side but separately, and then we'll put them together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Almeta Dizzley Clyburn, A-L-M-E-T-A, D-I-Z-Z-L-E-Y, C-L-Y-B-U-R-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mom was born on March 22, 1916, she was born in Lee County, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about the history on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace 'em and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew her father who was John D. Dizzley [John Dizzley].  I knew her mother, Everline Grant Dizzley, but except for the tracing that was done by the Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] group out of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I don't know anything else.  I had all of that done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there are no stories passed down in the family about what the family was doing, say in the 19th century or--?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.
Speaker 1: No stories about the, about emancipation from slavery or what it was like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we never had any of that on my, on my mother's side, a little bit on my father's side but never any- anything like that on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father was the offspring of a Cherokee woman and a mulatto and that--we've heard stories about that, but never anything of any substance that was passed down.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now do you have a sense that they were--I mean, do they have a lot of money?  Were they poor, or were they--did they work in the town or in the country?  I mean, do you have any sense about that?
Speaker 2: My mother's father was land poor.  He had a very large farm, but was basically a minister and he never accumulated wealth beyond the land.  Of course, after he passed away, the land passed down to (unclear), their sons, and they pretty much sold it all off.  There's not much left.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he had this land but he really--he didn't really get the most out of it or--?
Speaker 2: Well, because of his religious beliefs.  He planted a lot of cotton but that's not the way he got wealthy.  In South Carolina, you needed to plant tobacco.  He would never plant tobacco because he thought of smoking as a sin, and therefore he wouldn't plant tobacco, so while everybody around him was making a lot of money with tobacco allotments, my grandfather would not participate.  Of course, when he died his son James [James Dizzley] who was the oldest, immediately started selling tobacco (laughter), but eventually James took ill, nobody else did the farming and so all the land got sold off.
Story_ID: 635195
Speaker 1: Now what denomination was your [maternal] grandfather [John Dizzley]?
Speaker 2: My father [Enos Clyburn] was a pastor, my grandfather and father--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --were pastors in the Church of God.  In fact, my grandfather, my mother's father brought my father into the Church of God movement many years before he and my mother [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] were married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us a little about the Church of God and what it's about?
Speaker 2: The Church of God is basically Pentecostal [sic.].  I always refer to it as a fundamental Christian church.  It is headquartered in Anderson, Indiana and it's like all other churches basically in the South.  My dad--of course, the churches were segregated.  They were always integrated at their national meetings, but back in South Carolina there's a white Church of God which was across town from the black Church of God that I grew up in, but every June they had meetings in their headquarters in Anderson, Indiana and my first interactions with integrated groups were in Anderson, Indiana at our national meetings.
Speaker 1: Now where is Anderson, you know, I guess it was close to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in the southern part of Indiana, I don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Near the Ohio River or some place (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I've went there with my dad several times but I never focused geographically where it was.  I've been there since--I remember I was a baseball fan--I guess I still am, but baseball was part of my life growing up and the one thing I always remembered about Anderson, Indiana was that it was the birthplace of Carl Erskine who was a star baseball pitcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] and all black kids when I was growing up were Dodger fans, basically because of Jackie Robinson.
Story_ID: 635196
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] say about growing up?  I mean, or what was your sense of what her growing up was like?
Speaker 2: Well my mom was a very interesting woman.  I don't know how she did it but my grandfather [John Dizzley], her father was all about the land, farming.  Back in those days every--all the famers had big families.  There were thirteen children.  My mom--for how she did it, I don't know.  She talked her grandfather [sic.] into letting her go away to school.  She became the first one in the family to finish high school because they grew up, they got old enough they worked on the farm--that was it.   Now a lot of them you know to escape their life, left and went north.  My mom never did.  She went to Camden [South Carolina], twenty-two miles away and lived in with a family.  That's basically looked upon today as a Chicago [Illinois] family but they're rooted in Camden, South Carolina, the Dibbles.  She lived with the Dibbles, kept house for them and in return they sent her across the street to Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina].  When she went there it was called Browning home [Browning Model Home and Industrial School].  In later years, it became Browning Home Mather Academy [Browning Industrial Home and Mather Academy], and even later years after I graduated from what was then Mather Academy, it became Boylan-Haven-Mather Academy after combining with a, with a similar school in Florida [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].  So my mom went there through the tenth grade.  When she and my dad [Enos Clyburn] decided to get married, she decided to transfer from Mather Academy across the street to the public high school which was Jackson.  Now the reason for that was because Mather Academy being a private school, sponsored by the United Methodist Church required twelve years to graduate.  During this time, the public schools went through the eleventh grade, so in order to finish a year early and get married, she went across to Mather Academy.
Speaker 1: You mean to Jackson?
Speaker 2: Right across.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To Jackson High School [Camden, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so she graduated from Jackson High School after going to Mather through the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know--well, one question first of all.  The Dibbles she stayed with would they related to Eugene Dibble [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.], the doctor at Tuskegee [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Those are Chicago Dibbles we're talking about?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: They're related to the Robert Taylor.  And the Taylors and all of them (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, the Palmers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And quite frankly if my memory serves, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett is in that family.
Speaker 1: She certainly is, she is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, yeah, that's interesting so, 'cause they do have roots in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Sure, I knew all of 'em.  In fact, they were big property owners.  The main street in Camden is Broad Street and they own more property on Broad Street than anybody else back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, now did--Jackson High School was a colored high school, right, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--was there--now Jackson went to the eleventh grade. Do you know if the white high school went to twelfth?
Speaker 2: No, all public schools went to eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: O- okay, so all of 'em.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But the private schools went to the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, you know, so if you finished the eleventh grade in Jackson, you could qualify to go to college (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you were high school--you were a high school graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, all right.  So your mother got married, you know, after she graduated?
Speaker 2: My mother got married, she married my dad.  She was my dad's second wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His first wife [Rebecca Rambert Clyburn] died in childbirth.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did your mother--was she at this point, or did she have a--or even before that, this point, did she have aspirations for some career or anything that she wanted to do that she, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, she wanted an education and she basically wanted to go to school, and I'm told that after she and my dad were married, they basically accepted a call to pastor in Sumter [South Carolina] because Morris College was there and they wanted to go a place where they could both go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so that was the reason for going to Sumter where they went before I was born.
Story_ID: 635197
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna go to your father's side and then we'll talk about how they met.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Enos Lloyd Clyburn, E-N-O-S, Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D, Clyburn [Enos Clyburn].
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My dad was born on December 23, 1897.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in--where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Kershaw County, South Carolina, near Camden [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: How do you spell Ker- Ker- Kershaw?
Speaker 2: Kershaw is spelled K-E-R-S-H-A-W.  In fact--
Speaker 1: Kershaw County, okay.
Speaker 2: --Kershaw is the county, the county seat is Camden.  Though there is a town in Kershaw County named Kershaw, and near that town is another little town that is no longer incorporated, Clyburn [ph.], and that's where my dad was born.  I'm sure that Clyburn is named after the plantation that was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, once again, how far back can you trace your father's family and what are the stories about that side?
Speaker 2: Well, there's some interesting stories about my father's side of the family.  My dad always told us that his mother [Phoebe Lloyd Clyburn] died when he was two or three years old, and his father died two months before he was born.  Now he always qualified that by saying, "Or so they told me."  My dad never thought that to be the real case, so when I was running for [U.S.] Congress in 1992, I was invited to speak for the family and friends day at St. Matthews United Methodist Church [Camden, South Carolina], the church that my dad's family grew up in.  When I got there for the service, my cousin--one of my cousins said to me, "You know, this is gone be real historic, you're getting electing to Congress.  I'm sure you're gonna win, and it's gone be very historic."  I said, "Yeah, it'll be, I'll be the first black person elected to Congress from South Carolina in this century."  He said, "No, no, no, that's not what I mean," and he says, "Do you know who the last black congressman was?"  And I said, "Yes, George Washington Murray."  He says, "I mean, do you really know who he was?"  And I start telling him all that I knew about George Washington Murray.  He said, "Well, did you know that he was family?"  And I said, "No, I didn't know that, where'd you get that from?"  He said, "Well, I don't think mama's coming to the church today, she was not feeling well when I left home.  But you ought to talk to her.  Because George Washington Murray had a brother named Gist Murry [ph.], who used to live with- without my parents and grandparents."  So I just took note of that and a few days later I was rushing from the church that day, so I didn't have an opportunity to go by to visit with his mom, but a few days later I called her, and she was pretty reticent over the phone and I couldn't get much information out of her and, so I put it off a while and I called her back several days later, and it was in the evening and I told her that I really needed her to answer these questions for me, and after pressing her a bit she said to me, "James [HistoryMaker James Clyburn], you got to understand that back then a lot of things happened without the benefit of marriage."  Now I understood what that meant, and so I didn't press her anymore.
Story_ID: 635198
Speaker 1: But at the subsequent family reunion, we were there in Camden at the DuPont plant [DuPont May Plant, Camden, South Carolina] that had a recreational facility, and that's where we were meeting, and we just started talking about the family and that sort of thing.  And, of course, they always had me listed in the Phoebe Clyburn [Phoebe Lloyd Clyburn] wing.  Now, Phoebe was my dad's name--my dad's mother's name, P-H-O-E-B-E, so I started asking about Phoebe, who knew about Phoebe, because I couldn't--my dad [Enos Clyburn] would never talk about her, and there was a lady there, Ms. Mary Montgomery [ph.], who was in the family.  I think she was a Lloyd and had married a Montgomery, and I noticed she was very quiet down the picnic bench and she kept looking at me.  And, so finally I gathered that she was trying to say something to me.  So I got up and went down to where she was sitting and she said, almost a whisper, "Stop by my house one day and I'll tell you who Phoebe is.  So I knew Phoebe, and I knew your father's father."  She never said Phoebe's husband, she said, "Stop by house one day and I'll tell you."  My wife [Emily England Clyburn] kept pressing me to go by and talk to Mary Montgomery.  I kept putting it off, and finally when she passed away my wife chastised me a bit, but I went back to the cousin or aunt, actually it was great aunt, and her son, of course, my cousin and he told me that there was somebody else that I could talk to.  I did go to talk to the--somebody else and she was obviously up in age and remembering some things that didn't make a whole lot of sense to me.  So I never was able to get the real skinny on who my grandfather was, but I hired--when I had all of this stuff to be done for me and my wife, we could take everything back on Phoebe, back to her parents [Hettie Salmond Lloyd and Enoch Lloyd]--we could never find who my father's father was.  Now I had--one of my staff members, Hope Derrick, decided to take it upon herself to she (laughter), I paid whatever you pay to go on this ancestry.com or something.  So she said she was, she was going to take it upon herself to find her, and one day she same to me and she says, "I'm done with this. I'm not pursuing this anymore."  Well, she ran across information that seemed, that seemed to indicate that all--my father and his two brothers were born as my, as my great aunt said, without the benefit of marriage.  So my father was the youngest of the three boys.  Charlie [Charlie Clyburn] was a brother (background noise) and William [William Clyburn, Jr.], the oldest was William.  I knew both of 'em.  He always told me that his father's name was William [William Clyburn, Sr.], but the only William that we could find was his brother William.  We could not find anybody, any other William back behind that.  What we're seeing, what Hope thought she found was that George Washington Murray or his brother Gist [Gist Murray (ph.)] were the--one of them was the father--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of these three boys.  So one part of my family thinks that George Washington Murray was a great uncle, another part feels that George Washington Murray was really my granddad--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --my daddy's dad.
Story_ID: 635199
Speaker 1: George Washington Murray, from what I was reading he spent his latter years in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: He died in Chicago and there's a cemetery [Lincoln Cemetery, Chicago, Illinois] where he's buried and the marker is there.  Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], Congressman Danny Davis has talked to me about George Washington Murray.  He knows that history a little bit.  I know all the story about why he left South Carolina and how he left South Carolina, as well as who he left South Carolina with.
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit about George Washington Murray, because he has an interesting story.  It can be summarized I guess, but tell us a little bit about him.
Speaker 2: Well, what I've been able to find out about George Washington was that he was an incredible legislator and in fact he was nicknamed the Black Eagle and it came from his tremendous legislative skills and they said that he, politically he soared like an eagle.  I used to talk to Joe Madison, who calls himself the Black Eagle, I says--I said, "You're a knockoff."  My great uncle, at that time I was calling him my great uncle, and I still call him that because I--unless I do some DNA stuff I'll never call him my granddad, but he was credited with being the impetus behind the establishment of South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], which came out in the 1890 land grant program [Morrill Act of 1890].
Story_ID: 635200
Speaker 1: There's a book ['A Black Congressman in the Age of Jim Crow: South Carolina's George Washington Murray'] written about him that's published by University of Mississippi press at Oxford [sic. University Press of Florida, Gainesville, Florida].  I'm blocking now on the name of the author of the book.  It started with a M [John F. Marszalek] I remember that.  It's an interesting name.  Now I found out about that book from a, from a guy who's a lawyer in Sumter [South Carolina], whose last name was Hoar, H-O-A-R [John Hoar].  I'm blocking now what his first name was, but I believe I put his first name in my book ['Blessed Experiences: Genuinely Southern, Proudly Black,' James E. Clyburn] because I think--'cause he sent me a file he had on George Washington Murray.  Now I found out about it kind of interesting.  I--when I was running the first time for [U.S.] Congress in 1992, on Election Day I was--well, it was really a primary election day.  I stopped, I was just making the round, I left Columbia [South Carolina] early in the morning, went over to Florence [South Carolina] and visited a few precincts and from Florence I went to Sumter, and on my way into Sumter that day, I stopped at a church that I had visited when I was growing up, and the reason I stopped at this church is because they had it posted right in front of the church that it was a voting place, and I don't know, I just told the guy driving for me I says, "Let's stop here for a--" 'cause we were headed someplace else.  I said, "Let's stop here for a minute, let me see if anybody, I can go out and speak to a few of the precinct workers."  So we walked in and I looked over to the left and there were the Republicans voting place was over to the left and to my right there the Democrats were voting.  Well, there were no voters over to, on the Republican side, there were just two people working the precinct.  One was a white gentleman, other was a white woman.  I just waved to them and they waved and I went over and started chatting with the precinct workers on the Democratic side.  One of whom I had gone to high school with.  Well, as I was about leave the gentleman from the Republican side waked over and he says, "If you don't mind before you leave, will you come over, I'd like to chat with you about something?"  So I, you know, said farewell to those people and I walked over to talk to him. He says, "Do you know who George Washington Murray was?"  I said, "Yeah, I do."  He says, "Well, he used to live here in Sumter over on Church Street."  I said, "Yeah, I know where it's at."  So he started telling me a whole lot of stuff about George Washington Murray.  I says, "How do you know George Washington Murray?"  And he told me about this book that had been written about him and he told me, he says, "I believe that you're gonna be successful in this race, and I also believe that this would be an interesting family connection because I think you have a family connection to George Washington Murray and--," so in talking to him that day, he told me that he had a file on George Washington Murray and would be glad to share it with me, and sure enough a few weeks later the file--I got it in the mail. So that's how I got to know about George Washington Murray from this guy.  His big interest was he's a big Republican.  George Washington Murray was a Republican and he just wanted me to know that he would feel much better about me if I were a Republican I guess.
Story_ID: 635201
Speaker 1: He had his connection.  Now he had a--from what I was reading, he had a horrible end to--well, his, his political life kind of ended in a kind of really horrible way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he's not the only one.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Now the Reconstruction black--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --congressmen had like bad endings and, you know, due to the racism in the country.
Speaker 2: Right, now from my research George Washington Murray was a big land owner, land owner.  He owned land from where he lived in Kershaw County [South Carolina] out Black River Road, all the way through Sumter [South Carolina] and according to this file sent to me by Mr.--Attorney Hoar [John Hoar], he had property all the way down into Colleton County, South Carolina, which is a pretty long (unclear) line.  Now when they started passing all of these, what I call anti-Reconstruction laws, now a lot of people refer to it as Reconstruction laws, Reconstruction as my granddaughter reminded me a couple of days ago, it really only lasted about eleven years.  It was--Reconstruction law for all intents and purposes was over in 1877, after the so called Tilden Hayes compromise [Compromise of 1877].  Now all these laws that were passed after that and really culminated with the 1895 Constitution in South Carolina that made black folks second class citizens, all of which got really set in concrete with Plessy versus Ferguson decision of 1896 [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896].  After that, that brought, that cemented the anti-Reconstruction stuff.  Now in an effort to hold on to the vote when you had to be a land owner and that kind of stuff to vote.  According to my research George Washington Murray kind of carved up little plots of land and deeded plots to black people.  I mean I don't remember exactly what the size would be, so they would be technically land owners.  Well, he was indicted for that as some form of vot- voter fraud and of course he knew that he was headed to prison, and he left.  Well, that's--he left, he left South Carolina and that's when he went up to Chicago [Illinois] I'm told to escape what he thought was inevitable 'cause--he wasn't the only one to leave.
Story_ID: 635202
Speaker 1: I had an interesting, interesting thing that happened to me here, right here, right after I got to [U.S.] Congress.  I--we were having a meeting one day of the Congressional Black Caucus, and one of the members made some reference to Cardozo High School [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] and when he made his reference because that was a high school, he talked about that as being--the school as being named for the [U.S.] Supreme Court Justice Cardozo [Benjamin N. Cardozo].  Well, I'm sitting there I knew better, I didn't embarrass him or anything in the meeting, but after the meeting was over I called him, and I said, I said, "Look, I didn't say anything to you in the meeting today but Cardozo High School was not named for a Jewish member of the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  Cardozo High School was named for an African American member, a former congressman from South Carolina, Francis L. Cardozo."  He was shocked, he didn't believe it.  Of course, he looked it up, and then came back to me and thanked me for setting it straight for him, so Francis Cardozo had been--I said he was a congressman, Francis Cardozo was secretary of state and he was state treasurer in South Carolina, and when all these things started to happen to keep from getting indicted and going to jail, he left South Carolina and came to Washington and became a top notch educator here in the Washington, D.C. area and Cardozo High School was named after him.  So all of these folks left.
Story_ID: 635203
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting how things happen, Reverend J.A. DeLaine [Joseph A. DeLaine] who organized the folks of Clarendon County [South Carolina] to file the first lawsuit, well, lawsuit in the South.  Now there was a lawsuit (background noise) up in Massachusetts, challenging some aspects of segregation and I tell people all the time, to get the history right, you ought to read the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and you'll see, the Brown decision didn't affect just those five schools that--those five lawsuits that were combined to make one, but there was a little piece of Brown that dealt with Massachusetts because Massachusetts was originally segregated as well, and there is some legal action up in Massachusetts that was included in the Brown decision.  I just like to sometimes play with little tidbits of history that way to, to let people know that I know something.
Story_ID: 635204
Speaker 1: You were a history major in school, right? Or was--or soc- or you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you taught history?
Speaker 2: I taught history, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and South Carolina has such a rich history of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --of black folks involved, especially in Reconstruction and all that with the--I guess, and South Carolina was the state with the highest percentage of African American residents, right?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) South Carolina--
Speaker 2: At one point South Carolina, two thirds of the General Assembly of South Carolina [South Carolina General Assembly] was black.  As best as I can determine, now I've seen some books that indicated the entire congressional delegation which was four was black, but I think it's more like three to one black but, you know, a lot of this is not all that accurate so you don't know exactly what's accurate and what is not, like when I started doing the family tree on my parents (unclear) we all spelled my father's mother's name, Phoebe [Phoebe Lloyd Clyburn] is P-H-O-E-B-E and we still spell it that way, but if you get into the census stuff, the census of 1900, you'll find her as being P-H-E-B-Y and that's because of these uneducated census takers that went around, and they said, "Well, who lives here?"  And you said, "Phoebe." Well, I'm, I told my wife [Emily England Clyburn] one time I'm surprised they didn't have F-E-B-Y, but I've seen it as P-H-E-B-Y, but I know from the birthplace and who her children were, but I've never seen any indication of who her husband was, but I've seen the children.
Story_ID: 635205
Speaker 1: So you're related to this rich tradition in the Reconstruction Congress in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, so, so your father grew up--did he have any, any sense of that himself, did he, did he--?
Speaker 2: He had, yes, but he would never tell us.  I think my dad knew and I'll tell you another thing about him that made me think.  My father--well, let's go to--I'm running for secretary of state in 1978 and one day I got a phone call from a Reverend Dixon [T.M. Dixon] and he told me that he was the president of the Hampton County ministerial alliance and they were having a meeting and they wanted me to come speak to their alliance.  They were interested in getting involved in my campaign.  So I was pleased to hear that so I, we arranged a meeting.  We met at an intersection near Yemassee, South Carolina right out [U.S.] Interstate 95.  When I got to the appointed spot he was there waiting for me.  So I step out, spoke to him, we had some small talk.  He says, "I wanna ask you something," he says, "You have a very interesting last name."  He said, "I've never heard that name but one other time in my life and it belonged to a classmate of mine at Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina]."  He says, "My classmate," he said, "I never knew his real name but everybody called him E L."  He says, "Would you happen to know him?"  I said, "Yeah, I know E.L. Clyburn [Enos Clyburn]."  I said, "That's my father."  He said, "What?"  I said, "Yeah, my father's name is E.L. Clyburn, he pastors in the, in Sumter [South Carolina]."  He says, "Well, you know it's a strange thing."  He says, "He was one of the smartest students in the class, but he didn't show up for our senior year."  Said, "He never graduated."  Says, "We, he was there through our junior year.  He didn't show up for our senior year."  That wa- I was shocked at that.  I didn't tell him, but I went on to the meeting with him.
Story_ID: 635206
Speaker 1: When the meeting was--before the meeting started, I went to a telephone booth, we didn't have cell phones back then, and I called my dad [Enos Clyburn] who at that time was, yeah, suffering with prostate cancer and I told him that I needed to see him, that I was gonna be there for an hour or so and I was gonna come through Sumter [South Carolina] on my way back to Columbia [South Carolina] because I needed to talk to him about something.  So sure enough I got to my dad's house a little before midnight and I told him what I had heard.  Now this was January, February 1978.  So my dad very emotionally said to me, he said, "Well, son, that is true."  He says, "But let me tell you how all that came about."  He said, "When I was growing up there was no school for black kids beyond the seventh grade in the county I grew up in [Kershaw County, South Carolina]."  He said, "I repeated seventh grade three times, but after the third time the teachers told me I was too far advanced for the other students and I was, they couldn't satisfactorily teach the other students with me in the class and they wanted me, they didn't want me to come back.  So I left school and I got a job in a bakery shop and I learned how to bake.  As I kept reading, I kept studying and when the opportunity presented itself for me to go to Sumter with your mom [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] I knew Morris College was there.  I took a college entrance exam and I passed it and I was admitted."  He said, "After my third year the administration at Morris invited me into the office and told me that they did not have a record of my high school graduation, and that under the state law, they could not grant me a degree unless I could produce my high school diploma."  He said, "I couldn't produce one 'cause I didn't have one and so I didn't, they didn't let me come back into my senior year.  So I was not allowed to graduate."  Now he told me that, that night.  My dad died in June at the age of eighty.  Now if my dad, if Reverend Dixon [T.M. Dixon] had not told me what he did, my dad would've gone to his grave and I never would have known that and I asked him, you know, why he never talked about that and he said, "Because I never wanted you all to believe that there was anything to be gained by dropping out of school, and so I just thought if you all knew that, that that might have influenced whether or not you finished school."
Story_ID: 635207
Speaker 1: Now that doesn't end the story, and all this I've written about him in my book ['Blessed Experiences: Genuinely Southern, Proudly Black,' James E. Clyburn].  One day I was speaking for the dedication of the North Sumter Hope Center [North Hope Center, Sumter, South Carolina].  The North Sumter Hope Center created by congress [South Carolina General Assembly] is located just three or four blocks from the Morris College campus [Sumter, South Carolina].  So that day during the dedication talking about what that Hope Center can mean to that community, I reminisced a little bit about my dad [Enos Clyburn], and I told the story that my dad had shared with me.  Now while I was on the stage I did not notice that the president of Morris College had come into the room and was sitting on the stage behind me.  I really believed if I had known he was back there, I don't think I would've told the story.  I didn't know he was there (laughter) and when I finished and sat down, he was called upon to make remarks and I got this empty feeling (laughter).  So he went up, he made his remarks and when the program was over Dr. Lundry [ph.], the center president, came over to me and he says, "Look, I never heard that story before.  Is that true?"  (Laughter) I said, "Dr. Richardson [Luns C. Richardson], I have no real knowledge but I don't believe my dad would lie about something like that.  He, that what he told me."  So he didn't say any more.  About three of four days later I got a phone call from Dr. Richardson and he said to me, "I went into the archives to try to look up information on your dad."  He said, "That story is absolutely true."  He said, "It's all here in the archives."  He said, "And I'm gonna do something to rectify that."  Because when I mentioned Reverend Dixon [T.M. Dixon], Reverend Dixon at the time was on the board at Morris College.  He said "I'm gone talk to Reverend Dixon and we gone take this to the board of trustees," and they did and so several days later I got a phone call from him that says that the board of trustees had voted unanimously to award my dad his degree, and that degree is right back here right now, and he said that he wanted me to come and receive it and I did go.  So twenty years after my dad died, he got his degree and there's a picture in my book of my brothers [John Clyburn and Charles Clyburn], my two brothers, our wives, our children all went to Morris College for that commencement to get my dad's degree.  I was very moved by that because on the same day that he was being awarded that degree, my daughter Jennifer [Jennifer Clyburn Reed] was getting her third degree on that day, an education specialist from the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  She had received her bachelor's [degree] and master's in teaching from there and this was a third degree (laughter), so I kind of thought she was going to her graduation.  I told her, I says, "I'm going to have to apologize I'm not going to be able to come to your graduation.  I went to your first two, I'm not going to be able to come to this one because I have agreed to accept my father's degree from Morris College which is on the same day that you're getting your degree."  She said, "Well, I'm going with you."  So they had to end up mailing her, her degree.  She thought it was more important to her to go to Morris College and so she went with us that day and didn't, didn't go to her own--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --graduation (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 635208
Speaker 1: So your father [Enos Clyburn], he was able to become, he was a minister pri- primarily, right?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: In the Church of God.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did he do anything else for a living?
Speaker 2: My dad was a carpenter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did a lot of construction work.  He, being a minister was his calling.  He didn't make any money, he was never a mega minister.  (Laughter) He had a small church, but he made his living as a carpenter.  I called him the renovator of choice throughout Sumter [South Carolina]. My dad renovated more houses and stuff in Sumter than any one person much to my chagrin.  I hated that work (laughter) 'cause all of us had to work.
Speaker 1: You had to help and--
Speaker 2: We had to help, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did your father have, did he ever share with you another aspiration that he would have pursued had he been able to earn his degree?
Speaker 2: I think he probably would've been a cook.  My dad was an excellent cook and he learned in that bakery, bakery shop I suspect.  Had we opened a restaurant at one time I suspect my dad, that's what he would've done if he were not a carpenter, but I don't know exactly how he learned the trade, but he was an excellent carpenter, carpenter as well.  I always believed that my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I mean, if he didn't graduate from--I mean if he, if he had a chance to graduate from--
Speaker 2: Oh, if he had gotten a degree?
Speaker 1: --from Morris [Morris College, Sumter, South Carolina], yeah.  Would he had done something else, would--was he--did he have another goal in mind of?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I really don't think so.  Like my mom [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn], my mom graduated from college in 1953.  I was thirteen years old when she--I was thirteen in 1953 she graduated in the summer session in 1950 right after my thirteenth birthday.  Now my mom--everybody thought that she was going to close up the beauty shop and teach school.  My mom took that (laughter) degree and put it in a little metal frame and hung it up on the wall of her beauty shop and never taught a day of school.  She wanted that degree.
Speaker 1: I just wondered because your father really didn't have a chance to--I mean he didn't, he didn't have a chance to go to high school, then go to and finish.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he wasn't gonna do that, you know, with a family I know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he really didn't have a chance to go.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered if he ever talked about how he--
Speaker 2: He never, he never talked about it because I never knew that aspect about it until just a few months before he died.
Story_ID: 635209
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn and Enos Clyburn] met?  Did they tell, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a little bit of a story.  My father married Rebecca Rambert [Rebecca Rambert Clyburn], and Rebecca Rambert died in childbirth.  They were all members of the Church of God.  My mother knew his first wife.  When she died, my dad stayed single eight years before he and my mother got married, and of course he was almost nineteen years older than my mom.  But they did get married and she, they moved to Sumter [South Carolina].  In fact, it's kind of interesting when I looked all this up, Rebecca Rambert--I was born on July 21, 1940 as I said earlier.  She died on July 21st her, that was her death date according to the records.  I forgot what year it was but at least about ten years before I was, I was born, but my mom knew her and when we were growing up, we visited the Rambert family often.  My mom had a great deal of respect for that family and one of the family members lived, her name was Willie Mae Campbell [ph.] and she lived in Sumter and we visited her often.  In fact, she ended up teaching me math, mathematics when I was in tenth grade [at Lincoln High School, Sumter, South Carolina], but the family was always very close.  There was never any friction at all between the families.  It was almost like one family.
Speaker 1: So, so he didn't have any children, your father didn't have any children with--
Speaker 2: That was it; that was the first child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The child died--as I said, the child died and she died.
Story_ID: 635210
Speaker 1: Well when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walked, talked, what they looked like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've had this discussion and people think that there are, there are attributes of both that I have, and, and my father [Enos Clyburn] was an excellent speaker, and lot of people think that I got my speaking skills from him.  My mom [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] (laughter) always, she was an activist, my dad wasn't much of an activist, and it's no question but I'm an activist (laughter), so if you look at the two of them, you just got to say that I've got a reasonable portion of both their DNAs.
Speaker 1: Now did your father have the same--did he pass his voice on to you 'cause you have such a resonant voice?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my--I give him credit for the, for the voice that I have.  My dad was--mine's a little deeper than his was really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know you mentioned Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] earlier and he possesses one of those--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one of those resonant voices too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the two of us are often called the voices of God.
Story_ID: 635211
Speaker 1: You've got two brothers, right?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers.
Speaker 1: Right.  Just describe 'em and tell us what they're doing?
Speaker 2: My brother John [John Clyburn] was born October 22, 1942.  My brother Charles [Charles Clyburn] was born December 19, 1944.  So I'm two years and two months older than John.  John's two years and three months, oh, I'm sorry.  I'm two years and three months older than John, and John's two years and two months older than Charles.  We grew up very close, we had sibling rivalries.  We fought like any other siblings, but to this very day we talk almost daily.  I talked to John before I left home this morning.  Charles has called already and my BlackBerry's been acting up so I haven't gotten back to him yet, but I'll talk to him, at least--I'm gone return his phone call as soon as I can and I'll talk to John, I'll probably see him John tonight.  We have dinner together almost every night.  We vacation together all three of us and our children and our grandchildren.  We spend Christmas together every year.  We go to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  We started doing that in 1972.  So we go down to Hilton Head around the 22nd of December and we stay until the 2nd of January, and that's standard.  I mean we don't question whether or not we're going, the only question is what day will you arrive?  Will we get there in time for golf that afternoon, or the afternoon of the 22nd or if something comes up, you aren't going to arrive until the morning of the 23rd, that's the kind of debate we have about that, but we know where we're gonna be every Christmas.  We're that close.  John and I both graduated from Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina].  Charles refused to go to Mather because he was really into music.  He was--all of us did music.  I did the clarinet and saxophone.
Story_ID: 635212
Speaker 1: You have a big story.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, I think that what really laid the foundation for us being as close as we are occurred I guess when we were sub-teenage- teenagers and I might have been thirteen or fourteen years old.  We went with my father [Enos Clyburn] one day to the neighborhood mechanic, or Mr. Singleton [ph.], who worked on my daddy's cars.  So my dad--we never had a new, but my mother [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] finally got a new car in 1953, but other than that we bought--my dad bought used cars and so these cars had to be worked on pretty, pretty regularly.  So this particular day the three of us went with my dad and as soon as Mr. Singleton hooked the pulley up to the front end of that car and began to pull that chain to get the car raised so he could get under it, we started playing; and my dad said to us--he said, "Now boys, I don't know how strong this chain is.  It may pop and this car may fall, one of you may get hurt so I don't want you playing near his car, y'all go out across the field and play," and so we did.  We weren't gone long before we got into a little discussion that somebody looking at it might call it a fight.  I call it a physical discussion, and we didn't know it but my dad was watching us.  And after my dad thought it had gone on long enough, he called out to the three of us and brought us over to where he was sitting.  He was sitting on a drink crate, these old wooden drink crates, and I can still remember, just like it was yesterday.  He was sitting there and he lined the three of us up in front of him.  We were sitting a little bit anxious now not knowing exactly what this was about.  He had a piece of cord string in his hand.  He took that cord string and he gave it first to Charles [Charles Clyburn].  He said, "Charles, pop this string."  Charles struggled and struggled, he couldn't pop it.  He then it back and he gave it to John [John Clyburn].  He said, "John, you're two years older, you're stronger, you pop the string."  John struggled and struggled and he couldn't pop it.  He then took it back and he gave it to me.  He said, "Now, James [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] you're the oldest, you're the strongest you pop the string."  I struggled, I couldn't pop it.  He then took it back and he put that cord string in the palms of his hands and he began to rub his hands together, and of course the more he rubbed, the more unraveled the cord string became, and in a little while that cord string was in three pieces.  He then gave one piece to Charles, one to John and one to me and said, "Now sons, pop the string."  And all three of us popped the strings.  He said, "Now I want this to be a lesson to you for as long as you live.  Don't you let the little disagreements that crop up among you cause so much friction until it separates you.  Because if you do, the world will pop you apart and you may never know why."  Now I didn't realize what a profound impact that had on me until my dad's funeral, and my brothers said that I should eulogize him, and I was sitting there in the church that day trying to figure out what to say, and I remembered that and I told that story at my dad's funeral, and I really believe that--I know for me--that is why to this day, now I remember one time there was a test to this.  John and I were on State College campus [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] together and we got into an argument about something.  I can't remember what it was, and it kept escalating and escalating, and all of a sudden John said, "Hey, hey, wait a minute."  He says, "I'm not gonna change your mind about this, and you're not gonna change my mind, so let's stop talking about it.  Let's find something that we agree on, let's just leave this alone."  I was real embarrassed by that because it sounded like the wisdom the older guy was supposed to be imparting.  We stopped the argument.  From that day, and that might have been forty years ago, if not fifty years ago, I believe we were on State campus at time which would've been more than fifty years ago.  We have not had an argument since, from that day to this.  We've never had another argument.  We have discussions, but if we ever detect the discussion getting overheated, it stops and we go to the next thing.
Story_ID: 635213
Speaker 1: Good policy (laughter), so you're learning diplomacy at a early age.
Speaker 2: Very early age, yeah.  Well, I guess the best lesson I got in diplomacy also came from my dad [Enos Clyburn].  My dad was president of our, of his church's presbytery, and one year a group of ministers started an opposition group to his presidency, and I heard about it.  And I used to go to these meetings with my dad, my brothers, John [John Clyburn] and Charles [Charles Clyburn] never went to these meetings too much, but we always met at the Church of God for the estate meeting in Darlington, South Carolina corner of Lee [Street] and Pine Street there, so everybody knew that this division had developed and that it was pretty, pretty serious.  So at the end of the annual meeting when they were getting ready to elect the officers for the next year, the business meeting was taking place up in the sanctuary of the church and of course, I knew about it and I kind of sneak into the back of the church.  So while they were debating and, or really nominating officers, my dad's name was placed in the nomination and the other minister's name was placed in the nominations.  I never, I remember the minster very well.  I know his name and where he was from.  I never call his name.  There's some other names I never call because (laughter) he got children and grandchildren I know and some of them live in my district [6th Congressional District], and so I never call his name, but he--when the votes were taken, it was a tie vote between the other minister and my dad, and just as the vote was announced one of my dad's supporters jumped up and says, "Because this election has not been definitive, I move that we just continue with the current officer for the next year and revisit this at the next annual meeting."  And one of my dad's opponents jumped up to object and my dad yelled over both of us says, "Now wait a minute, let's consult the bylaws, and under our bylaws the president votes in the case of a tie."  He said, "Now I didn't vote and I have a vote in case of a tie," and with all the clamoring going on and my dad yelled out, "And I vote for Reverend--," his opponent and everything just stopped 'cause he had just cast the tie breaking vote in favor of his opponent.  And I'm sitting in the back of the church and I'm saying, "What in the world is this?"  So later that day we're driving home to Sumter [South Carolina] from Darlington and I said, "Dad, I was sitting in the back of the church during the election."  He said, "Yeah, son I saw you."  I said, "Well, explain to me why you voted for your opponent?"  He said, "Son, always remember when things get as divided as this church has become, nobody's gone be able to run it."  He said, "They'll want me back."  And sure enough, the next year he was elected and stayed president until he retired or well, until he felt that there was not--he didn't retire from the ministry, he retired--and they didn't want him to, but he quit, and I learned that day that--from him, how sometimes it's best to give up the mantle, especially when you see that diplomacy is not going to carry today.
Story_ID: 635214
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to go way back for a minute covering some real early ground, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is in my mother's kindergarten.  I remember being in kindergarten.  My mom [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] started a kindergarten in our church.  I guess I was about four or five, four years old or was four because I went to regular school at five, and neighborhood children attended the kindergarten.  It was not a big kindergarten, but I remember.  Those are my earliest memories of being in my mother's kindergarten.
Story_ID: 635215
Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in the same place or did you move around when you were growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, no.
Speaker 1: Same place?
Speaker 2: Same place.  We didn't, we didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: We never moved.
Speaker 1: But can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 104 Walker Avenue in Sumter [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was Sumter, so this is--was this like the black side of town or was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, was there (unclear).
Speaker 2: There were two blacks--I guess maybe more than that.  Sumter would have to be divided north and south.  Now, some would be southwest--we grew up what was called out west, out West Liberty.  The south Sumter was called across the tracks but out west in my--the quadrant that I grew up in was all black and there was a quadrant.  So if you divide the city--Liberty Street ran east and west, and Main Street ran north and south, and South Main, across the tracks to South Main is where black folks lived, that was south Sumter.  If you would go what would be the southwest quadrant.  Out west was really southwest because southeast of Liberty would be, was white but, so Liberty Street was sort of a dividing line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was South Main like the main street in the black community?
Speaker 2: That was the main street--the main--yeah, the Main Street downtown was business.  Now South Main Street was on the other side of the tracks and that was black.  Now there was an overhead bridge, still is which I just went over a couple of days ago.  The overhead bridge over the railroad tracks 'cause there must be twelve tracks, railroad tracks so that the overhead bridge is there, but when you come down off the bridge you're on Manning Avenue and that's black, South Main Street runs off to the side of that (cough).  So the railroad tracks stop on Main Street here.  Railroad tracks on the other side of the tracks are South Main Street again.  It's not continuous.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is that like the black business strip, I mean do they--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Manning Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is the black business strip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Abs- absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And one block south, no, say one block west.
Speaker 1: And, so black businesses in, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a theater over there or anything like that or?
Speaker 2: The theater was downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: West Liberty, downtown because the, the black theater, there were a few businesses on one side of Liberty Street that were black.  In fact, my mother [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] had a beauty shop on West Liberty downtown.  She had two beauty shops, one way out West Liberty where we were, and then downtown because way back then folks came to town on weekends and, so she had a beauty shop downtown that was only open basically on Fridays, Saturdays and I believe it was Wednesdays, because way back then stores were closed I forgot how that thing worked now, but there was a day in the week that the folks came to downtown Sumter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now there's an [U.S.] Air Force base in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Shaw Air Force Base [South Carolina] is there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: In recent years within the last (unclear) that's base (unclear) commission.  Sumter is now also the headquarters of the Third Army [U.S. Third Army; U.S. Army Central].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Third Army--they got these now joint use bases, Shaw Air Force Base is a joint use base now.  So the, it's the headquarters of the Ninth Air Force and there's the headquarters of the Third Army.
Story_ID: 635216
Speaker 1: Can you describe the house you lived in, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, growing up--the sights were Swan Lake [Swan Lake Iris Gardens, Sumter, South Carolina], was sort of a tourist attraction.  Rich black people, there was only a ten minute walk from my house.  Black people were not allowed to visit Swan Lake.  Baseball was a big thing.  Church was a big thing, great big thing.  Music, so if you--most of the real sights were not, were not seen by black people.  I suspect if you were to (cough)--it's baseball on weekends, on Saturdays, church on Sundays because I was in the band there was, music was big.  I was teasing the other day that when I was growing up we didn't have a good choir in the church, they have an excellent choir now, but when we were growing up we didn't have a good choir.  We had good speakers, though they preached too long (laughter), they were--so I grew up in a very nurturing situation but expectations were limited.  My parents [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn and Enos Clyburn] taught us differently, but most of the kids that I grew up with, not all of 'em, most of 'em, expectations were very limited.  Finish high school, and the big debate--are you going to the [U.S.] Air Force or the [U.S.] Army (cough).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there many black pro- professionals in town, I mean were they mostly school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there were teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Preachers, a few undertakers, that's it, and I say a few undertakers, I think we--in the little town of Sumter [South Carolina] when I was growing up, there were seven black undertakers, seven black undertakers, I remember that, and everybody had to--if you didn't want to teach or preach, you know, you were an undertaker.  I remember, there was one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --one black lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who was Parker [ph.], everybody--I don't remember what his real name was.  Everybody called him Lawyer Parker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then a little later on Dorothy Sampson came with Ernest Finney [Ernest A. Finney, Jr.] as minister and became chief justice of the supreme court [South Carolina Supreme Court].
Speaker 1: Six black undertakers, and--well, we were discussing earlier that South Carolina has a--has one of the largest black populations in any state.  South Carolina and Mississippi at one time had pop- populations that exceeded the white population.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure, or the--that shift took place in the 1930s with the Great Migr- Migration [Great Migration] and, you know, when I came along I mean people couldn't wait to get big enough to get on the train and to leave.  I mean, there wasn't, there wasn't any question about that.
Speaker 1: And they were going primarily to--?
Speaker 2: New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Baltimore [Maryland], Washington, D.C.  I mean they would stop before they got to Washington, D.C.  A lot of 'em went on to Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore.  My mother was the only, the only girl that stayed.  Now three boys stayed, Michael [ph.], James [James Dizzley], Leroy [Leroy Dizzley] and Jonnie [John Dizzley].  There's another boy, George [George Dizzley], George went north and all the girls except my mother did, and none of them stopped in Washington.  Two went to Baltimore, three were in Philadelphia, my Aunt Lillie Mae [Lillie Mae Dizzley Johnson], Rosie [Rosena Dizzley], and Mary Lee [Mary Lee Dizzley Washington].  Lillie Mae, Rosie and Mary Lee, yeah, those three and then Verlie [Verlie Dizzley] went to New York and she still lives in New York and still lives and my Aunt Louise [Louise Dizzley Mashack] is still in Baltimore, still lives there; both over ninety.
Story_ID: 635217
Speaker 1: Tell us about school, now when did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school at the age of five, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is your mother's [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] kindergarten you're talking about?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started kindergarten when I was four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started public school, Lincoln School [Lincoln High School, Sumter, South Carolina] at the age of five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to Lincoln through I think it was the fourth grade, and of course, then I went to Liberty Street elementary school [Liberty Street School, Sumter, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Now I mean, before we leave Lincoln, what was--what were you interested in when you started?  Did you like school first of all?
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved school, I was a real good student in school.  I was an outstanding student up to about the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in, in those days in, at Lincoln what were you interested in?  What was your favorite subject, or did you have one?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was always history.
Story_ID: 635218
Speaker 1: And did you have any favorite teachers at Lincoln [Lincoln School; Lincoln High School, Sumter, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, at Lincoln 'cause I remember through Lincoln for high school and that's--I was in high school there before I went to Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina].  But my first grade teacher, if she's dead, she died recently.  It was Mrs. McCain--Mrs. McCain in first grade and Mrs. Johnson [ph.] in second grade, Mrs. Brogdan [ph.] in third grade.  She had a sister--I had Mrs. Blanche [ph.] in fourth grade, her sister Mrs. Johnson, Mrs.--there were two Johnsons, the second grade Johnson and the fifth grade Johnson, and then there was a third Johnson [ph.] who was a principal of the school and also taught me in sixth grade, and then Mrs. Paul [ph.] in seventh grade.  I remember all my teachers and when I--of course in ninth grade when you start what you call changing classes and my favorite--Mrs. Ivey [Fannie Ivey] who also taught me typing--my, listen one of these things I'll never be able to understand.  My dad [Enos Clyburn], when I was in like the tenth grade, Mrs. Ivey was the typing teacher and taught business and stuff but she had a basement in her house and she had taught private lessons, private typing lessons in the basement of her house.  My dad used to take me to her house (laughter) and I started typing when I was in the tenth grade, though I--and I took it from her privately.  I didn't take typing in the regular school until the twelfth grade and when I went to Mather but Agnes Wilson [Agnes Hildebrand Wilson] was--we'll get to that, I skipped over eighth grade.  My favorite eighth grade teacher was Mrs. Stover, she was Lincoln--Logan at the time.  Mrs. Logan [Bettie Logan Stover] taught me science and I teased her the other day.  We were having a signing at home and she was there and I started teasing her that she was one of my favorites.  I didn't learn much, but she was single and good looking (laughter).
Speaker 1: See you were, you were at that age when teachers--
Speaker 2: I was at that age, man, I tell you.
Story_ID: 635219
Speaker 1: So you were at Lincoln [Lincoln School; Lincoln High School, Sumter, South Carolina] first, and then you went--
Speaker 2: And then I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) went to four.
Speaker 2: --to Liberty Street elementary school [Liberty Street School, Sumter, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Liberty Street, okay.
Speaker 2: Through the sixth grade, then I sent to Savage Glover [Savage Glover School, Sumter, South Carolina] in eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Glover.
Speaker 2: And went back to Lincoln in the ninth grade and I was in Lincoln ninth, tenth and eleventh, and my mom [Almeta Dizzley Clyburn] took me out of Lincoln in the eleventh grade and I went to Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Mather--okay, all right, so.
Speaker 2: I had gotten into a lot of bad habits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother John [John Clyburn] had already gone to Mather and he talked me into going over, and I went over to visit him one time and there was a young lady who was his best friend he wanted me to meet, and I met her and I was smitten by her and so I said, "I'm going over to Mather and hang out with her (unclear)."  So I talked my parents into going.  My--you know, it was expensive but we worked out a deal, I played football and I worked in the cafeteria washing dishes to pay my tuition.
Speaker 1: Now this is--Mather is a Methodist school you were saying?
Speaker 2: United Methodist school.
Speaker 1: United Methodist school, yeah, okay, all right.
