Story_ID: 379675
Speaker 1: Hi, my name is Loretta Henry and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is doing the video and Ms. Karen Hunt from Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] is an observer.  So, we'd like to get started.  First of all, I'd like to thank you for agreeing, Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], to this interview.  Could you, would you please state and spell your full name, including, with your middle name, please?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, I'd like to say that I'm honored that you would do this.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: My name is Daniel A. Collins, and what else did you want to know about me?
Speaker 1: Could you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, D-A-N-I-E-L, A, for Andrew, Collins, C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and could you tell us the day you were born and the place?
Speaker 2: January 11, 1916, Darlington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 28th of, 27th or 28th of--
Speaker 1: Twenty-eighth [28th], 28th of March [March 28, 2005].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Twenty-eighth [28th].
Speaker 1: Twenty-eighth [28th].
Speaker 2: Of March.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Twenty-eighth [28th] of March.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and the year is?
Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred--2005, 2000--yeah, I'm partially rational (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Is in Mill Valley, California, at my home.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the address (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 700 Summit Avenue.
Story_ID: 379676
Speaker 1: And just to get started, I'm going to ask you some People magazine-ish kind of questions, so just kind of bear with us.  Okay, could you tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? Well I guess fish, shellfish if I have to pick out one, fish and shellfish.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Why, any reason?
Speaker 2: Well, rebirth, anew, another time around, beautiful flowers, nice weather.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green, why?  Because I think my mother [Lucy Miller Collins] had green eyes and it was her favorite color, and over the years, I've just developed an affection for green.
Speaker 1: Okay, wonderful.  Your favorite place to go on a vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, this place has been such a con--consistent vacation that I haven't, I just don't go anywhere for vacations.  I guess my favorite vacation place would be skiing in the mountain.  We have a, we have a cabin in the mountains and I guess if I have to pick one thing out that I loved to do, and can't do anymore, it would skiing.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where, where is your vacation home, where?
Speaker 2: In Tahoe, Tahoe City [California].
Speaker 1: California.
Speaker 2: Near, near Squaw Valley [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Can't think of one.
Story_ID: 379677
Speaker 1: Next, we'd like to explore your family history, okay, your background.  Could you tell me something about your mother?  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Lucy Miller Collins was born in Newberry, South Carolina, somewhere in the middle 1880s.  She was born to a, a, a Methodist minister, whose name was Edmund [ph.] and her mother's name, I can't remember her mother's name right now, but she was born in Newberry.  She went to Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], which is, in that era was one of the premier schools for black people, black students, Allen University and Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  When, your mother, where did she grow up?  Did she grow up--
Speaker 2: She grew up in Newberry.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything else when she was growing up, some of the things she liked to do?
Speaker 2: No, I wished that I did have some information about her.  I don't have any, I don't have any childhood information about what she did.  I guess I do have a story, the only story I know about my mother.  Her, her mother died when she was a young lady or teenager and she married another man named, Cooper [ph.], her mother did and her first memory was her stepson--her stepbrother being dragged down the street with a rope around his neck behind a wagon, precursor to what we saw in Mississi--in Texas a few years ago, a rope around his neck, being dragged down the street.  That was the only childhood memory I have of her.
Speaker 1: Did she have any idea what had happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you but I can guess, I could give a good guess.  He must have smiled at a white girl or maybe he made a passing remark at a white girl or maybe he insulted a white man, I, you know, uppity, I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She was a very beautiful lady, had a beautiful voice, played the piano and ran a little grocery store and taught school.  In fact, she was a Jeanes teacher.  A Jeanes teacher, and that amazing you raise your eyes.  A Jeanes teacher was equivalent to your modern day person who comes to the school and trains teachers.  What do you call them?
Speaker 1: Teacher trainer.
Speaker 2: Teacher trainer, yeah.  I remember going with her on to see--it was a little country school and riding with her out to the school on the weekend when she had the courses to, in-service training, riding with her out to these schools while she conducted her program for that Saturday.  I also remember, more than once, my mother was principal of her school.  I think there were one or two other teachers.  They had the seventh grade, and the kids taught each other.  The older kids taught the younger kids in one room, very, very functional.  All the kids could read and write as I remember.  I remember going with her on Saturdays, since she was the head teacher, head of the school, to pick up a check, or pick up the pay salary or the paychecks from the superintendent of education, who was always white.  And, as we drove into this man's yard, he was a farmer as well as superintendent of education, she always drove to the back door, and she would wait there until he felt he wanted to engage her and bring the checks.  And so he'd open the back door and give her the checks, and that was one of the reasons why I thought so much of Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] mother, because I'm from the South--I went to school in Georgia and the story I heard earlier about Ms. Lillian [Lillian Gordy Carter] is that she never allowed anybody to come to her back door and when she talked to someone in her house, she brought them into the living room.  That's just in direct, 180 degree opposite to the experience I have with my mother going to this white superintendent, who in his way was demeaning her by making her wait outside in her car until he decided to come out and bring checks to the back door.
Story_ID: 379678
Speaker 1: And I also remember some good things about it, because the church, the school, the local schools in those days were also supported by, by Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald Fund] and Rosenwald, the Rosenwald school, Rosenwald would furnish the cash money for any nails and, lumber, whatever you had to buy, tools, and the local people furnished the labor.  And I can remember going with her [Collins' mother, Lucy Miller Collins] on the weekends when they were building a school.  They would work together to clean up the area and do the work and labor and raise the school.  So I've always had warm feelings for, for, that money came out of Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck, and Co.], you know.
Speaker 2: All right, I've just found it, do you have anything else about the Rosenwald schools?
Speaker 1: Oh, except that it was for white and blacks and it was a way of supplementing southern education by eleemosynary funds to do whatever they could do to, it was a, it's a way to subsidize the early private subsidy, not government subsidy, but private subsidy because those schools in those days would, they'd fund entirely out of, out of county funds.  There were no federal funds in those days, so Rosenwald would fund this sort of, fill the void or helped to close the void, not fill it but close it.
Speaker 2: Do you know how long she was a Jeanes teacher?  How long she worked?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can guess.  It started when I was, I remember when I was maybe five years of age, going out to schools with her and she stopped teaching somewhere in the, in the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: You also said she had a grocery store.
Speaker 1: Yes, she had a little grocery store that was attached to the house.  We had a big four-bedroom house, two stories and little grocery store from that.  People found it any way they possibly could.  I remember, some interesting stories about that because she may get a knock on her door at four o'clock in the morning, somebody with two cents wanted to buy two cigarettes because, (laughter) you laugh but it's a fact.  You get one cigarette for a penny, couldn't afford a whole pack, so he'd buy one, one, one cigarette.  It's interesting because I can't remember anybody knocking on her door to buy food, but I guess that habit, I guess we didn't recognize then how addictive tobacco was, but they would come and knock for one cigarette, so I guess that was a fix we didn't think about as being a cigarette fix but that's what it was.
Story_ID: 379679
Speaker 1: Can you tell me something about your father?
Speaker 2: My father was, his father [John Collins] was white, his name is Charles--his name is William Sumner Collins [sic. Andrew Collins] and I've always thought highly of him because, if you remember, Charles Sumner was a leader in the, what's the word I want, abolitionist movement out of Boston [Massachusetts], out of the New England and while his father was a white man, his mother was mulatto, and my father used to tell me about his father being a member of South Carolina Legislature.  Well I paid him no attention as most kids don't, they think their father doesn't know what he's talking about and he's showing, he's bragging, but then later, I have just in my files right now, I have a book here with this in it, you know, history that his father was indeed a member of this California [sic.] Legislature.  He was a, I think it was the Assembly [South Carolina General Assembly], or they called it the Legislature.  He was a member of the South Carolina Legislature in 16--in 1868, '65 [1865] when my dad was born, and he must have been a farmer because I learned from other sources that a person whose estate was $500 or more was considered well-off and he had an estate of, so he must have been a pretty well-off guy.  My father was one of seven children.  He was, there were four or five older than he and two or three younger than he.  He later, he, his earlier years, he tells me about working on the railroad as a porter.  He remembers, he tells me the story of, or that he remembered people coming out of California would talk about these huge trees in California that you could drive a full horse team through.  I thought my father was shooting off his mouth just like I thought he was about the legislature.  So after I moved to California and brought my family out here and we were raising a family, he came out to visit us about 1940, in the late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s] because we moved over here in 1952, so I guess it was in 1951 or 1952, he came out to visit us, at that time he was in his eighties.  So one Sunday morning, he kept talking about this big tree in California, I got the dictionary out, still not believing him, and looked up Sequoia Gigantica [Sequoiadendron giganteum] and indeed there was a tree down in the General Sherman, down south of Yosemite [Yosemite National Park, California], down in the southern part of Yosemite Valley.  So we got in the car one Sunday morning and drove down to General Sherman and that was a big delight for him, you know, he was proven right.  We had a one trip down, my only time seeing the General Sherman, but if anyone is listening to this, I would urge you to go see General Sherman.  It was there I think before Christ was born, that early.
Speaker 1: Could you tell me, where was your father born?  Where did he grow up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was born in Marion, in Marion, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us--
Speaker 2: And he grew up in Wahee District, W-A-H-E-E, the Wahee District of Marion County.
Story_ID: 379680
Speaker 1: So could you tell us about something about your ancestors?  You told us something about your father's [Andrew Collins] family and a little bit about your mother's [Lucy Miller Collins], is there anything else you can share with us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only thing I know about my mother's family, I knew very little about her parents except that Edmund [ph.] was married to, I can't remember her name, I have it in my records.  He was a Methodist minister and he had two families, one family was older and before my mother was born and he had a couple of kids by that marriage and then he had several kids after my mother was born.  It happens that I had, she had three sisters, Aunt Rosa [ph.], Aunt Aida [ph.] and Aunt Sally [ph.] and I have photographs of those three sisters and my mother.  I don't know what they did.  I know that one, Aunt Sally, lived in Buffalo, Aunt Ida, lived in Buffalo, New York and about 1942, '32 [1932], '33 [1933], that means '33 [1933] I was out of, I was in college [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia], freshman or sophomore year, we drove from Darlington, South Carolina to Buffalo to her funeral.  That was quite a trip.  She was--buried her, I never saw her alive, I only saw her in death.  She had another sister, Aunt Maggie [ph.].  Aunt Maggie was a nurse. She had gone to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and had married a man who had gone to Hampton with her.  He had gone on to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and got his M.D., contracted tuberculosis and when he came out, in those days, you go to Colorado for treatment.  He went to, came--he went to Colorado but he, his name is Joseph [ph.], came back from Colorado after he had died, they had one child named Joseph [ph.], older than I, but I grew up in his, I knew him, he was in my life but he was--his, his father died.  His mother was a nurse from Hampton and she was rather famous in her generation.  She was a nurse for Penn School [Penn Normal, Industrial and Agricultural School, St. Helena Island, South Carolina] on Daufuskie Island [sic.], off of Beaufort [South Carolina], Lady's Island [South Carolina], just outside of Beaufort, you cross the little bridge there and you, the Penn School is a center now, it's called the Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] but Aunt Maggie was the, I remember as a kid going down, it was a trip from Darlington, it was about eighty-five or ninety miles from Darlington to Beaufort.  So we started early in the morning, my mother would pack a huge lunch and some wet towels for, you know, to wash your face or whatever and make this big lunch of chicken and cake and whatever else and we'd head off to Beaufort and go down and spend a week, or at least several days, or week, and we'd go down when they were having a big fair at Penn School and the fair at Penn School was like the fair in many southern communities of that era.  They were a place where farmers brought their products, farmers brought their sugar cane, they brought their cakes, they brought their pies, they brought their corn, corn ears, whatever they raise, they would bring to this fair and they would show it off for competition for the best prizes.  Well, they had the same thing down in, in, at the Penn School.  Now at the Penn School, the people there were just barely removed from Africa, they'd been there for several generations but they were very, I don't want to use the word primitive, very--
Speaker 1: Traditional.
Speaker 2: --very African, I think I would say, very African in their behavior patterns.  Their speech was hardly understandable if you were from the mainland but they had a life of their own.  They were great huntsmen, great fishing people, they made stuff out of their baskets, they still do.  If you go to Beaufort right now, you would pay a big price to get baskets woven by the people, that's a native skill.  You pay two, $300 for a straw basket like this, they're so finely made, but I remember going down with my mother to visit Aunt Maggie.  Aunt Maggie, in 1933, Aunt Maggie, she was the nurse, she was a midwife.  She taught all the people on the island.  She taught midwifery.  She was the, she was the obstetrician as far as delivering babies was concerned.  She delivered all the babies on, and she trained the local people to be midwives.  So she is famous in the Penn Center today.  I have some documents on her now and some photographs of her.  She was very famous as a trainer of the workers in the birthing.
Story_ID: 379681
Speaker 1: Back to your parents [Lucy Miller Collins and Andrew Collins], do you know how they met?
Speaker 2: I--my mother, Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] figures heavily in our, in our family.  My mother went to school at Allen University and she met a Professor Turnage.  She married Professor Turnage, they had a son, half-brother of mine, Elliott [Elliott Turnage].  This first husband of hers died from scarlet fever.  My sister [Andrena Collins Baumgardner] went to Allen University and she married one of her professors, a fellow--Professor Baumgardner.  So, I don't know how, I guess my mother was teaching school somewhere there in South--in, I don't know for sure but I've never heard her say she lived anywhere except Newberry [South Carolina] or Darlington [South Carolina], so I suspect she'd come to Darlington as a, as a married lady, but daddy had, lost his, his wife [Rosa Collins] a couple, three years before and they were married in 1904 or '05 [1905].  She was a school teacher.  That's all I can, know about that.
Story_ID: 379682
Speaker 1: When you were a child, your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  I had a dog.  We had a big four-bedroom house, this big veranda's around the, the first floor and a veranda around the second floor that wrapped around the living room toward the back of the house.  Um, what was your question again?
Speaker 1: Just your earliest memories.
Speaker 2: Oh, I can remember my mother [Lucy Miller Collins] punishing me for something that I didn't think I did.  Now, whether I did it, I don't know, but I had a dog named, Dewey.  Dewey was a mutt.  He sucked eggs.  That was the worst thing for a dog to do in those, in that era, but I loved him with a passion, and my mother told me the story and I remember the event, but she would tell me that she remembers me doing this.  I had gone, she had punished me for something I thought I didn't do.  I go in the back porch, under the window, which was off of her bedroom and I said to my dog, Dewey, "Dewey, somebody is not going to heaven and it's not you and it's not me."  That's the earliest memory I have, I can remember the event.  Another thing I remember, I loved eggs and we had this big dining room and of course we had chickens with eggs and we had a rather, been a lovely, a big home and my dad [Andrew Collins] was a contractor, he did very well financially for a black man, and one of our cousins, one of my mother's cousins, there was a fellow named J.P. Rita [ph.], who was a Baptist minister and he would travel around but he would always come to visit us on his travels.  He would come and spend the night with us and spend the weekend and I remember once on the table, my mother made a big platter of fried eggs and there was one egg left, and one of those preachers, he took that egg, and I ran back in my chair, my chair and said, "Daddy, he took the last egg, get him."  (Laughter) That's a silly memory, but that's, that's, that kept in my back, of course I had some play, playmates and we played in the street and we played, we flew kites.  My parents had a huge, it wasn't about two square blocks behind our house and we played football in those fields and flew kites.  We made kites out of newspapers and little dried sticks and cotton, you know, pieces of cloth, we would make a kite tail.  I remember those very dear memories, you know, a wonderful childhood in spite of, sometimes we think of those, everybody lived in total misery, but many people are adjusted to a very comfortable lifestyle.
Story_ID: 379683
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about your siblings, their birth order and their names?
Speaker 2: Well, I told you about my bootlegging brother, my half-brother.  Didn't I tell you?
Speaker 1: Could you tell everybody else about your--what was his name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  His name was Waldo [Waldo Collins].  Waldo is the son, was the offspring of my father's [Andrew Collins] first marriage, my father's second marriage.  His first wife died but without birth, without children.  His second wife [Rosa Collins], he married just a couple years after.  Waldo was a product of that marriage.  Waldo was about seventeen years old during the Second World War [World War II, WWII], I mean the, I mean the Great World War, the First World War [World War I, WWI], but he was good with automobiles, good mechanic, and so he entered the service and he became a driver for some general, I don't remember who, but the story is that he became a driver for that general and he drove for that general during the war and then after the war, he landed in New York [New York] and with his South Carolina roots and, I guess his other South Carolina connections, he must have gotten a hold of some bootleggers, so he would run whiskey from South Carolina to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New York and this must have been about 1927, I was maybe eleven years old.  I remember the Sunday morning when mother [Lucy Miller Collins] got a call from the New York Police Department [NYPD] that they had found Waldo dead.  He had fallen out of a window into the back courtyard to his house and they did not figure foul play because Waldo always carried a roll of bills in his shirt pocket, that was his signature, and when the police found him that morning, the roll of bills was still in his pocket, his shirt pocket.  I have heard stories about how that particular night in New York City, what happened to my brother, my half-brother, because some of the young men who grew up in Darlington [South Carolina] would go up to New York to work in the summer or go to New York.  My brother's apartments were always available to them, they could always get a meal, they could always find a place to sleep, you could always find a job, he'd help them find a job, and that night they were having a party and my brother had two apartments in this apartment house, one he kept his alcohol in, across the hall from one where he lived, and this is the story, at least my young men from Darlington, who were there when it happened in New York, said he had gone, he had gotten a message from the police that they were going to raid him, so he'd run across the hall, and they came up to raid him and he ran out, out a window, hoping to get to the fire escape, but it was not the fire escape window, it was a window with no fire escape and he just fell down several blocks--several stories and just died.  They found him the next morning--the next Sunday morning.  That's, that was Waldo.
Story_ID: 307664
Speaker 1: Okay, you told us about your brother, Waldo [Waldo Collins], could you tell us about your other siblings?
Speaker 2: Elliott [Elliott Turnage] would be the next one.  My mother [Lucy Miller Collins] was married, was married to--pardon me--to one of her professors at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina], Professor Turnage, and they had a child, Elliott.  Elliott's father died when he was just a baby or before he was born with scarlet fever, and Elliott, and then my mother married Andrew [Andrew Collins].  Well it must have been just after the turn of the century, maybe, Elliott was born, let's see, he was eleven years younger than, older than I.  He was born in 1904.  So somewhere between 1900 and 1904 they were married, Elliott was born.  Elliott was a very, very, from what I could find out from cousins who grew up with him, and from his record of achievement, afterwards, he was a very, very bright guy, very bright.  He went to Allen University, which was the school in that era to go to.  And then he went to Allen for two years and then he went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  He was one of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] students, went to Fisk University, graduated from Fisk University and one day I wanted to ask [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin if he, by any chance, knew an attorney in Muskogee, Oklahoma, named Chandler [ph.].  Elliott finished Fisk University.  He had a classmate named Chandler, with him at Fisk University, also his classmate, Jimmy [ph.] (unclear), his classmate, and Pee Wee Smith [ph.], when he was at Fisk.  He left Fisk, went out to Arkansas, and Shorter College [North Little Rock, Arkansas] for a year because he was too young to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He went to Harvard Med School [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] when he was seventeen years old and he went, I mean Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So he went to Harvard Law School and he graduated I think in 1927.  He graduated from Harvard Law, and Frankfurter, I think Felix Frankfurter's son [sic.], one of the big legal names in that era, befriended my brother, my brother was very bright.  He would do the studying in school with the boys who had, who were at frat houses on the weekend.  When my brother graduated from Harvard, this particular friend, I think it was Frankfurter, it might have been, it might have been another name and so I shouldn't have throw that name around but one of his schoolmates from Harvard invited him down to his, to New York [New York] to meet his father who was with a big law firm, my brother thinking he would be a member of that law firm, and, of course, he was--no, I guess it couldn't happen. And that, there wasn't much for a lawyer to do in 1926 or '27 [1927] and he did not have the kind of, I think Bill Hastings [William Hastings] was in his class.  If not, he was certainly in a class before or one class behind but Bill Hastings came with some Washington, D.C. connections, he had some connections.  My brother didn't really have any connections, he was just really out there by himself and he was rejected in New York.  He finally went out to Oklahoma, got out to Oklahoma some sort of way and joined Chandler who had been his schoolmate at Fisk.  Chandler had also finished Harvard Law School, and my brother went to, in practice with Chandler.  Depression [Great Depression], they had one big case, a part Indian [Native American] and black named Herman Ingram [ph.], and anybody from Oklahoma in that era would know Herman Ingram because he was, he was, he had some lawyers who kept him drunk, you know, he was part Indian and they have a predilection to alcoholism and they essentially bankrupt the boy except also you are dealing with the Depression, so it was a tough time, when oil wells were sort of closed and my brother just couldn't make a living, he didn't have a source of income.  His partner said, listen, two of them, there was not enough practice for two of them and my brother left and went back to New York and started driving cabs and had essentially a nervous breakdown, and he came back to Darlington [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 307665
Speaker 1: I was in college [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia], so it had to be in the middle '30s [1930s], 1933, '34 [1934], '35 [1935] or maybe early part of '36 [1936].  He [Collins' half-brother, Elliott Turnage] had come back home to live because he, and he came back home essentially a failure and all of Darlington [South Carolina], knowing him to be so bright as a student, coming home as a failure, he was just really, really very distressed and neurotic.  I was in college and very popular and he became, he and I never really got warm unfortunately because each time he would go out, we always had an automobile he'd go, take somebody out for a ride, they would ask how his day and he would put them out of the car.  So he and I never got to be close but we did improve quite a bit because after my father [Andrew Collins] died, after my father, my father died first, he sort of took over and took care of my mother [Lucy Miller Collins] and took care of the home and the estate and he was remarried, he married and they sort of took care of my mother while she was in her late years, in her, she was about eighty-two or eighty-three when she died and that sort of wound up, my Darlington family.  I mean, after he died, he had disposed of any property we had and, well the old homestead was still there.  I gave the homestead and the property to the Darlington Recreation Department and they were supposed to build the first integrated swimming pool on the property and you see, this had to be during the, the southerners began to build the swimming pools and let blacks swim.  They were going to build a swimming pool there and invite all the kids to, but that never happened.  I think they opened up the swimming pools downtown.  Darlington did--Darlington never had any real, any real race riots or anything.  People moved when they had to move.  When they had to open up the public schools, they did.  When they had to open St. John's School [St. John's Elementary School, Darlington, South Carolina] to blacks, they did.  When they had to open the public, I mean the school swimming pool to blacks, they did.  So the pool was never built on the property, but the city still owns the property.  They have a plaque there, a monument to our parents.
Story_ID: 307666
Speaker 1: And your sister?
Speaker 2: My sister died.  My sister--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Andrena [Andrena Collins Baumgardner].
Speaker 1: Can you spell it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Andrena was a social worker, married to Herbert Baumgardner who is the old Columbia, South Carolina family.  Herbert had a brother in Cleveland [Ohio] named Luther Baumgardner, he was a physician but Herbert and my sister lived in the old Baumgardner estate on Hampton Street, 2320 Hampton Street, just across the street from the Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] football field but Herbert had gone to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He had a master's degree in language and he was teaching languages at Allen but he had an addiction, alcohol.  He would get his check and before he had got home, he'd gone and spent it and wrecked the car.  My sister, being a social worker, always had an automobile.  So she tolerated all that she could and I was in New York [New York], we were in New York, and our baby was to be born, our first child was to be born in May and she was to come up and visit us and I got a telephone call that she had committed suicide.  She had committed suicide behind her husband's, you know, just being--he was never cruel to her.  She never said that he ever struck her, but, you know, you can, you can be, there are many ways of being oppressive to a marriage rather than just hitting people, but that's what she did.  She took potassium permanganate and I remember the story.  My mother [Lucy Miller Collins] lived about eighty-five miles away in Darlington [South Carolina] and my mother went up to Columbia when my sister laid in the bed for, oh, almost twenty-four hours with her, potassium permanganate.  I, if she had been in some other city and they had enlarged her stomach and washed it out, but the only place in town for blacks in those days was a little hospital called, Waverly Hospital [Good Samaritan-Waverly Hospital, Columbia, South Carolina].  They just didn't have the facility to do all that, so she just laid up there and died.  I can't blame the hospital.  The hospital didn't have the facilities.  If she, I can certainly lay some blame to the southern system of segregation.  She could not go to the county hospital or to another hospital and get proper care, so she died for the lack of proper care and that was a real sad time for me.  I went down to Columbia for the funeral.  It was a real, a real sad time for me and, you know, I have photographs of her.  She was also a flyer.  In 19--she was a licensed pilot, you know, a small plane.  I have photographs of her which I've shown it to the Frankfurter people.  She had a license to pilot.  So she was a flyer and then this is, she died in 1942 and she was flying two or three years before that and I have a photograph of her in her plane, at her plane, you know.
Speaker 1: How did she become interested (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was a time and I, there probably weren't but one or two other black women flying.  I've seen photographs of black women flying in that era, but I don't remember her name but my sister was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did she become interested in flying but she was trained--
Speaker 2: Well, she was a wonderful gal.  She was my best buddy.
Speaker 1: Was she?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was my best buddy.
Speaker 1: I find that so interesting that she was a pilot.  How did she become interested?  Where did she train?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know, she just took, you know, you had local, they had local plane, you had local people who, you could rent the plane and fly them, but she was flying, she was flying and she was solo, I mean, so therefore she had to be, she'd been flying, I guess in the early, in the early, you know, '40s [1940s] or the late '30s [1930s].  Well, another black woman, I've seen photographs of her in a leather outfit, with a leather cap on who was flying at that time, I can't think of her name.
Story_ID: 307667
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about the neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, it was the colored part of town.  There was, when I was a kid, there were no, there was no city water supply.  We had a well.  When I, my youngest memory.  My father [Andrew Collins] was in the draying business before he became a house mover.  He's in the draying business.  He moved tobacco around from the warehouse to warehouse and moved cotton around from the gins, pardon me, but he was a dray- had dray, had a drayage company and had a big barn in the back of our home with maybe about eight or ten horse teams, eight or ten, about ten horses, it'd be four, two-horse teams which he used to pull his dray trucks.  I can remember in the mornings those guys coming down by the side of the house, going back to the barns, watering up the horses and tying them up to the wagon and so forth and I can remember my dad bought the first Republic [Republic Motor Truck Company] truck.  The Republic truck was an old diesel truck, a two-lunged diesel truck.  It had thick, hard rubber tires, about that thick, I mean, hard rubber, not like the soft rubber now in automobiles this would have been, when it went along, it went along with a big jolt but it was a diesel.  Dad had his diesel, I remember that and, of course, diesel didn't last very long before it hadn't got into Ford [Ford Motor Company] and Chevrolet began to build trucks, a lot of weight trucks and more efficient trucks.
Speaker 1: So what was your community, the neighbors, your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: My neighborhood, of course, all black.  There was a house of prostitution down the street, about a block from my house.  My mother [Lucy Miller Collins] had a grocery store.  She never, she never disparaged the prostitutes and we had this grocery store, so I had to sometimes deliver groceries there and she said, "Son, you go in and you be courteous and you come on back out."  But it's a funny thing.  I finished high school [Mayo High School; Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina] in 1932.  That was in the height of the Depression [Great Depression], and my family made the decision, all of my brothers had gone, my brother, one brother had gone to Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], Waldo [Waldo Collins], one [Elliott Turnage] had gone to into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], my sister [Andrena Collins Baumgardner] had gone to Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] and AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  When it came my time to go to college in 1932, my parents were hard up, money was short.  They made a temporary, they made a decision that I would not go to college and Ms. Buford [ph.], that was her name, she was the headmistress at the whorehouse, came in the store one day and asked me what I was going to do.  I guess I was blue, maybe crying, I don't remember that.  So I said, "My parents said I couldn't go to college, they couldn't afford to send me to college."  So she berated my mother and she said to her, "Ms. Lucy, how could you not send this boy to college?  He's the nicest kid you got," and that was what it took for my dad to go down on a Sunday morning to the home of the guy who was the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company agent, borrowed $200 on his insurance policy, which I finally saw that when he died, I, when I cashed that policy, there was the $200 he borrowed.  He'd gone to the, to the agent's home that Sunday morning and got a $200 check to give to me to go to college.  So you never know where strength comes, you never know from whence it comes.
Story_ID: 307668
Speaker 1: On, along that line, the church, was your family very active in the church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the church, depended upon who my mother [Lucy Miller Collins] was mad at (laughter).  Basically, we were A.M.E.s [African Methodist Episcopal], Bethel A.M.E. Church [Darlington, South Carolina] was the church that we really grew up in and Bethel A.M.E. Church was a part of the A.M.E. church that supported Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] so we were basically African Methodist Episcopals, but I guess my mother would get mad at somebody so we would over to Saint--to St. James Methodist Church [St. James United Methodist Church, Darlington, South Carolina], which was the C.M.E., which was the Colored Methodist Episcopal church [Christian Methodist Episcopal church] in that era and it's a funny thing and it was true all over the South in that era.  St. James Methodist Church, the Colored Methodist church, C.M.E., Colored Methodist church, was across the street, across Pearl Street, on this side across the street was the Methodist Church South, Episcopal Church South [Methodist Episcopal Church South].  In that era, all the churches, the Baptist and the Methodist church, always had a black church to join in because that's where the slaves went.  The slaves, you know, you first, they would, they didn't go to the white Methodist church and they, they didn't bug us so they built the church, it might seem like a long distance then, you know, down across the hollow, across the creek or some place, but as you get older and you get paved streets and you get elevations and you get contouring and so forth, you're right across the street from the big, from the big Methodist Church but that was true for all over the South and in Augusta, Georgia, there was a beautiful Baptist church, a great big beautiful because Baptist really built some fine churches, white, Methodist--Baptist Church South, there was always a little black church behind it, and it's still true.  I don't know that, I know in Augusta, Georgia, the church is still there.
Speaker 1: So did the church influence your life?  How did it--
Speaker 2: The church?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Were you act- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The A.M.E. church?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were growing up, how was--did it influence you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I mean, you know, you dealt with college people, people coming in town who you had programs, you had Easter programs, you had revivals, you had ministers coming and speaking, you had picnics, you know, you, when the presiding elders came, you were in touch with them and they would inspire you and tell you to, you know, help.  I'll never forget at Eastertime, at Eastertime I had a song to sing as all kids did in those days.  Everybody had a song, a verse you'd have to say at Easter.  My song was 'Jesus was a little boy just like me' [ph.] and, you know, you asked me whether I had a nickname, yes, some of those hard knock boys who heard me sing this Easter song, started calling me Jesus.  (Laughter)  Oh, boy, that'd been, of course, it made me mad when they did that, but they would say, "Here comes Jesus."  'Jesus was a little boy just like me.'  Do you remember that song?  You never heard it?
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the words?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Do you remember the words?
Speaker 2: Just, 'Jesus was a little boy just like me,' I guess there were some other words, but that was all I remember but what I remember was that they were hard knock boys from across the west end that called me Jesus.
Speaker 1: So the west end was?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the part of town where the not-so-well-off blacks lived.
Story_ID: 307669
Speaker 1: And when you went to elementary school, what was your elementary school like?  Were there some teachers there?
Speaker 2: Mayo, Mayo High School [Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina] and I run across the history of Mayo High School while I was looking at some of this material for, Mayo High School was founded right after the Civil War and there's a world history of Mayo and Mayo [Dwight Mayo] was a Baptist--a Methodist minister, a white Methodist minister, who started Mayo High, Mayo School, which, of course, became Mayo Elementary School and then Mayo High School and it's still now, it's still in existence, now it's totally integrated, of course, but--
Speaker 1: What were some of the teachers there who influenced you over there?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were fantastic.  They were, they were people but they were fantastic.  I, myself, I was way overweight, I was, they used to call me fatty as a little boy, I was fat and I was, I was not rambunctious, but I was mischievous and I would throw spitballs and I would just say things to the girls and do something and the teacher, the punishment that day was to, you see, boys sat in one, sat in certain rows and the girls sat in certain rows, separate.  So the punishment was this teacher, for me acting up would be to make me sit over in the aisle with the girls, that was the punishment and, of course, my greatest plea was then was, "Don't tell my mother [Lucy Miller Collins]," because my mother was a school teacher.  So the greatest threat they could put on me was, "I'm going to tell Ms. Lucy about you," because everybody was your mother.  Everybody had authority to tell you when you weren't behaving properly.  Now, you're afraid to do that for afraid the kid may reject you in such a way that you could be damaged but everybody was a mother.  Everybody had some authority over you.  You really had a village in those days.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?  Were you, did you love to read or were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I was not, I was, if you were to take an average, I was probably, I think I was below average student but in the senior year of my high school, this book I wrote on dentistry, if you will notice in the formatter, I dedicated it to a man named, I.C. Wiley.  I.C. Wiley was a young teacher who had just finished Claflin University [Orangeburg, South Carolina], Claflin College, the year before I was a senior in high school, so he, more than four or five years older than I, maybe seven or eight years because he had to finish four years of college, maybe he was six years older than I.  He'd come down to my little high school to teach and he taught mathematics and during that one year, he had to pass by my mother's grocery store to get to where he lived.  He lived with a Mr. and Mrs. King [ph.] around the corner from our house.  He would stop by my mother's grocery store and sit on the bench, eating a quart of ice cream and challenge me as an individual, you know, challenge me.  How he did it I wish I had, knew the combination because before the year was out, I was so good at math that he had to put a special, it was, there were two kids in my class who were always ahead of the class, a boy named Roy Green [ph.], whom we called, the cabbage green, and a girl named Ernestine Keith [ph.], they were always ahead of the class, they were always ahead of the class and I was along with the stragglers.  By the end of that first year of Mr. Wiley's teaching mathematics, he was teaching geometry, trigonometry, Mr. Wiley, we were, there were three of us challenging each other, he put a special question in the exam for the three of us and immediately, if you understand that mathematics, the minute you see the problem, you got the answer, you know.  It's no big long thing.  I had the answer right in my head.  Mr. Wiley knew I had it and he kept going around to the other two, hinting to them, hinting the answer and I remember telling him I said, "Wiley, that's not fair.  That's not fair."  But anyway, this man was a man that gave me the spark, the spark of confidence that no other teacher had ever done and I never looked back.  Since that time I was, if I might say so, ahead of all my classes.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite classes?
Speaker 2: Science, science.  I wish that I had taken, I wish that I had had more English and more compositions and so forth.  I wish, but science was, science came easy to me.  Mathematics was easy.
Story_ID: 307670
Speaker 1: What were some of your friends, when you were in school, people you grew up with?
Speaker 2: Which level?
Speaker 1: Elementary school and high school.
Speaker 2: Well, the elementary school kids, in fact one young man, one young man, he's as old as I am, well about four months younger, was born next door to me in Darlington [South Carolina].  We had this big house and we had, the house next door that belonged to my parents [Lucy Miller Collins and Andrew Collins], small two bedroom house and a family lived there, their name was Saunders, pardon me, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S, I think their name was Sanders, S-A-N-D-E-R-S, but somewhere along the line, the girls changed it to S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S, but they lived next door and there were kids in that family that matched just about with me, matched my sister [Andrena Collins Baumgardner], matched my brother, we grew up together and the one boy in the family who matched my age, the youngest in the family, his name was Archer J. Saunders [ph.], we call him Buster, he and I have been friends, he, you know, I played football together in high school [Mayo High School; Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina].  I was a couple years ahead of him.  He came down to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] and played football at Paine College.  When I moved out here to practice dentistry, he was in New York [New York] as an accountant, working with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] in accounting and he and his wife moved out here and she became my business manager.  He and I have been friends ever since.  In fact, I call him at least once a week.  We call each other now, one or the other.  He is as feeble as I am, maybe more so, but we stay in touch.  I used to always go and see him or he used to come over here and we'd have lunch.  He was a great golfer.   He could have been the Tiger, Tiger Woods.  He could have been the Tiger Woods, but, of course, that was impossible.  He worked, he was a, he was a caddy, he was a caddy in South Carolina, he was a caddy at the golf course and he took a, he could take a five-iron, he could play the whole course with a five-iron, he used it as a wood, he used it as a chipper, used it as a putter and we played golf together for two years out here and, I mean, for ten years, or fifty years out here.  Neither of us are able to play golf anymore, but we're in touch.  We're in touch for lunch or he'll drive over here to have lunch with me.  I won't drive to Richmond [California] and if he lives in, over in Richmond.  I don't drive, I don't want to drive the bridge.  Driving is so hazardous now.  I don't drive, but we talk.  So we've been friends since we were born, still friends.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Story_ID: 306361
Speaker 1: Just before we left, you were telling us about your lifelong friend [Archer J. Saunders (ph.)].  Could you tell us some of the things that you did when you were in high school [Mayo High School; Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina], some of your extra--your teams or--
Speaker 2: Well, you want to know, I'll tell you one thing I did that was, as I reflect on this, it's very, very informative for me.  My father [Andrew Collins] was a contractor.  I learned how to work with him early on.  I always had use of an automobile so on Sundays, you know, I'd pick up my buddies, we'd go pick up a couple of girls, we'd just ride, just ride from one place to another, just ride around, Sunday afternoon.  Well one Sunday, we rode out on somebody's property and we were lucky to have, picked up the girls that this young man wanted to pick up and ride but all innocent stuff, really, and he told us to get off his property and, somehow or another, I must have said something back to him in some kind of way, we had some words, and he said, "I'll see you at school tomorrow."  Well, he was a country farm boy and really, if I'm honest about it, I was a little afraid of him.  I'm a city slicker, you know, and this may shock you, but there was an old pistol in the pantry, it was rusty, it hadn't shot, it hadn't fired, I guess, in twenty-five or thirty years, with mold on it and whatnot, but I took that, I took that to school with me for protection and at lunchtime, this boy's name was Harold Smoot [ph.].  At lunchtime, Harold Smoot came up to me and said, "All right, we're going to settle this," and I whipped out my gun.  Well, now I think about kids getting into trouble so easily and get off on the wrong track.  If I had behaved that way in San Francisco [California] today, I would be in jail.  I would be a juvenile delinquent but instead the school, whomever was in charge of the yard that day, came and took me up to the principal's office, the principal sat me down, said "I'll get back to you, Dan [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins]," and I described to him what had happened.  By the time that school was out, it happened during the lunch hour, school was out, he called Harold Smoot in, Harold told him the same story, I drove Har--Harold Smoot's ride had left by the time the principal got through with us, so I rode Harold home.  The whole thing was settled without calling parents, without calling police but my behavior was such that had it, in the modern day era, I would be a juvenile delinquent.  I might be in prison with a gun, I don't know what they might have done to me, having used a gun in the act, I might have gotten the three, what is it, three strikes, three strikes, you know, and in one strike, but I grew up in what I would consider a loving and kind society, not fancy but the principal had me come back 'cause, you know, in those days, if you get, he had a strap, it was on a wooden, a wooden handle, it was a strap on the end, a leather strap, and you get so many strokes on your hand, one, two, five, he promised me so many strokes, so many licks.  I had to come back to him after school every day.  He was always too busy to give them to me.  He would make me go with him down to the gym where the, you know, we had the big auditorium where they play basketball or whatever, but almost for three or four weeks he had me come back every day, never did punish me but that was a masterful way of managing me because it'd give me minutes, much time to think about my behavior and what I had done but it was a loving society, it was the village.
Story_ID: 306362
Speaker 1: When you were in school, were you in the choir, the school paper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never, I never, I never--
Speaker 1: --what kind of other activity--what activities did you do?
Speaker 2: Well I remember being in a, Fu Manchu, in a play, what's that play?  There was a play but I never had a voice, I never had a singing voice and so I didn't, I sang in college [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia] as long as I could disguise my voice with maybe fifteen other voices and the boys glee club, you know, and had a good bass or a good baritone that would carry the tune, I could, could sing behind that, but I, music--I've always had a fondness for music, a great love for music but I started the piano.  My wife, I mean my mother [Lucy Miller Collins] gave me money to go to Miss, Ms. Maggie Smalls [ph.], is the name of the woman who taught music.  I went to Ms. Maggie Smalls' house from the time I was eight or ten or eleven, somewhere in there, she'd give me, I don't know, twenty-five cents worth of music lessons and I would head over to Ms. Maggie Small for my music lesson and I would pass by these boys on the corner, teasing me for going to music lessons, so I'd end up going downtown buying marbles and not going to music lessons.  So I, when I went to college, I had a clarinet.  My parents had given me the clarinet.  I went to the music department, no talent, but I have a love for music.  I loved the guitar music, I loved classical guitar and I ended up studying classical guitar over here in Mill Valley [California] and this had to be now in the '50s [1950s] and my teacher, my instructor here was a very good teacher.  She went to Segovia [Andres Segovia] in Italy and studied with Andres Segovia.  And so I asked her if she would, I had a Martin guitar [C.F. Martin & Company], if she would just have him to, ask for, if she would pick up, she was going back to Germany to pick me up a Schwarz guitar [Schwarz Custom Guitars], I think that was it.  So she mentioned this to Segovia and Segovia said, "Well, listen, give him one of my guitars."  I have one of Segovia's concert guitars made by Vitaday [ph.] and in the box, it says, "Made especially for Andres Segovia in 1958 by Vitaday."  Vitaday is the, is famous, not for guitars, he is famous, that whole family is famous for violin bows.  They make all the fine violin bows in the world but also make a few guitars so, and they made this especially for Andres Segovia, one of my sons has it now.  So I studied that very, very seriously and got a pretty good repertoire.  I mean, I can, I can entertain a group for an hour with different types of flamenco and some very complicated pieces, but I discovered I was not going to be a concert guitarist and the older I get, I mean, I just, I put it down because the arthritis it got, I just couldn't work my fingers, but I love guitar music.  I got a pretty good collection.
Story_ID: 306363
Speaker 1: You had mentioned the teacher that encouraged you to go to college and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I.C. Wiley--
Speaker 1: --and you talked about the lady down the street who told your mother [Lucy Miller Collins] you had to go.  So when you finally, when everybody got the money together and you went away to school, can you tell us about when you first went to school and where you went, and what you studied and something about--
Speaker 2: I went to Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.  I went there because the business manager in the college, my family, my family college was really Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] and I had a brother-in-law teaching at Allen, my sister [Andrena Collins Baumgardner] lived in Columbia [South Carolina].  I was supposed to go to Allen, but a fellow named Wheeler Irving [ph.] who grew up with my sister and brothers, their peers, older, maybe ten, fifteen years older than I, was a business manager at Paine College.  I played football in high school [Mayo High School; Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina], so he wanted me to come down to Paine College, and he managed a football scholarship with a little bit of help.  So I went to Paine College instead and, so that's why I went to Paine College.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what, some of the classes you took?  What was the school like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I took, I took a major in chemistry and, I mean, a minor in physics and mathematics, and was scheduled to, pardon me, my professor, my science teacher had finished Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and he had arranged for me to take graduate, a graduate degree at Indiana and a scholarship and whatnot, but I really wanted to be an engineer.  I wanted to build bridges and so forth because I'd been around, that was my dad's [Andrew Collins] work, but I also knew that if I had gone for engineering, the only other person having finished engineering at that time was Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.  He finished in the [U.S.] military.  There was nothing for me to do but to teach at some little college, and I could make more money, I did make more money with my dad, working for him than any black school teacher could make in those days.
Story_ID: 306364
Speaker 1: So I worked with my dad [Andrew Collins] for a year and bought an automobile, saved some money and one cold day, I was working with my dad, we had, I remember we had a fire in the big drum to kind of warm our hands under a house and some kind of, where I was working under a house and somebody turned a water faucet on when they shouldn't have and I got wet.  It didn't hurt me or anything but it was a downer.  Also at my dad's work, at that time, called for us having to move.  We'd go to one town, he had contracts with the highway department from South Carolina and one of the first states to expand its highway system, but in order to expand the highway system, the city, or the state has to acquire property and when you acquire property to take a roadway through, you cut through people's graveyards, you cut through their fences, you cut through their houses, you cut through their telephone poles and my dad's contract with the state was to clear the right of way or whatever was in the right of way, if it was movable.  He moved houses, large back of barns, not many grand houses because, you know, white people with grand houses, you just took it over in another direction, you didn't go through the boss man's, but a lot of houses had to be moved and that's what, that's what I did from the time I was, but I decided, since the work called for, for having to go to where the work was, it meant that he had a team of men, we would come in and we would, they would get our provisions, and we'd go out to this town, he would rent a house, hire a cook--one of the men was cook, and we stayed a whole week.  I spent many a summers down in Crawfish Row [sic. Cabbage Row; Catfish Row] in Charleston [South Carolina].
Story_ID: 306365
Speaker 1: So what was Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] like?  What was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, Paine College was great, you know.  People talk now, there were always three times the girls on the campus as boys.  It's always been like that.  Black families would educate their girls.  I guess it was for protection reason because girls were more exposed and man just didn't want his daughter, he wanted to try to give his daughter protection.  So there have always been more black women finishing, going to college than black men for whatever reason.  So there were probably two girls, two boys on the campus for each girl.  It was a small college.  My graduating class only had twenty-four people in it and that was, that was about an average class.  Now, they have 150 or so graduating a year but then a class of thirty or twenty-four was a pretty large class and everybody knew everybody.  Everybody, we knew everybody.  There was just nobody on the campus you did not know and did not know well.  So it was like a great big family.  I remember, in that era, Paine College, I don't know if you know anything about golf but one of the finest golf courses in the world is the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament, Augusta, Georgia].  As the crow flies, the Masters is only one mile from Paine College and Paine College, at one time, owned about fifty acres of land between it and Augusta National [Augusta National Golf Club, Augusta, Georgia], but over the years, they've sold off some of that property for housing and whatnot but the City of Augusta [Georgia] was very warm to Paine graduates.  Many of our girls and boys lived in the City of Augusta.  In fact, I would say that the school was about half residential and about half came from the city, from Macon [Georgia], South Carolina or from towns close.  Danny Glover's mother is a graduate of Paine College.  In fact, Danny [HistoryMaker Danny Glover] used to be on our, you mentioned Danny earlier, he used to be, I think he still is a emeritus board member but his mother was a graduate, I think the class of '65 [1965], I think it's '65 [1965].  Danny has made a big grant to the college in honor of his mother.  I don't know how long Paine College can survive.  There is no cheap way to educate a child.  There's no cheap way to educate, I mean it costs as much to educate a kid at Paine College as it does at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], if you had the money.  The teachers weren't going to get the salary if you don't have the building but if you're going to get a first class education, there is no second class money.  So for the money that black colleges [HBCUs] get, I think it does have, I think the colleges do a fantastic job for the kind of money they have, the kind of teachers they can support, most of the teachers who come because they are the devoted to the students.  They can find a better paying job somewhere else, and the college has to depend upon a lot of foreigners.  I know in order to get your Ph.D. up, Ph.D. proportion up in the classroom, you depend upon foreigners to a large extent for your, I mean, there are a number of Indians teaching at Paine College and I think at other schools as well.  The one thing that students often complain about the Indians professors, particularly, looked down their nose upon the students and I didn't have that trouble when I was there because they didn't have any Indians or any foreign nationals.
Story_ID: 306366
Speaker 1: We had white people.  Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] has always from its inception.  Paine College was founded, the black colleges in the country were all, all black, founded by Methodist, Baptist, Episcopal, or Presbyterian churches.  They were all black in the early years.  Paine College was founded by a joint venture between the C.M.E. church, the Colored Methodist Episcopal church [Christian Methodist Episcopal church] and the Methodist Episcopal Church South, the white and black Methodist churches jointly founded Paine College and it was the only such school founded by both the white and black section of a church and on that campus, beginning in 1932 when I was a freshman, there was never a moment of segregation on that campus.  A white person put his foot on that campus, he was a person.  There was no setting seats assigned and we'd have all kinds of presentations in the auditorium.  Whites were welcome but they found seats where they found seats.  There were no seats put aside for white people, as the other schools had.  When the teachers came, if a white came on the campus for any purpose, for some of the sessions or for special occasions whatever, the teachers would eat with the, at the teachers table but the teachers, white and black teachers, ate together.  Anybody else, and the students ate with the students.  There was no white table and no black table.  So I learned the beginning of 1932, I learned how to live in the integrated world.  I learned not to be afraid of the presence of white people because they were present in my four years of education and I'd come to respect them and had affection just like I did for my black teacher.  In fact, I got to the place where I paid it no attention.  I did not think of my white teachers as being white or my black teachers as being black, it didn't, and I think that prepared me for joining Dr. Howard Thurman's church.  The first integrated church  in America was the little church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples] he started here in San Francisco [California] and joining that, that event is still that church yesterday, east of it, that church is still, still surviving.  It is not, it is not a (unclear) church.  In fact, the church and the black churches are taking on another whole event now, there are 25,000, 15,000, ten--or how, fellowship church is still a small church, it may be 150 or maybe a hundred members, but they are tough people and they're committed people, they're not, if you're going to talk to us, you're going to talk sense, you're not going to talk a lot of hogwash.
Story_ID: 306367
Speaker 1: When you were at Paine [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia], what organizations were you involved in?  Were you in a fraternity or clubs or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had--no fraternities.  There were no fraternities, no sororities on the campus.  We had Zenyeski [ph.] social science club.  There was social science, it was a science club.  You had, what else, what other kind of clubs we have.  Of course we had athletics and you had the music department, kids who took music.  You had the debate team.  You had a good, you had a good, Frank Yerby was in school with me.  Remember Frank Yerby?  You ever heard of the name Frank Yerby?
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Isn't that amazing?  Frank Yerby is on the era of James Baldwin, same generation of writers.  Frank Yerby wrote about fifty books, Dell Publishing Company, they were all novels.  Dell was his publisher.  Half a dozen of his books became motion pictures, 'The Vixens' [Frank Yerby] and two or three others became motion pictures, this is the background in the '50s [1950s] and this was quite something.  So Frank became quite a writer.  He became one of the best known black writers in the world.  He moved to France, I mean, to, to Spain, to Madrid.  He so removed himself from the black world.  I know I got some photographs somewhere, you might, might run across him before, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin people leave.  Frank, Frank Yerby was given an honorary degree at Paine College, I have photographs of that happening, and he became very bitter.  I don't know why.  Well, Frank and I were roommates.  I'd come to Paine, I mean, he was a year behind me in college.  I went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] as a freshman at Meharry in dental school.  Frank had come up to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] to take a master's degree in drama and he took a master's at Fisk.  He and I and another, one of his classmates named Robert Screen [ph.], roomed together.  In those days, there was no, there were no dormitories at Paine, I mean at Meharry.  We would room in people's houses, they would rent us a room and we were in the lady's living room the three of us.  So Frank and Screen and I were roommates.  So we were very close.  You know you roommate with somebody, you train, you trade ties, you go eat together and you bring a sandwich back and whatnot. But when Frank got to be famous, he wanted nothing in the world to do with black people.  Unfortunately, DeReath [DeReath Curtis James] and I took a trip to Spain, we were going over to Greece so we stopped through, through Madrid, I had his address from Dell, I wrote him a letter so to anticipate us coming.  When I got there, I couldn't get him on the telephone.  Where he lived, it was only about ten blocks from the hotel where I was and in those days, I was doing a lot of walking for exercise, so I walked over to his place, I talked to his concierge, his concierge said he had gone to his summer place.  So Frank didn't want to be bothered with black people.  He must have had a miserable--if you read, if you read carefully, James Baldwin, James Baldwin mentions him by name that he was, that he turned his back, you know, he was, could have done so much more than he did do but his attitude was such.  So James Baldwin took him on in his, in one or two of his books, but Frank Yerby was one of the guys at the campus.
Story_ID: 306368
Speaker 1: There was one young man [Dr. Mack Gipson, Jr.] there named, he finished Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] and the first black Ph.D. in geology.  Why can't I think of his name?  It's, tip of my tongue, but he was the first black, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] from Paine, University of Chicago and took a degree in geology, became the first geologist, the first black geologist in the country.  Then after spending a career working for oil exploration, people in Houston [Texas], University of Caro--University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] he became a professor at University of South Carolina and he died on the faculty of the University of South Carolina in geology.  And of course, there were, Paine never had any, a whole lot of famous people like Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] did and like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] did.  Morehouse was very productive or, it's not as famous as a Franciscan school Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] does a great job, one of the best in the country for preparing students for medicine and for science but Paine was, Paine was, in general, I would say it was in the middle of, a middle level black school, but still does a great job because the kids who go to Paine College, 75 percent of them would not go to college if Paine College wasn't available and I always say to them when I would address them that, you can get there from here.  You asked me what my favorite statement was, my favorite statement, maybe that's it, "You can get there from here, it's all up to you."
Story_ID: 306369
Speaker 1: After you went to Paine [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia], you went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Meharry.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about Meharry, your times there?  What did you study in?
Speaker 2: Well, dentistry.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to study that?
Speaker 2: How did I decide on dentistry?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My dad's [Andrew Collins] work, as I told you earlier, it meant that you had to be away from home for weeks at a time and I wanted to get married, I wanted to have children and I thought that choosing a profession or a proviso work that caused you from being away from your family was not a good way to start a family.  So I really, my first application, I first applied to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] for medical school but medical class, Howard, Howard wrote me back that the class was filled, so I wrote the Paine guy, I mean to Meharry, Meharry wrote me back, the medical class is filled by the time I applied, but we have openings in dentistry.  So I said, "Fine."
Speaker 1: So what was Meharry like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful.  We didn't have dormitories, we lived in people's homes but you had a lot of sororities, a lot of fraternities, so you had dances to go to.  At least once a month, you went to, you went to somebody's dance, either AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  It was a wonderful, narrow and close, of course, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] was just across the street, so they are plenty girls and Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] was just five blocks down, down the street.  So you had plenty of girls, so there were plenty of your peers in your same environment.  So it was just a wonderful place to be for four years, wonderful place to be.
Story_ID: 306370
Speaker 1: Okay, we've been talking.  You went to Paine [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia] and you went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  Can you tell us something else about the rest, how, the rest of your education and training?
Speaker 2: Well, from there I went to New York City [New York, New York], out of Meharry, I went to New York City for a one year fellowship at Guggenheim Clinic [Guggenheim Dental Clinic] in children's dentistry, which is that, in that era, was the course of training, graduate course, that would certify you for, we call, pediadontist, children's dentistry.  There was one other up in New York, I mean in Boston [Massachusetts] that served the same purpose of training in children's dentistry.  So I spent a year in New York at the--have I mentioned here about being called to the [U.S.] military?  Well, while we were there, while I was there, I went to New York in 1942 for a one year fellowship along with four other, along with three other black interns from Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], two from Howard, two of us from Meharry and there were about forty-five interns there from all the other schools, all the, all the dental schools in America were given a fellowship to award, to their best student.  There were a couple of guys from South America, so there were maybe fifty interns and they had a big seven-story building there that Guggenheim had endowed and we gave free, our training was on the, in children's dentistry, but the clinic, but the clinic provided free dental care for children on the West Side, on the East Side, on the West Side of New York, I guess, yeah, on the west side, I don't know, is it east?  I can never tell how the island [Manhattan, New York] runs, 72nd [Street] and New York, just around the corner from New York University [New York, New York], that's where we took our surgery there but I spent a year training there and war [World War II, WWII] broke out while I was there and it was December the 7th, '41 [1941].  By the next week, all the interns were broken up into groups of ten or twelve and on the alternate days, the groups were sent down to Whitehall Street by instructions from the military to apply, to apply for a physician--to apply for a commission.  Now, all of the white interns would stop by, would take the exam, get sworn in as first lieutenants, get a cheat sheet, stop by Barneys [Barneys New York] or someplace on the way back from the clinic and get uniforms and come back to the clinic in the afternoon, all dressed and ready to go to the military and then they would wait around until they got assignment.  There were four black guys, we all went down, took our exam and neither of us were commissioned.  When I got up, when I, the officer in charge, the ward officer said, "Stand and bring your, show me your certificates, I mean, your diplomas and stand up and be sworn in and Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], the colonel, will see you in his office."  So, I knew what was coming.  I knew what was coming.  So I went to the colonel's office, he had an office about twice the size of my bathroom there and he said, "Dr. Collins, I just got a directive from Washington [D.C.], they are commissioning the colored doctors all in Washington, directly in the department [U.S. Department of War; U.S. Department of Defense]," I mean, just a delaying technique, so that's twice we were denied.  We were denied when they, when they invited us to the class to apply for a physician--for a commission because they were expanding the peacetime [U.S.] Army, they didn't take any blacks and I have those documents which he, that have the invitation, dated and signed by the guy in Whitehall Street that turned me down because I was black, and all the other black doctors, and then I had this wife [DeReath Curtis James] and a brand new baby.  The baby was born in May and this is September.
Story_ID: 306371
Speaker 1: I had no job, I had $175, my last intern check.  We stopped by West Virginia on the way down to South Carolina to visit my wife's [DeReath Curtis James] parents for a few days and while there, I got in touch with a fellow named Joseph [ph.].  There was a black guy who was the liaison to the War Department [U.S. Department of War; U.S. Department of Defense].  He had toured with us in the United States.  My in-laws knew him.  I wrote him a letter and he apologized for the [U.S.] military not taking me, but they would sooner or later, and this was all during the time when the 92nd [92nd Infantry Division ] was being formed, you know, during, right at that time, they were expanding the 92nd to take black officers and train people.  The armed services [U.S. Armed Forces] had not desegregated, but they did not have a system for training the cadre of people, the black doctors, they really needed the black doctors.  So, but, when they expanded the 92nd, then they could take black doctors and they would take you in and I think I said earlier, some of my classmates were taken in as privates 'cause that depended upon your local draft board.  Your local draft board could take, call you up or not call you up.  And in some, it happened in my case, in South Carolina, that whoever, the guy who was in charge of my draft board was so glad that I had an invitation for a graduate, post graduate training in the University of California [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California], had a letter from the dean inviting me to come out here and study.  He was glad to get rid of me.  Well, you know, he just, a lot of people didn't like the idea of a black guy by having an officer's uniform.  He didn't say that to me, I don't know that to be true but he took any excuse I would give him to get out of his face, "You go on to California, take that scholarship, I'll take care of you."  So I came to California with that assurance.  When I got out here to California, the dean whom I never met before, only corresponded, the dean, I told the dean that they were after me now to go to the military, they had turned me down twice but they were after me again.  So he said, "Dan [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins]," said, "please write them a slow, by slow mail, write them a letter and let me declare you essential," because all the physicians and dentists and all the hospitals over the country, where there was a military establishment and the VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] had military, had VA facilities in all the cities in the country where there was a medical school and if you were on the faculty at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] or Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] or University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], you could also have an appointment in the VA facilities in that town, so that was extra income for you.  They could almost get military pay, you get retirement, you get extra income, you build up certain gratuities on top of your university salary.  Now when the war broke out, of course, you had all of these medical people, medical teachers and so forth who had been receiving money from the government, they were sort of like in reserve, so they would call in right away.  We had a rapidly expanding [U.S.] Army, so the medical schools in the country had been almost denuded all over the country for faculty because that was a quick fix while the whole acquisition process becomes formalized and intelligent, so the dean suggested I write them this little letter because he needed me on the faculty.  He had, his faculty had been little.  So I got an essential classification and I sat there during the whole Second World War [World War II, WWII] in the university with a, you know, with a, was it 2-A or some kind of exemption because I was essential.
Story_ID: 306372
Speaker 1: What was teaching like at UC San Francisco [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was fine.  It was fine.  The University of--it was fine.  The students, you know, all they want you to do is talk to them and give them a grade, you know.  I didn't feel any hostility from the students, in fact I developed some very good friends, many of them came to my office later on to practice with me.
Speaker 1: Did you get tenured there?
Speaker 2: Well, that's another whole book, of which I'm writing.  When I had, I had spent eighteen years at the university, I had gone up to all the steps, an assistant professor, the next step would be associate professor and tenure, eighteen years, but I was informed by the dean that there was no vacancy for me and a friend of mine named, oh goodness, he was a Jewish doctor who was trained in surgery at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland], Henry Weisengreen [H. Henry Weisengreen].  Henry Weisengreen had been an exquisitely trained oral surgeon, but he, but he was one step ahead of me in terms of getting his tenure.  He was giving a paper in New York City [New York, New York] to the American Association of Anatomy [American Association of Anatomist], some original dissection, when he got a telegram from the dean from the dental school out here, saying that his request for tenure was denied.  He was so taken aback by this.  He was in New York City, he called, my wife [DeReath Curtis James] and I were in Washington, D.C. at Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland], he flew down, spent the night with me, agonizing over the fact that he was turned down.  He finally got his professorship but he got it through the medical school teaching anatomy to medical students.  The dental school had never tenured a Jewish professor and never tenured an Asian, an Asian of any kind.  They were all good old boy--white boys, period.  Then in 1960, 1958 when it was obvious to me that that's what was going to happen to me, I left and I went into, I took that energy and put it into private practice, put it into political activity and my life took another whole departure to another whole direction.
Story_ID: 306373
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you tell us about this departure?  What was your private practice like?  Tell us a little bit about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had one of the best practices in America.  I had, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordon, Jr.] came all the way from New York City [New York, New York] for his dentistry out here.  [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and her daughter [Marie-Christine Dunham Pratt] and, I had one of the best practices in America and I only left that to go to Harcourt [Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich] and worked at Harcourt.  I had, I guess, over the years, I had about twenty young dentists, many of whom I trained at the University of California [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California], some I had not, had not been students of mine who would come with me and learned how to practice dentistry.  I guess about twenty of them over the years, white, all, all kind of kids, and then my activities, since I didn't have the university taking all my time, I got into politics and I ended up, let's see, the Governor Brown [Pat Brown] appointed me to the State Board of Public Health [California Department of Public Health] and then asked me to resign that after a year and become a member of the State Board of Public Education [California Department of Education], which I kept for the next seven years.  What I really learned what happened in public education.  At that time, we had the best education system in the country.  We created Silicon Valley and then 1989, about that date, two men named, one named Jarvis [Howard Jarvis], one named Gann [Paul Gann], promoted a tax initiative which took personal property, I mean private property off the tax rolls, so it completely gutted support for public education and it's been suffering ever since.  It's been suffering miserably ever since.  It's just going steep downhill and that whole philosophy of fighting taxes, one that the present administration, giving tax money back to people.  How, the government has no tax center, I mean it had no profit center, it doesn't make any potatoes or glassware or telephones or pianos or telescopes.  The government has no profit center.  The only profit center it has is the tax and if you give people back their taxes and you don't tax them and you make your whole philosophy, no tax, how in the hell are you going to run a government and the government is getting into that right now.  It's getting into, you see, you ride down the highway and that's your own, the governor in this state, now the governor is taking the money that should be spent for roads, your gas tax, he's using it for, for general fund and you ride the streets in California at your own peril.  Your car might drop into a hole any minute and I mean a big hole and you gotta, so you have developed a whole society that looks upon tax as an anathema.  Well, nobody in the history of mankind has ever loved taxes, however, you have been promised two things and what are they?
Speaker 1: Death and taxes.
Speaker 2: Death and taxes, and when you, then get into an administration that gives people back tax money and not tax and then spend money for [U.S.] military, we are so broke as a country.  We are so broke, our paper, our bonds and stuff are owned by Japan and China.  We don't even own our own debt.
Story_ID: 306374
Speaker 1: So how did you get involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Well, I told you, I couldn't get as involved in teaching as I wanted to, so I used that energy to be active in politics, and it so happens, I did it in the democratic, democratic politics just at a time when Pat Brown was running and Pat Brown became governor.  He was a good governor.  He was a, really a good guy.  He was a good guy and he was a, really supporting public education and he was running for the local here, as a district attorney and I campaigned for him then and I campaigned, I campaigned for Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II].  I was his Northern California chairman of his campaign in Northern California, co-chairman of his campaign for president.  I got some correspondence from Adlai Stevenson, some signed documents that she's going to be accessing and John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I was a candidate to, I was a delegate to the '60 [1960] Convention [1960 Democratic National Convention] in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: If you were in politics, it was a heady time.  It was a great time.  John Kennedy was a charming candidate.  I was a delegate to this convention and I never will forget on the day that the convention voted him to be president, he had overnight to choose a running mate and the first caucus he called to tell who he had chosen to his running mate was the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus].  Is he free?  I want him to bring that, can you get that--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We can do it later.  We want to stay on track.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why would he call the Black Caucus first?
Speaker 2: Oh, well because he had chosen Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] to be his running mate, a southern senator and, of course, he had, you know, the Black Caucus was suspicious of a southern senator and we were the first caucus and I guess about seven o'clock in the morning, we made it to the hotel and he, he and Johnson came in and the place was filled with all the black candidates, maybe two hundred black candidates from all over, all over the country and he announced and he said, you watch us the first one hundred days.  We're going to do things that have never been done before and after he made this announcement to us and announced that he had chosen Johnson and to watch, to give him one hundred days to watch what happened, everybody gathered around him as people do in politics, you know, he was getting ready to leave the room and Johnson was leaving the room by himself, almost like a stranger, he was, nobody paid him any attention.  He was walking out of the door to go to another caucus and I left the herd and walked over to him and said, "Senator, I'm from the South and if the South is ever going to change its attitude about blacks, it's going to be led by a southerner."  He never forgot that statement and I got a letter up there from him and Johnson did more for civil rights than anybody in the history of civil rights.  Kennedy never did very much of anything but Johnson did some heroic, and he said, he was perfectly, he was perfectly aware, he said, "We've just delivered the Democratic Party to the South to the Republicans."  He knew the price he was going to pay for it and it's true.  When he adopted the civil rights plank and so forth and his own program, the southern, the Southern Democrats just left the Democratic Party and went to the Republican Party--
Story_ID: 306375
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about local California politics, Northern California's, how it affects blacks (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frankly, frankly, I don't know any more about California politics than any other person who reads the newspaper.  I have just had enough to do with politics to be totally frightened of Schwarzenegger [Arnold Schwarzenegger].  He is a souped-up, jazzed up, exercise man, steroid man, has to be very bright, you know, you can't discount his intelligence, but he is really a Nazi at heart.  He can't, he does not grasp government by administer--I mean, by legislatures.  He wants to take his program to the people.  He is going to decide what the issues are and, personally, I vote no on all initiatives.  I don't care how the publicity sounds, I vote no because it's tough enough to understand what your legislature is saying when you have the opportunity to go up there and talk to them and you could follow his bill and you can follow legislature's bill, you could, he has to present it to the public.  These guys, I mean, it just doesn't, haven't got to talk to anybody, all you got to do is have money and buy an election.  If you think you can understand what is in an initiative, you must be a Ph.D. in gobbledygook because the initiatives never, almost without exception, never do what they publicize is going to be done by this initiative.  The board's on the tobacco thing.  It gots, that they own money.  In fact, Schwarzenegger got some money, an initiative on tobacco, I think, and he headed for children.  Well he, what's he doing with my tax money, with him running a profit organization with my tax money?  Well that's because you resist the democratic system.  You, it's a fascist, be my way or no way.  So I'm very frightened of, what I really cannot understand is how Shriver's [R. Sargent Shriver] daughter, how Maria [Maria Shriver] bought into that, and is buying into it but the man is a first-rate fascist.
Story_ID: 306376
Speaker 1: You were instrumental in helping the Urban League [National Urban League] get started in San Francisco [California].  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  Yes, I was.  When I came here in 1952, there were about thirteen--there were about 3,000 black people in San Francisco.  I came out in the fall of '42 [1942], just after Pearl Harbor, you know, a few months, less than a year before.  There were 1300 blacks out here before and by the time after Pearl Harbor, and this explosion of, of worker (unclear) goes--I just ran across a documentary here that was sent over to John Hope [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin].  Marin City [California], which is here right now, there's a whole document that showing the formation of Marin City, the destruction of the plans and whatnot.  You have 3000 blacks and in a matter of four or five months, you have 20 or 30,000 blacks coming on these trains.  I happen to be on the very train with those people, coming out here in 1942.  I drove the overland, the overland.  It took us five days to get from Chicago [Illinois] because all of the, about every fifty or sixty or one hundred miles, the passenger train was parked out over to a side and while a freight train came by.  Freight trains had, had priority.  That train was so, so crowded with people coming out here, not just blacks but, so crowded with people who could, who could leave wherever they were, with a one-way ticket.  No promise of a job, just come to California 'cause it gave, it sent the guys out to get a one-way tickets.  I sat on the same train.  That train was so crowded that the men's room, there was some guy sitting on the head.  Every seat in the men's room was taken.  You know, there are usually four or five seats around benches, that was taken.  They ran out of food in Ogden, Utah, they ran out of food and I remember going into, it had stopped at Ogden, I went into the station, and those peanuts smelled so good.  I bought some peanuts and got ill on the train from eating the peanuts on this empty stomach 'cause they had no other food and I just got a real sick feeling.
Story_ID: 306377
Speaker 1: But I made it here and where these blacks, this new population of blacks coming into town in mass numbers and the only, for the most part, the type of black person or white person who could pick up stakes, take a one-way ticket and go to a new territory was not the guy who had a job, was not the school teacher or the butcher or the baker, he, it was guys who would take anything, could only pay them at a dollar and five cents an hour, a dollar and ten cents an hour.  It was no big bonanza, it wasn't a gold rush, but it was a job and if you knew you had, that caliber of newcomer in large numbers and the Japanese almost the same day, it was only a month or so apart that the Japanese had been taken out of the Fillmore District [San Francisco, California] and put into concentration camps, and blacks ended up in town.  That's why they ended up in the Fillmore District because that's where, that's where the Japanese lived and there were vacant spots.  They just went into that, to that vacuum of space but then you had, you got these old time, old timers, I would have called them, about 3,000 that would have been in San Francisco [California] for, some of them for several generations, been here for a long time and they were pretty well settled.  The most important person in town was a man who drove, who drove the, the, who was the chauffeur for the, for the mayor, by the name of Walter Sanford.  He was the mayor's chauffeur.  He was the, he was, that's the man that you want to front for you because he would, he could get some action.  So you had to, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and some very thoughtful Caucasian ladies, Dan Carcelen [ph.] from the Levi Strauss family, formed a committee to study this new social situation in San Francisco and invited Charlie Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] who at that time was the president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I mean of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], invited Charlie Johnson to come out and conduct a study and people did this sub- study over about three or four months, he came back, had a series of meetings with the Social Service Department [California Department of Social Services], with the YMC--with the YW--YMCA who sponsored this thing, I'm just finding out, and decided that Charlie Johnson suggested that the Urban League would be the best social answer to this new population.  Another group is, another group, old timers here, did not want New York-type people controlling, they wanted local people, they formed the Council for Civic Unity.
Story_ID: 307490
Speaker 1: So we were starting, you were starting to tell us how you got involved with the Urban League [National Urban League].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] decided that it would get involved and it sponsored a study of the attitude of San Franciscans towards this new population and invited Dr. Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson], who was the outstanding sociologist at that time and president of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], invited him to head such a study.  His, he had an assistant named, Herman Long [Herman H. Long], who later became president of Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama].  Herman, he set out to stay in San Francisco [California] and, you know the conductors had, we had meetings and he talked to all kind of different social workers and different organizations, social organizations, social welfare organizations, social clubs.  A woman named Ms. Anna Volkman [ph.] and another woman named Amy Braden [ph.] and Dan Carcelen [ph.], who at that time was president of Levi Strauss [Levi Strauss & Company, San Francisco, California], people of that nature were on this committee, people who really wanted to help and try to find something about this new population because those had begun to slam downtown, but these blacks came out here who hadn't, you know, they'd go downtown and they want to try on hats.  You know what happened then, don't you?  (Laughter)  They wanted to try on dresses.  And so doors began to slam and tensions began to build.  So we just, we had, I guess there were many, thirty or forty people without a different, we had a--Charlie Johnson made a chart out of questions he would ask and so forth and I just discovered that that report was in some of my papers and I, that report was made to the YMCA, so they have a copy of that report, but it was decided by the group, by the study group, I mean, Charlie Johnson suggested that the organization he was familiar with that could best service the need for this new population of people and for this new tension in the community was the Urban League because they had trained social workers, they know how to go about it and, of course, that meant that leadership would then be in New York [New York], New York would direct the behavior of the local branch.  Well, there were a bunch of liberals, and I'm a liberal so when I, use that term advisedly, there were a bunch of old Socialists who didn't like the idea of somebody out of New York running, they were, they were in control over the new area.  So they broke off and formed the Council for Civic Unity and the Council for Civic Unity had a local guy named Matt Crawford [Matt N. Crawford].  Matt Crawford was an old Socialist, he knew that.  It was publicly known that he was a Communist and that's, you know, that's his business, but he had other things in mind.  He had other philosophies in mind than what this committee had recommended, so that group followed that leadership and formed the Council for Civic Unity.  Then we've, those of us who thought the Urban League was the best, we formed the Urban League, we talked, we'd sit, led us to Reginald Johnson [Reginald A. Johnson] to, at that time Lester Granger [Lester Blackwell Granger] was the, Lester Granger was the CEO at the Urban League in New York and led us back and forth and we did the things they advised us to do to get a group of people together and got a budget together and raised monies to, the first budget, it got that monies together between the grants from the community chest and from other citizens and we invited Seaton Manning and his wife, Eugenia [Eugenia Manning].  Seaton Manning was a graduate of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and he was head of the, had a master's degree and he was head of the Boston Urban League [Urban League of Eastern Massachusetts].  And so Seaton came out here to head this new Urban League.  He was our first director and he remained head of that.  He was a wonderful administrator.  His wife, I just learned, his wife had finished Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] and had finished, what's the girls school [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at Harvard?  You know the, the--
Speaker 1: Smith?
Speaker 2: There's a school at Harvard that women used to go to.  It was still Harvard.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: But anyway she had received a, graduated from that school and they were both very highly trained, very wonderful leadership people.  I just learned at church yesterday, or Easter day, that she is on our sick list, so she must be about ninety-four or ninety-five, so I must call her tonight.
Story_ID: 307491
Speaker 1: They [Seaton Manning and Eugenia Manning] came out and they were the first.  A fellow named Don Glover [D. Donald Glover] came out as our industrial secretary and, of course, we had office staff and so we had just a small staff of people and we got the budget together.  It was like a $9,000 of budget, I think, and we started the Urban League [San Francisco Chapter of the Urban League; Bay Area Urban League] and the Urban League opened a lot of doors and--
Speaker 2: What were some of the activities?  What were some of the things that they did, that you were involved with?
Speaker 1: Well, meetings, I mean you would go with them, you would, Urban League would send its staff to labor unions and to the banks and these were not picketing people, some people did picket.  I mean, I guess, and some of the banks were sooner or later were glad to have the Urban League to negotiate with, but the Urban League quietly goes around to Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, California] and to other friendly organizations and there are some friends, in fact the member who sold us this house eventually.  There are some friends if you search them out.  They might not be perfect, it might not be everything you want, but you take that and you run with it.  So Urban League had a cadre of people scattered all over San Francisco [California] that helped them to open doors in banks and to automobile concern, at that time, no blacks were salesmen, no blacks worked as mechanics and so forth.  So we inched along, it was more jobs and more jobs.  As, you know, it's tough to change the community.  You have to just stay and then you got to get training programs, you, you--wherever you can find a grant, of course the government then came aboard with programs for agencies like the Urban League, you know, put money aside to train people for jobs in the Urban League, we'd implement some of those programs, privileges in hospitals.  You see, there was no doctor, no, no black doctor had privileges in any of the major hospitals when they first came into town, so we'd work with those hospital administrators and opened up those things that our qualified doctors and got them and once they opened the doors, then it's nothing to it, you know.  It flows like, like, like water then.  You know, it depends upon the people eventually seeking these opportunities and preparing themselves for it but San Francisco, one of our hardest nuts to crack was the labor unions because the only labor union in town that hired any blacks when we came here was the Longshoremen's Union, ILWU [International Longshore and Warehouse Union], (unclear) union and, of course, the government was trying to prove that Harry--Charles [sic. Harry Bridges] of being a Communist and they tried to discredit his work at the, at the, wherever he was, discredit him and, they never proved that he was a Communist, never proved it and, but it was the one place in town that blacks could find good, good work, was at the Longshoremen's Union and I take off my hat to them.  It's still true except in the Longshoreman's in San Francisco, might have overplayed their hand, long range, because by making it so difficult for people to ship to San Francisco, having so many demands on them, they went to Oakland [California], so we have just about lost all of our shipping, it's in Oakland now.  You might have seen just, just two weeks ago, they brought these huge cranes in under the bridge.  Oakland is now a major shipping, and it's 'cause largely it's really the place it should be because if you land a ship in Oakland, you put your container right from the ship or right on a train and you ship it anywhere in the country, whereas in San Francisco you gotta put it on something and get it across the water here.
Story_ID: 307492
Speaker 1: When you were younger and you were living in San Francisco [California], could you tell us the neighborhood you lived in, describe something about it?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood I lived in is now called Lower Pacific Heights [San Francisco, California] because instead of minorities or black people moving, encroaching upon white communities, in San Francisco, the white community encroached upon the black community.  So the, Lower Pacific Heights is really the old Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California], and Stanford University--I mean, the Pacific Medical Center [California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, California] got a huge plant down there, the Pacific Medical Center, the old Stanford campus, it's one of the most busy areas in, in the country.  It's just, it's a bad place to have a hospital but they have a hospital that are getting, getting in and out is difficult, parking and everything else, but--
Speaker 1: What was it like when you were living there?
Speaker 2: In San Francisco?
Speaker 1: In Fillmore, in the Fillmore, in San Francisco?
Speaker 2: It was, it was comfortable.  You know, I had my fraternity brothers.  I had my, I was a member of the Elks [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks] lodge.  I met those people and I had some friendship there.  My boys and my wife [DeReath Curtis James] were a member of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], so they had activities with Jack and Jill.
Story_ID: 307493
Speaker 1: Dr. Howard Thurman had come out from, from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], he'd been dean of the chapel at Howard University, but he and his wife had been to India and met with Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] and Gandhi had, a long conference with Gandhi, and Gandhi asked him a rhetorical question, "How in the world can you be a Christian in America with, you're segregated?" and Howard, he put a bee in his bonnet.  He and his wife, Susie [Sue Bailey Thurman], a team, they came back to the United States, committed then to opening up an interracial church, and they began, in fact, they were a group of socially concerned people, a professor of philosophy [Dr. Alfred G. Fisk] at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and a Presbyterian minister and a couple of other black people had a little committee trying to start an interracial church and decided that they needed to have some leadership, so they wrote a letter to Howard Thurman, who, at that time, was a dean of the chapel at Howard University, and asked him if he had a student, you know, a graduate student they could send out here and lead them through this process of forming a church, and their request from this kind of, from the group of people, some white, some black professors, ordinary people forming this church, they decided Howard and Sue and he ended up after a year of coming out here himself, and taking a leave of absence from Howard, or resigning eventually.  He didn't do, he never went back to Howard to teach.  They came out here on a shoe string because it was a chance for them to put into practice what emotionally and psychologically and spiritually they wanted to do.  That was, at that time, he founded the church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples, San Francisco, California] in 1944.  Eleven o'clock on Sunday morning--was the most segregated hour in America, it was the most segregated hour in America and he attacked that problem by starting this little church out here and he was such a dynamic spirit, such a wonderful speaker and such a wonderful philosopher and I just went to church yesterday and about twenty or thirty of his books now, they're selling like hot cakes, people are buying them now because these new communities, you know, these new megachurches, these new ministers, you know, they eventually need some spiritual heft.  They're taking on a big, a big hunt, you know, they're taking 15,000 people and gonna tell them how to live their life.  And so, but, anyway, Howard and Sue kept this church alive.  The local population gave money to keep the local expenses going, but the church was bought and paid for by friends of Howard Thurman abroad, people who lived in Connecticut or wherever.  When Howard Thurman died, the church had a bank account of a quarter of a million dollars, plus two pieces of property free and clear.  The church had a three-story apartment house next door but keeping a church alive is a very, it's not an easy job.
Speaker 2: No, it wouldn't be.
Story_ID: 307494
Speaker 1: What was it like when you were living in Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California]?  How long were you there?  When did you live there?
Speaker 2: I came there in 1944 and I left in '52 [1952], I came there in '42 [1942], I left in '52 [1952], I was there for ten years and I lived, I finally got an apartment, you know, I buffeted around for a year, living in, when I came out here, the dean [at University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California] had found a place for me to live through the lady who worked as the hat lady or the attendant in the lady's powder room.  The dean's wife knew this lady because she was an aficionado, she was an opera--theatre aficionado and she knew Ms. Brown [Lillian Brown] in the powder room, and Ms. Brown had made a partial career out of making a, she had a big four room flat, four bedroom flat in the Fillmore District.  She made that space in her house available for blacks who came with the groups in the theatrical world.  There were always some blacks, some characters, you know, Paul Robeson came to town, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham came to town, Janet Collins came to town, but they had no place to stay.  You couldn't stay at a hotel, you couldn't stay at the Fairmont [Fairmont San Francisco, San Francisco, California], you couldn't stay at the Mark Hopkins [Mark Hopkins Hotel, San Francisco, California] so, but there weren't that many coming, you didn't have a big volume but Ms. Brown housed, she could only take care of five or six in her big flat and she had a couple of other families, and she could take a spillover to another family, that's what she did with me.  When I came out here, I stayed with her for a month.  The dean recognized that I was really depressed not having my family out here, so he arranged for a little grant for me to send for my wife [DeReath Curtis James] and she stayed with, we stayed with Ms. Brown for about a week and then she found a house, a room for a neighbor that lived a block and a half away.  So we stayed with her, then for, for about a year, with her family and then, then I began to pound the streets again looking for an apartment in want ads.  So I finally put an ad in the newspaper and described myself, "Negro doctor, wife, and baby, two babies, looking for a place to live," she answered that ad.  She said her name was Ms. Lillian Brown.  She said, "I know you're going to have a hard time finding a place, said, but I have an apartment downstairs and you could have it."  She lived upstairs and she gave us the apartment downstairs, which was just like a heaven, it was heaven-sent for us.  We had plenty of room for our kids.  She lived upstairs.  We stayed there for about two or three years.  Then Ms. Brown decided that she would, she sold us the place.  She sold us the place, we bought that house and paid $7,000 for it, thank God, that house nowadays is worth a million.  That's probably, invested one hundred thousand [dollars] in it but it's in Lower Pacific Heights [San Francisco, California].  So Ms. Brown made a place for us to stay, bless her heart.  She made plum pudding every, she made a plum pudding every Easter, every Christmas.  She would always make us a plum pudding with the hot sauce and I mean it was a good plum pudding but Ms. Brown became a very dear friend.  She has a granddaughter who lives here in Mill Valley [California] and we keep, I stay in touch with Sandy [ph.] but, anything else to say about that?
Story_ID: 307495
Speaker 1: Oh, we decided to move, move here [Mill Valley, California].  I think I told you the story of how we came over here.  I think I've already mentioned how we stayed over here, how we came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mentioned it off-camera.
Speaker 1: I did?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so could you tell us?
Speaker 1: The neighborhood where we lived, and it was as good a neighborhood in San Francisco [California] for blacks as any other, began to deteriorate.  Two young men who were a little bit older than my boys, whom I knew very well, one of them was Ms. Brown's [Lillian Brown] son, the woman I first knew, her son, and his buddy, who dropped dead on the street with drugs, that was the beginning.  I see, I'm talking now about 1950, the drug stuff was beginning to creep into, in the neighborhood and I said to my wife [DeReath Curtis James], she said to me, "You know, it's time for us to look for another place to live."  So we did.  We looked around.  We went to several, down the Peninsula [San Francisco Peninsula], in a want ad, saw an ad, advertising this view out of this window.  She was advertising how, the view.  So we get, it so happens that on that particular Sunday, one of my young associates in my dental office, he had been a former student, wife was having a baby, so DeReath made a meal for them and invited them over for the meal on Sunday and when he came over, she fed them, but she, he had two kids and we had four, he had this truck, this engineer's station wagon, so all of us piled in that station wagon, in that engineer's truck, came over to Marin County [California] to look for a lot, and we got dusty looking over that lot.  I didn't like that neighborhood.  So on the way out of town, DeReath said, "Dan [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], how about that ad you were reading to me this morning?"  So I stopped by the depot, which is the downtown paper, newspaper stand, picks up an ad, called her again, she said, "Yeah, come on up."  So we came up, usually in a day but it was a much different road in those days, we came on up and when I got out of the car and when Dr. Payne [Rodney Payne] got out of the car, Dr. Payne is Scot, he's a white young man, she immediately turned to him and said, "Oh, Dr. Collins, come on down, you want to see the house?" and doctor, and Rodney said, "No, I'm Dr. Payne, this is Dr. Collins."  So she right away said, "No, we can't sell you this house, I can't sell you this house."  So Dr. Payne said, "Well can we see the house?"  We came down and we saw the house.  DeReath saw these floors, ceramic floors, and the house was, just this part of the house was the kitchen and the kitchen was primitive.  She fell in love with the house and Dr. Payne, without me saying a word to him, preparing him for it, he just automatically said, "Listen, I'll buy the house."  He didn't have any money, and we gave, she gave, we gave him $50 and he agreed he would buy the house and he was going to raise the financing.  Fortunately, there was a black savings and loan called Transbay Savings and Loan [TransBay Savings and Loan Association] in San Francisco, and we had an account there, and we had stock in it and it was black controlled.  So on Monday I arranged financing to buy the house, paid her all of her money and she called, that was on a Sunday, Thursday morning she called, she and her husband were going down to the theatre and walked back up the hill and she said, "On the way up the hill, my husband and I decided there's no reason why the Collins, those children, shouldn't live up here."  So they decided to sell us, instead of going through somebody else, they decided to sell us the house directly.  So we remained in touch with Mrs. Fault throughout the years.  Her husband, by the way, was in the ceramic business.  He made, there's a, there's a part of San Francisco off of 19th Avenue that used to be cabbage patch and hog farm but it became, shortly after the war [World War II, WWII], it became a huge development area, just miles and miles of ticky-tacky houses, which are now, you know, they're not bad quality houses, but they were ticky but then (unclear) talked about and ticky-tacky houses and he had the job of doing the ceramic work because all those houses had ceramic kitchens and, so he put ceramic in here to upgrade.  So this is not a fabulous house, but the location is fabulous, and somebody comes along here with about five million dollars and put a house up here you could have, a really gorgeous situation and there are some houses just across the street that are three and four million dollar houses, yeah.
Story_ID: 307496
Speaker 1: When I was on the State Board of Public Education [California Department of Education], we bought text books.  At that time, California was the largest purchaser of textbooks in America.  We had this one big state and we had uniform books throughout the state.  Once you sold a history book to the California adoption system, it went into all the schools.  So, here I am saying, you know, at that time, I think we were spending about $28 million a year for books here which is nothing compared to now but the books were just like all the other books, they had not a single indication of a black man, or a Chinese man, or an Asian man, or a Chicano man or woman.  It had little to do with women.  It was just a traditional, white male dominated text books and I met [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin fishing and I said, "John, I'm sitting here buying textbooks, $28 million worth, and there isn't a single book here that I can vote for so why don't you go and write a history?  Why don't you put together what you think is a history and present it to us?"  So that's what he did.  He got Caughey [John W. Caughey] and, a couple of, another guy from Southern California and they put together this history book ['Land of the Free: A History of the United States,' John W. Caughey, John Hope Franklin, and Ernest R. May], which is the first history book in America presenting other than white images and of course it never looked back and everybody then got into, because once California produced the books, then other states would adopt them but it, the other states didn't, didn't have enough volume, any one state, maybe New York did, New York State did, to have a company, at least they couldn't compete with California and once you got a book adopted in California, then it becomes available to all the rest of the country.  They changed a few dates and so forth in the book but it's the same book.
Speaker 2: So when did you start working for the publishing company?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  So while I was sitting on the board of education, buying these books, there was a man named William Jovanovich.  William Jovanovich was a Montenegrin, Croatian, Croat--Montenegro was his particular ethnic group.  He, he asked me after I was off the board, after I had left the board, after I had spent my time on the board, he invited me to join the board of education, to join his corporate board.  At that time, there was no other black on anybody's corporate board, maybe one or two, I have a history, I have the history of blacks in corporate board, photographs of the first eight or ten of us that was on the corporate board throughout the country, Robert Reid [ph.] was one of them, and I have photographs of that and our meetings and so forth and trying to expand blacks in, on corporate boards but after I worked with Harcourt [Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich], advising them about trying to change their image, Jovanovich wanted to change their image, and I got a lot of stories to tell about that 'cause the first job I got for a black young man, he couldn't take because he had to get up, he had to be there at eight o'clock in the morning to take the mail and sort the mail and deliver it to people's offices.  He couldn't do that because he didn't get up that soon.
Speaker 2: Okay, well I think that's a good place to stop, that's--
Speaker 1: He didn't get up that soon.  So he waited through that until, now there are a number of people who made careers out of publishing at Harcourt, of course Harcourt was eventually bought by Lucas [ph.].  Lucas now owns it, yeah.  My secretary, the young lady that I brought into publishing, and she finally became an editor for me, she was so good at editing books.
Story_ID: 307497
Speaker 1: When you joined the company, you started working with them, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You became a--
Speaker 2: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: It was Harcourt, Brace, and World when I first joined [sic.] and then Jovanovich [William Jovanovich], being an egomaniac, had his board change the (unclear) to Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.  It didn't change anything, it would change the address, changed the--but he observed the way I managed myself on the board of education [State Board of Public Education; California Department of Education] because we were buying all these books and I was speaking up about the things I wanted to see in textbooks and his company didn't hire any black people.  He had, his books were like all the other books but he had the vision enough to say, after I was off the board to, "Will you serve on my board?"  So he invited me to serve on his board, board of trustees, and he said, "This means you have to come New York [New York] for about nine meetings a year, to board meetings."  Well, it so happens that that was true, but since he was trying to change the image of his thing, he asked me if I would serve as consultants to other departments.  So they had called my time, would I stay over at night and meet with, this day after tomorrow.  Fortunately, the personnel department set up some jobs in the mailroom, it was the easiest place to bring people in.  He still was looking for editors, you know, with certain skills and he found two or three and brought them to the company, who are still with the company, and still have done quite well with the company.  One of the people that I was hoping I could get through the company was Toni Morrison.  She was just a young person around New York City trying to get started in the publishing.  I said this young man, we finally got from the department, to offer some jobs in the mailroom and two, two things happened, two instances that will give you a little understanding of what we have to deal with as a people.  The one young man said he'd take the job, but what time would he come to work?  I said, "You gotta be here at eight o'clock in order to get the mail out to people by the time they arrive at nine on their desk."  He said, "I can't take that job," and you ask him, "Why?"  He said, "I don't get up that soon," and he wasn't being smart.  He just, he said, "I don't want no job that will have me to get me up at eight o'clock, at a time--."  The other, the other young man came to work and he was good except some days he just didn't turn, just didn't show up, just didn't show up.  So I told the staff, "You got to call people in and ask them."  He called the people and asked them, he said, "No, I didn't come in Tuesday or the eighth and Friday, well, it rained, it rained."  Well, you see, with other people whose children, whose adults are hanging out on the block for day work up in Maryland, and when it's raining, they stay home, you don't go out and that was that kid's exposure.  He wasn't being smart aleck, that was just all he knew.  So I told people that worked with these guys, I'm saying and so we built quite a, quite a cadre of minorities at Harcourt by the time I left it.
Speaker 1: How long were you there?
Speaker 2: For twelve years.
Story_ID: 307498
Speaker 1: At that time, it was a rigid, the company [Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich], the corporate America was going through a rigid retire at sixty-five, so at sixty-five, I had retired, but--everyone else was doing it in those days, then they'd ext- they got rid of that particular thought, but in the meantime I had retired and that's, this is, well I had twelve years with them and I had that new experience.  I, doing my health books, I took trips to Switzerland, to, not Switzerland but to Denmark and Sweden and picked up textbooks and talked with people there because they have very explicit, I mean, you know, they, they, we talked about the vagina, you see the vagina, you don't see some strange thing in some dark corner.  You saw a penis, it showed you a penis, they didn't show you a banana but we were so, no, we are so, I don't know what we call ourselves here, straight-laced.
Speaker 2: Yeah, puritanical.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we didn't, we wanted to hide the reality but, so that was a great experience going to Denmark and Sweden to see how they dealt with the same issue.  We also learned something else on that trip.  We took the occasion to visit a, and it was a guest of, a fellow named Brant Michelson [ph.] because we had, our fourth son [Craig Collins] is developmentally disabled and my wife [DeReath Curtis James] there was very prominent.  In fact she founded a disability service [Marin Aid to Retarded Children; Lifehouse, San Rafael, California] for California.  If you look at this thing of her, her composite over here.  When she died, she was celebrated for having founded this organization and it's in Marin County [California], it has the best program for the developmentally disabled of any county in the country.  So people moved to Marin County for those purposes.
Story_ID: 307499
Speaker 1: Well, my next question is, you've had such a wonderful life and you've met so many people, is there anybody that you'd like to tell us about that you haven't told us about?  Some people you worked with in San Francisco [California]?  Somebody who was very, did you know Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] or did you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I knew Willie Brown very well.  I was co-chairman with his minister, Harold--Hamilton Boswell [Dr. Hamilton T. Boswell] of his first campaign, the very first campaign.  We had gotten a little office down on Divisadero Street and began this little meager campaign when he was introduced to Phil Burton [Philip Burton] and Phil Burton and his wife, Sala [Sala Burton], were the consummate political affair.  They were, they lived twenty-four hours a day, politics, forty-eight hours because two of them were both political animals right up to the, right up to the gill, and they liked Willie Brown.  In fact, I think Willie Brown was his law partner or something, but he adopted Willie Brown's campaign out of, Harold Boswell, of course Willie was, Reverend Boswell was Willie's minister so they maintained that relationship.  Willie and I have a great relationship but, politically, he moved beyond anything I could do for him, and he became his own independent operator and he has done extremely well as a politician, one of the best politicians in the country, very, very bright.
Story_ID: 307500
Speaker 1: How do you see things for blacks in Northern California, their general life?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Blacks in Northern California, how are things going (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it varies.  It varies, you know, it just depends upon, take Ernie, Ernie Bates [Dr. Ernest A. Bates] that I was telling, about Ernie Bates who has this, American Hospital of Shared Services [sic. American Shared Hospital Services, San Francisco, California], where he, with equipment, maybe a $50 million equipment and, and a motor home and took it around to, I think he's a very exciting man.  I gave you his number, didn't I?  Yeah.  I think he's a very exciting man.  There is a man in town here named Kermit Boston.  Kermit Boston was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he was educated at Cheyney [Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], and he is in the book business.  He, he, he is a book, he works for, I think, HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers, LLC, New York, New York], but he trains, he trains people for book people, trained staff to sell.  He is an amazing man.  He is the chairman of the board of KQED [KQED-TV, San Francisco, California], which is one of our major nonprofit stations.  He is also a board member of the national nonprofit FM stations.  He is also chairman of the board of Grace Cathedral [San Francisco, California].  He is a great Catholic and a great, Episcopal cathedral here in town.  He is the most, he is the most productive person I know.  You know, he just spreads across, and one of the best personalities, you know.  He's always giving, he's a giving, so I would just urge, his wife [Barbara Ruffin-Boston] has a Ph.D.  She is a consultant in education, somewhere along the line, but they, they live in San Francisco [California].  I can give you his telephone number, 239-1609, is his telephone number.
Speaker 1: You've met so many wonderful people and you've done so many wonderful things.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, well, the, this young man is probably, to me, he is probably the most well-rounded person I know of all the people I know, Kermit Boston.  He is kind, giving, he does not ask anything of anybody.  He is a great leader and he's the type of guy that I think you would enjoy meeting--
Story_ID: 307501
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've done so much.  We haven't even got to half of the things you've done (laughter).  I'm so impressed.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you live eighty-nine years and stay out of jail, you know you got to do some things, just, you do--
Speaker 1: What else--is there anything else you would, that you often thought, oh I wish I had done that or something you'd like to, to, another project you have going that you'd like to finish up or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to finish up this manuscript (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  What's it about?
Speaker 2: --but I don't want to call it a manuscript, I want to finish up these memoirs because the minute you say manuscript, you're talking about promising something and that is, that's far off of my mind.  I've gone that route.  I've published textbooks, I've published in textbooks, I have chapters, published my own books.  I, I do not, and I've husbanded a half of, a dozen other books from black writers while I was working with Harcourt [Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich] because I had, one of my responsibilities was acquisition and acquisition editor, so I had the authority to bring people and introduce them to it, of course, you got it good here.  We did the book on Bakke book ['The Bakke Case: The Politics of Inequality,' Joel Dreyfuss and Charles Lawrence III], which I thought was a wonderful--it's going to become more important as time goes on, the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978].
Story_ID: 307502
Speaker 1: Could you tell me where, you're telling me about things that you would, some of the projects you're still going to do.  What about some of, over, you've lived for eighty-nine years.  What are some of the values?  What are some of the things that you've learned about life?  Something that you'd like to pass on?
Speaker 2: Well, I, the eternal search for truth and if you ever find it, as I have found it, it's a very fleeting, it's a very fleeting acquisition.  The truth shifts and changes so often and it's one that, it's, and I'm so frightened of our president [President George Walker Bush] who has found a truth saying, saying things to him that God intends for him to be president, that worries me because one of my great experiences is that, you haven't even mentioned this and I hadn't thought about it.  There was an outfit in California thirty years ago, called, Synanon. You ever heard of it?  He shakes his head behind you.  S-Y-N-A-N-O-N.  Synanon was started by an ex-drug addict [Charles Dederich, Sr.], an ex-alcoholic and his wife [Bettye Dederich], who was black was an ex-drug addict.  They started this program of taking people off the street and cleaning them up and making first-class citizens out of them and it was really is the discoveries of Synanon is the basis on which Betty Ford's Clinic [Betty Ford Center, Rancho Mirage, California] operates, Dr. Phil [Dr. Phil McGraw], all of that is nothing but Synanon gaming, you know.  The, there is a group out of Monterey [California] that, I can't think of that name, but my wife [DeReath Curtis James] and I played the game for about ten years.  Neither of us were alcoholics and neither of us had any addictive habits except my wife smoked, but we saw all of these young black kids from fine homes like our home, like your home, all messed up in the head, prostitutes, usually girls prostituting themselves, you know, at age sixteen, eighteen and nineteen.  So we, I started off by doing free dental work for them, and Chuck Dederich was a smart guy.  He was able to take the system and milk it.  He got a whole clinic, equipment established and put it up at Marshall [California] and I got a couple of dentists to go up there with me.  We would do first-class dental work, you know, thousands of dollars a month worth of free work for them and my wife would serve as sort of an alter mother for these young girls, many of whom had no social graces.  My wife, if anything, was a very graceful person, very graceful, tremendous gal and she served, and she found a big satisfaction in that herself because she had four boys.  She never had girls depending on her but now all these young women who, she became a mother image for them and, until her death.  She would go to reunions after, after Dederich fell apart and it happened to this, all of those leaders, Jim Jones, my minister and my church behind Howard Thurman, he came to the church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples, San Francisco, California], a fellow named Chandler [ph.], from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  (Pause) Anyway, we became enchanted with helping kids at Synanon and we learned so much by listening to and watching the game, and watching people confess, same thing they're doing now in these, these, evangelicals.  It's not difficult to get people to confess, you just do the magic, you know, the mooding, mood change and so forth and they'll agree to everything.
Story_ID: 307503
Speaker 1: It's frightening to me because, oh, Chandler [ph.] was a seminary mate of Jim Jones.  You know who Jim Jones was?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, if you would have followed him down, he committed suicide.  He was a seminary along with Jim Jones and the Sunday after the massacre down at Jonestown [Guyana], mass murder, or mass suicide, he preached a sermon in our own church [The Church For the Fellowship of All People, San Francisco, California], same Howard Thurman church, and he said he knew Jim Jones in the seminary and when he came out of it, Jim Jones came out of the seminary, he was a Baptist, he had a Baptist church in Indianapolis [Indiana] and it was the first church in Indianapolis that invited blacks, equal membership with everybody else, and he said that Jim Jones he knew of that era was a man who understood the power of love but somewhere along the line, Jim Jones fell in love with power and that's what I saw with Chuck Dederich [Charles Dederich, Sr.], so Dederich was a very powerful force, to the point he went to Washington, D.C. and he was getting ready to, he was being asked by the government to open up a government program.  Some of his followers did, you know, the New York [New York] program, all those programs are all excellent, on programs.  So it's not that difficult to lead people.  It's not difficult at all and this you, what's it called, this religious movement now what have you, big megachurches, funda--not fundamentalists, they're all fundamentalists, but there's another name for it, Evangelicals, frighten me, they frighten me.  I mean these people can, it can easily turn off into a fascist nation, where to me and they, when they have their personal gods that say if you search long enough for God, you will find the God you're looking for.  And these people are finding the God they're looking for.  It's not the God that I worship, but it's the God they're looking for.  These megachurches, you know, fifteen, twenty thousand, ten thousand members, and they're building these churches now and they're not even building them like churches--
Story_ID: 307504
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?  What's the thing you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: What stands out most for me?
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of?  What's, what's--
Speaker 2: What am I most proud of?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's a good, hint, what's--
Speaker 2: What I'm most proud of is my family.
Speaker 1: Oh, can you tell us something about them?
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest son is an architect by training, University of California.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: But he was an early-on, before it was diagnosed, attention deficit disorder [ADD].  He was at the University of California for eleven years, A's for all of his courses but he shifted from one major to the next and I knew that he had finished, had enough units for graduation because I'm an alumnus of the university and the alumni association has an program where, when a student finishes the University of California, finishes qualifications, the alumni association invites the parent to give the kid a life, give the kid a life membership in the alumni association.  So I had done that.  I had sent, I think it was $100 for life membership or $200 or something, I sent that in so I knew, his brother, younger brother two year--second, you know, asked him, "Buddy, when you going to get your degree?" and Buddy said, "Oh, I don't know."  He said, "Well, if you got something to do, I'll--if you got a paper to turn in, I'll turn it in."  So he called over to find out what his requirements were to get his degree and was informed by the person in charge of said, "I'm glad you called because Mr. Collins' diploma has been on the shelf here for two years."  But he was an early attention deficit disorder person and he went through a miserable, years.  He just, he went through alcoholism and it's just been in the last three or four years that he's gotten, four or five years that he's gotten out of that and he's been on strong medication and they're getting that squared for him now, but he's a charming boy.  He's the best-rated person in our family.  There is nothing you can talk about that Buddy doesn't have some good fundamental information about.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: You say, huh?
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Dan A. Collins, Jr. [Daniel A. Collins, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We call him Buddy.
Speaker 1: And your second son?
Speaker 2: So, the second son is a urologist, very successful, private practitioner and he does a lot of training of, or he does a lot of traveling because he, and working with a group that have a special technique in treating prostate, prostate disease and so he travels around the country lecturing on that, so he's a lecturer and in great demand for--
Speaker 1: And his name is?
Speaker 2: His name is Edward, Edward J. Collins.
Story_ID: 307505
Speaker 1: And the third boy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then the third boy, third man, has a degree from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a joint degree from Harvard and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a law degree from Harvard, MIT, in city planning, and he spent a year and a half in Athens, Greece with Doxiadis, Constantine Doxiadis [Costantinos Apostolou Doxiadis] who developed Triangle Park [ph.] there in Maryland, Brasilia [ph.], so he, is what they call an esthetician, not esthetician, I can't think of the word right now, but he is, he is a lawyer and a city planner and he and his wife [Paula Robinson Collins], is from Washington, D.C., she also has a master's [degree] and she went to Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts].  She has a master's in city planning from MIT and she is presently, has a private consulting firm for people who are developing properties.  I mean, she developed a headquarters for Boudin Bakery [San Francisco, California] which makes sourdough bread.  She is now doing a whole block that one of our churches has a whole block of properties that will be developing the Tenderloin [San Francisco, California] and so she's, she is the developer for that project.  Now her husband, the young man who was, who was, and they built, while they were in the construction business, they built the Synanon, I mean they built the Metreon, which is the premier entertainment city in San Francisco [California]. It has fifteen mega screens and so forth.  Sony [Sony Corporation], it's a big center for Sony because then Sony was the main, but it's the, if you haven't been to, it's in, it's in a big park downtown, off the Moscone Center [San Francisco, California] and also they built the Four Seasons [Four Seasons Hotel and Residences, San Francisco, California], 47-story hotel, that was all the projects that they developed for Sony.  So, but he now does, doing that for all these years, he's taken a job.  He is now in charge of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] of Northern California, all this area.  He was just in Sri Lanka, YMCA sent him to Sri Lanka and India and all those territories.  I was surprised to find out that the YMCA has in place about 150 programs in that part of the world, they're already operating.  So he went there and he put those program together.  He has a little lecture thing he does for them.  So he's got a, he's just tickled to death because he loves people, he loves children and he loves, he got a staff of 250 people, a budget of, I think, some $50 million and he's just having a ball doing that for the YW--YMCA.
Speaker 1: And his name is?
Speaker 2: His name is Charles Miller Collins [HistoryMaker Charles Collins], Miller from my mother's [Lucy Miller Collins] maiden name, Charles Miller Collins, we call him Chuck (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your youngest son?
Story_ID: 307506
Speaker 1: The youngest son is Craig [Craig Collins], the developmentally disabled son, and the one for all in which my wife [DeReath Curtis James] spent 90 percent of her life was working for the developmentally disabled and was highly, but she was highly--before she died, she was highly honored for her being founded the, what we call Marin Aid to Retarded Citizens, it's now called Lifehouse [San Rafael, California].  They've changed the name to Lifehouse but they have a big fundraiser.  In fact, on the 30th of April, they have a big fundraiser every year.  The chefs of Marin [Marin County, California], all of the fine restaurants in Marin, and they've been doing this now for ten years, would come and bring their piece de resistance.  It's a formal affair.  Everybody dressed, ladies in their gown and men in their, their black tie and all the chefs of Marin have tables and you walk around and pick out whatever you want to eat, pick out your own food, all the booze you can drink, gins and all the wineries bring their wine.  So it's a, for a hundred, I think the, I think the fee is $185, I think, and all but $35 of that is tax exempt.  It's one of the places to be in Marin County now.  They always sell out all their tickets.  It's just a wonderful evening and for the last two or three years, it's been hosted by a fellow named Huey Lewis, (unclear) for a jazz aficionado, you may know him.  He is a quite a jazz figure, quite a golfer.  He was, you might have seen him in the recent tournament, not the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament, Augusta, Georgia] but the one down in Monterey [California], Pebble Beach.  He was--he played in that tournament but he's a wonderful guy.  I know Huey.  He's, he and I go to the same gym so I've known him outside of that occasion.
Story_ID: 307507
Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to know, you've told us something about your children.  Could you tell us a little bit about your wife, what's her name and--
Speaker 2: Oh, DeReath [DeReath Curtis James], oh goodness, you know you talk, that's another whole, I would urge you to just read this before you leave.  It's a pretty good, pretty good resume of what she was about.  In 1953 or '54 [1954], we just moved over here [Mill Valley, California] and our young, we found out that our fourth child [Craig Collins] was developmentally disabled and she just went, and there were no services for those kinds of kids when we came over here.  There's nothing.  So she spearheaded and found other parents, got together and got the school system to agree to set up the special classes, the special teachers for people who were developmentally disabled and the group from one little classroom to now--there must be forty different homes in Marin County [California] of various sizes and various levels of independence, especially my boy lives in a, our son lives in a, in a home with four other young men who are developmentally disabled and they have twenty-four hour supervision, but he still has a lot of independent activity.  One of the, he was home on the weekend and he had his special jacket when he left here this morning because on Sundays, on Mondays, he goes to the local county hospital and passes out reading material to patients, that's his, that's one of his community activities and is one of the best known people in Marin County.  I feel very comfortable with him riding the bus here in Marin County.  All the police know him.  All the bus drivers know him, all along the way where he stops, he loves the malls.  He walks the malls.  He essentially owns Macy's.  He essentially owns Macy's.  He can go anywhere in Macy's he wants to and nobody can take food into Macy's, he can.  If you ask him, they'll say, but if you see, say he's eating food here, then the, the clerk will tell you, "Well, that's Craig, he has special privileges."  He's just a delightful kid and he's worked out a nice life for himself.  He's fifty-, he was born in '51 [1951], so he's fifty-three years old and that's one of the things that's happening with the developmentally disabled, now we're developing a whole aged group and that's a brand new frontier.  We just didn't have thousands of developmentally disabled people living to be that old.
Story_ID: 306396
Speaker 1: --Each photograph, if you can tell us who it is in the photo and where and when it was taken, if you don't remember the exact date, the exact date is fine, whatever gets us close.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right, and go ahead with this one sir.
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Lucy Miller Collins, was born about 1886 and she died in the '60s [1960s], I think 1962 or late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's another picture of my mother.  She was just a young lady then.  This is my mother in 1940--about 1945.  She'd come out to visit me in California, in a friend's backyard, Dr. and Mrs. Pittman [Dr. William R. Pittman and Tarea Hall Pittman].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Those are her two sisters.  The small picture is, is Aunt Aida [ph.].  I never, I haven't met these people, I just know, I just see the pictures.  They were, let me see this one.
Speaker 1: Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think one is Aunt Rosa [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, you can hand it to him.
Speaker 2: Aunt Rosa, yeah, this is Aunt Rosa, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is Aunt Rosa?
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: Evelyn Bass-Watkins [ph.], Aunt Maggie [ph.].
Speaker 2: Aunt Maggie.  Yeah, that's the, that's the nurse.
Speaker 1: All right, so the small one is Aunt Maggie and the last one is Aunt Rosa.
Speaker 2: Aunt Maggie--Rosa.
Speaker 1: Okay, next photo please.
Speaker 2: I dig those--dig those leggings.  That's me in my hometown [Darlington, South Carolina].  I guess I must have been twelve or thirteen years old.  My mother taught school, I told you and one of her teachers lived on this street called Chandler Street [sic.], so I would leave our high school or grammar school, which is only about two or three, three or four blocks away, walk over to this street to meet my mother after she would come home from teaching in the country and one lady who taught with her, lived on this street, so I would go over there and visit with this family and watched my mother came home.
Speaker 1: Next.  Very good, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That must have been a picture about 1930.  I finished college in 1936 and this was made for my senior class, so this is 1936, the graduation picture from Paine College [Augusta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  That's good, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in my dental office, treating Dr. Howard Thurman, famous theologian and philosopher, and the founder of the first interracial church in America, Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples, San Francisco, California] in 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This has a--
Speaker 1: Take it out, just slide it out.  They'll slide out real easily.  Go ahead sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a picture of me and my wife [DeReath Curtis James] taken, was it taken off of that picture?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.  I think I gave this picture to the artist, to a Japanese artist in the airport in Atlanta, Georgia who did that painting off of this photograph.  This is a photograph that was made--
Speaker 1: Okay, next, or you can finish talking while we put the next one.
Speaker 2: Me and my wife, yeah, that's me and my wife.
Speaker 1: This happens to be a little mini, a mini family reunion of my wife and myself, a first cousin and his wife, Bobby [ph.] and Joe Wright [ph.] from Beaufort, South Carolina.  My wife and I had come down to Kendleton, Texas for a Miller, which was a big family, my mother was a Miller, Miller reunion and they had a reunion every year at one place or another.  This is Kendleton, a little black community south of Houston [Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  Okay go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a picture that was made here in this living room with all my four sons and my wife and this must have been about 1950--
Speaker 2: Turn off that light that's over the table there.  I'm getting, or just stand where you are, just where you are is fine.  It's actually, yeah, just stay right there just for a minute and, hold on one second here, I just got to come up a little bit, let this one.  (Pause) Okay, great, come on back, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is my wife and our four sons, the littlest guy is Craig [Craig Collins], and the next is Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins], and then Edward [Edward Collins] and Daniel [Daniel A. Collins, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Now, it's starting in the lower right and moving counterclockwise?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 306397
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), and this is a picture of after a Christmas party, at the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] Christmas party.  Starting with me, holding my wife's [DeReath Curtis James] hand, the young man, (unclear)?  Can we go right?  You want to go left?
Speaker 2: Go left to right.
Speaker 1: Oh, Christ, I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: Or if you can't remember everybody, it's okay.
Speaker 1: Well, can I point out to you?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll remember his name in just a minute and his wife.  That's a grandson, that's the boy that lives in London [England] now that I think I'm going to lose to Europe now.  I don't think he's going to come back here to live.  That's his father, my son, Edward [Edward Collins], the urologist and next to him in the background is Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Collins], the lawyer and city planner, and then coming--starting at this end is Sara [Sara Collins], who--
Speaker 2: On the right.
Speaker 1: On the right, she is a physician and is now searching around for her residency and she wants to be a cardiologist.
Speaker 2: Next to her.
Speaker 1: And next to her is Julia [Julia Collins], her sister, who is a corporate executive for an outfit in New York [New York], for an outfit called, Guardsmark [Guardsmark, Inc., New York, New York].  They furnish the un--no, the un--armed personnel for, in fact her, her job is to furnish that and supervise the care of the Rockefeller Center [New York, New York], that's her specific assignment and she is anticipating, right now she is just studying on to take a, to go back to school, she wants to be a, she wants to take a master in journalism and business administration.  The next picture here is, is my oldest grandchild, she's now about six months pregnant.
Speaker 2: Is that the one with the pearls?
Speaker 1: No, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is, my God, I can't remember my granddaughter's name, Hilary [Hilary Collins].  Hilary is pregnant now and she will be delivering in about two months.  That'll be the first great grandchild, yeah, and her, now, the mother, these two girls, these two young ladies, their mother is next to Hilary.  Can I show you?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: That's their mother, Paula [Paula Robinson Collins].  Paula's father was a federal judge in Washington, D.C., Judge Aubrey Robinson [Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr.], he's dead now, preceded city planner and is, judge--manages the, she is the consultant for development of various projects in San Francisco [California] and just above her is her husband, Charles, we call him Chuck, he's a city planner and lawyer, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Next to Paula is--
Speaker 2: Red dress?
Speaker 1: --is Sylvia [Sylvia Collins] with the red dress, Sylvia.  Sylvia is married to the green tie, that's Chip [Edward Collins] and then Chip's son lives in London.  As I said, I think we lost him to London.  He has his home over the Seine [Seine River, France] and he made a lot of money in a high-tech world when they were throwing money around like, you know, like, but he hit it pretty big with the, with a wireless company and the next--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In the green dress.
Speaker 1: Gus [ph.], he's a lawyer.  He's now, he's married--he is married, we are cousins by marriage, by my wife's, cousins by marriage.  My wife's brother is married to this young lady's sister and that's the brother, Charles James [Charles James, II], who lives in, he now lives in, where does Charles live?  I guess Chicago [Illinois].  He bought those fifty-five Burger Kings in Chicago.  I hope he doesn't go bankrupt.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine, great, next.
Speaker 1: Now I--that's an executive by a local outfit called, SPUR.  SPUR is San Francisco, S-P, Urban, San Francisco Urban Planning [San Francisco Bay Area Planning and Urban Research Association, San Francisco, California], these are nonprofit group that does not build anything but has a real powerful position in long range planning for San Francisco use of highways and major changes in the city and that was an award that's over here on the counter there, an award they gave me.  I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: All right, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that your friend?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That is Chip.  You saw him earlier on.  We were out playing golf and they offer, golf tournament in San Francisco at his, I think it was at his country club.  He belongs to The Olympic Club [San Francisco, California] which is a pretty fancy golf club here in town.  I still have that at our firm.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Well, that's Chip, doctor, the physician, and his wife, Sylvia, and me in the black, next to him, next to her, was another daughter-in-law who is married to my son [Daniel A. Collins, Jr.], who was the ADD, attention deficit disorder architect.  She is a veterinarian and she is in charge of the veterinary research house down in Stanford [California].  Stanford, Stanford VA [VA Palo Alto Health Care System] has a big research center and she's in charge of the animal research at Stanford and this is Paula and Chuck.  Paula is the advisor to the developing and Chuck is now head of the San Francisco, Northern California, YWCA--YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 1: This is the last one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There is a piece de resistance.  That's the little grandson, the youngest grandson, Alejandro [Alejandro Collins], Alejandro.  His mother was Sylvia, who you've seen earlier and this is the young lady who's pregnant, my granddaughter ready to deliver the first great grandchild, that's Hilary and Alejandro.  He's quite, he's up skiing this weekend.  He's got a big, well, this is big, this is the ski season, this is the--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right, ski week.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ski week for all the schools so he's up there with--
