Story_ID: 105912
Speaker 1: So we'll begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer; and Scott--I'm sorry Scott, your last name?
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS:  Stearns.
Speaker 1: It escaped me--I'm sorry, Scott.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and today's date is Monday, September 27, 2004, and this interview is taking place at Howard University in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would please, for the record, please tell me your name, spell it, and--your full name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Well, my full name will include my middle name (laughter)--George Edward Curry, traditional spelling on George and Edward, last name Curry, C-U-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 2: February 23, 1947, Tuscaloosa, Alabama; it's T-U-S-C-A-L-O-O-S-A.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.
Story_ID: 105913
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little better.  So, for these questions, if you could just give me short answers, that'd be great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food--chocolate cake baked by my mother [Martha Brownlee] and no one else.  She sends me one--I am fifty-seven years old, she sends me one my birthday every year; she forgot and made a drastic mistake--forgot one year, and there was hell to pay, and I got it a little late, but my chocolate cake--baked by my mother.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Spring and summer because I'm a southerner from Alabama; I, I can cool off but I can't warm up.  I don't--do not like cold weather, even though I lived in it from time to time--but spring and summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Blue--that's easy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  I'll tell you, there a couple.  The place I think that is the prettiest place in the world is Santa Barbara, California because it has the mountains and it has the water there; I like it a whole lot, but I also like Egypt, like Cairo; I went there in December, and that was the place that had just impacted me more than anywhere else.  I've done a lot of travelin', I've been to every state in the union except Alaska; I wanna finish that and make that complete, but Santa Barbara is the prettiest and relaxing.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying; do you have one?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I don't know if I can say that on tape (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sure, you can (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple--they call 'em Curryisms; "Let the door hit you where God split you" (laughter), and "Opinions are like behinds--everybody got one."
Speaker 1: Okay, great; thank you very much.
Story_ID: 105914
Speaker 1: Now, let's begin talking a little bit about your mother.
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, would you please start with your mother's name and where your mother was born, and where she grew up as a girl--that kinda thing.
Speaker 2: My mother is--my mother's married a couple times so this incarnation is Martha Lee Brownlee, one word.  She lives in Augusta, Georgia where she was born seventy-five years ago; we just celebrated her seventy-fifth birthday; my three younger sisters and I went to Augusta and, and took her out to dinner and gave her some gifts and celebrated.  She was born in Greensboro, Alabama which is in Hale County, H-A-L-E County, in Alabama.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a little girl growing up in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Momma just talked about it being poor, and I've probably gotten more information from her sisters and brothers that they were all extremely poor, and that my Big Momma, Sylvia Harris, her mother, had moved, I think, first to Birmingham [Alabama] 'cause that's my oldest Aunt (unclear) cousins lived a time, then they moved to Tuscaloosa [Alabama], and then they brought the rest of the kids there, so they talked about that a lot.  My mother--my grandmother, Big Momma, was part Indian, so they talked about that and whenever she got angry, the Indian would come out in her.  They didn't talk a whole lot about that--a whole lot beyond that; I know much about--I know a little bit 'bout Big Momma parents; her mother was killed by a train, goin' across a train track--I remember one of my uncles tellin' me that.  I'll have to go back and get that 'cause I been tapin' my uncles and my aunts; I hadn't done it before, but I got most of 'em on tape now, and I had--I taped my stepfather [William Polk] 'fore I died--'fore he died, rather, and so I, I got some records and I'll get them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever talk about just any--share any stories with you about, you know, Alabama, that time, that kinda thing?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, really; mom, mom didn't do whole lotta that; my stepfather did a little bit about my father's side but no, mom didn't talk a whole lot except all--they all had to work and 'bout--how my uncle Frank, who can't read and write, had to drop outta school to take care of the family--those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did they do? Did she--?
Speaker 2: Field work in Alabama, yeah.  And Momma--even growin' up, Momma always had two or three jobs; she would iron clothes for people; she did domestic work when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 105915
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Martha Brownlee]?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  My mother is a--and never met a stranger; she's a--there's a song by, by Humpty Dump [sic, Gregory Jacobs' alter ego "Humpty Hump" of Digital Underground] called, Oh, it's like "M.C. Hammer on crack" [sic, "The Humpty Dance"] (laughter), you know; just energy, energy.  Very sunny person, doesn't matter where she moves, she knows everybody, very--I remember like my momma would always give--like, for example, we were growin' up, old ladies in the neighborhood; there was one lady particular, Ma Six [ph.], we call her, that Momma would take her food every day 'til she, 'til she died; I mean that, that's my momma--she's a, a, just a givin' person.  I told you we just went to celebrate her seventy-fifth birthday.  The night before we took her out, she had gifts for everybody; we weren't givin' her gifts, she was givin' us gifts and that, and that's when she's happiest.  I 'member one time I took her to Saks; I had never taken her to Saks; I said, "Momma, I'm gon' buy you a dress."  And she looked and, "Oh, no."  My mother loves--my mother's cheep; I mean she'll jump over the fence to keep from wearin' out the hinges, and so she went in and said, "Oh, we can't pay that," and she went to another dress, she say, "Oh, we can't pay that."  And so finally, a third one, I just put my hand on the price, say, "You like this, Momma?"  She say, "Yeah," and so I took her to the cash register with my hand over the price (laughter).  That's my momma; she buys gifts.  She was, she was in Cleveland [Ohio] before she moved to Augusta [Georgia] and she would just like buy gifts for my--all my sisters, friends, and bargain, oh, yeah, she, she, she could squeeze a dollar 'til the eagle grin.
Story_ID: 105916
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father now-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Emm, that's a sore subject, by the way.
Speaker 1: --starting with his name and a little bit about his background.
Speaker 2: His name is Homer Lee Curry, he left home--he left us when I was very young, probably 7 or 8 years old; I know his family better than I know him.  He died when he was at the age of fifty two, he had been in the [U.S.] Air Force; he was a mechanic, he also played a guitar, I remember that.  I remember his father and, and mother; they live in a rural area called Reform, Alabama, R-E-F-O-R-N--M, and it's about thirty miles from Tuscaloosa.  My granddad [Joe Curry] on that side bought his own land, and I saw the deed one time; it had that he bought it with a T-Model Ford, and some cotton, I believe it was, with something else he bought it--so I knew his family; I knew his sisters and brothers better than I knew him.  My daddy was an alcohol--no, my daddy was a drunk.  Some people say alcoholics, but alcoholics have to go to meetin's and my daddy didn't go to meetin'--my daddy was a drunk; that's what I remember about him.  What I remember most about my father is that, in his drunken state, he would come in and wanna fight my mother [Martha Brownlee] when I was a little boy; in fact, I 'member him drawin' a knife on my mother one time very vividly, and I 'member gettin' in the middle of it, and so I have a--very, very bitter memories of my father.  And I only recently made peace with that, and the way I made peace was that--when I finally concluded that he probably did the best he knew how at the time, and that was the only way I could make peace, and I was in my fifties before I could make that--make peace with that.  So, his sister still lives in Reform--I still see her; his brother is dead but I used to spend time--I spent more time with him than I did my father, all of my aunts--I went down there every summer so that--his family, and I thank him for that, I know very well; I did not know him very well.
Speaker 1: What impact did it have on you and the family when he left?
Speaker 2: I became the man of the family.  Momma would always tell--introduce people as me--as her "other husband" 'cause I'm the oldest, I'm the only boy, and I have three younger sisters.  It didn't impact me as much as it does some people because I have a lotta uncles that I'm very, very close to, and there were always male figures in my community that sub--served that substitute role.  I played football since I was in the eighth grade, so I played quarterback in high school and college, so I had football coaches.  My high school principal, which I'll talk about later on, he was a commandin' figure; he, he, he lectured me and mentored me and taught me things, and there were a couple of fathers in the neighborhood, they just took on all the kids in the community, so this thing that people have, "Oh, your father wasn't home" is no big deal for me because I did have that substitute.  I was angry about it--very, very angry about it; in fact, I know he wrote me a letter when I was in college saying, "Dear Son," and I gave the letter to my mother and said, "You better answer, he doesn't wanna hear what I have to say."
Speaker 1: Do you remember good times with your father?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not really.  I remember goin' down to my grandparents' house and ridin' on a little ol' train that they bought me, a blue train, when I was a kid, and I spent a lotta time with my cousins--my first cousins down there, but in terms of just time with him, no.
Story_ID: 105917
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if you all came mainly from free people or slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: I'm beginnin' to do some of that now.  I told you I was about interviewin' some of my relatives; I haven't really done a whole lot.  I know about my Big Momma [his maternal grandmother, Sylvia Harris], her parents, and a little bit about my grandpar--my parents on my father's side, but not a whole lot beyond that.
Speaker 1: Do you know if they were free or slaves?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I was very glad of my, my, my granddaddy on my daddy's side owned his own land--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and he was--now it's about eight acres down there, still land that my family owns, yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Why don't we start with your paternal grandparents; start with their names and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Let's start with Big Momma.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Let's start with Big Momma.  Big Momma, my mother's [Martha Brownlee's] mother, name is Sylvia Harris; she was born August 23, 1900, and I always remember August 23 when, when it comes around.  Big Momma was a very independent woman; I think she had about twelve kids, and one or two died.  Big Momma never married and--which was a source of pain for my mother, but I told her to get over it and that's big--see, we have this thing--some of the kids are like--take my mother, they would talk about Big Momma, say, "Well, she was strict, she did all this and all that;" I don't know anything about all that--all I know is she spoiled me, and so whatever problem they had had with her, they should get over it and don't tell me anything bad about my Big Momma.  So Big Momma spoiled us--spoiled me in particular.  In fact, she told Momma one time, "Don't make that boy wash dishes, you gon' turn him to a sissy."  "That's right," I said, "That's right, Big Momma, don't let 'em turn me to no sissy," so I didn't have to wash dishes anymore (laughter).  And she was protective, she was independent.  I remember she'd be drive--walkin' to, to town and I would be drivin', catch her, say, "Get in this car."  'Cause for a long time, we didn't have a car, and my stepfather [William Polk] had one but he wouldn't let anybody drive it, and so one time--I'll never forget this--one time, my mother wanted to go to church on a Sunday, and my stepfather was watchin' a game and her brother--one of her brothers, Uncle Percy--Percy had said he would come by and take Momma to church; he didn't, and I saw my mother cry on the porch.  I say, "Momma, don't worry about that, I'm gonna work this summer at University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] washin' dishes," which I did, "We gon' get our own car, and we're not gonna depend on anybody else."  And so I did; we got a 1960 green Corvair, I taught my mother how to drive, took her up to get her driver's license, and we been drivin' ever since; we just--Momma and I close.  There's a lotta incidents like to have happened that, that really makes Momma and I really close.  So, my Big Momma was just independent, spoiled me, I would eat twice on Sunday--at home, and at Big Momma's, she was protective (laughter).  I remember one time I was learnin' to drive.  I have a uncle who's 'bout four years older than I am, Jessie--we call him Padna, P-A-D-N-A, and we were--I wouldn't say steal, I would say we were liberatin' my uncle's car when he would sleep at night, and we both lived in the housing projects at the time, and we come out, and we wait 'til he go to sleep, and get his key out his pocket, and then we'd go and my uncle would teach me how to drive; we come back, we come back, the parkin' spot where the car was, somebody else had parked there.  So we go out the next night, wait 'til he go to sleep--this went on for about two weeks.  So finally, one night he caught us (laughter); we were comin' back, he caught us, we ran to Big Momma and Big Momma say, "Leave those boys alone."  I say, "Right, you heard Big Momma, leave 'em al"--"leave us alone."  And that's the way she was, she was protective, and she was partial to her boys, I have to admit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, were you the oldest grandchild, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I was the oldest grandson; there was a granddaughter older, though she was reared by my grandmother and--who I thought, for a long time, she was my aunt.  But I was the first grandson, yes--yeah.  I, I enjoyed the role very well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did Big Momma ever share any stories with you about life for her as a girl?
Speaker 2: Not Big Momma never really did that kinda thing.  I know--I think part of it is, Racine, I think that--I think that they deliberately tried to protect us against some of that by not sayin' it.  And they were so busy fillin' our mind that one day we'll have opportunities that they never have.  I remember my, my high school principal always say, "Well, you gotta be ready when integration come," and my high school guidance counsellor, Miss Hackett, would say, "You gotta be ready when integration come," like it's gon' walk around the corner, you know; I'm still waitin' for it (laughter).  "Like you gotta be ready because you gon' be the first generation to get a chance."  And so we were all operating in mode [ph.], that we gotta study hard, we gotta work hard because we gonna get chances that none of our parents or ancestors got, and that's true, we did, we did.
Story_ID: 105918
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit now about your paternal grandparents.  What were their names?
Speaker 2: Joe Curry and Liza Curry, Reform, Alabama, Pickens County; don't know how old they were, but I got some documents I'm gonna be lookin' into; died when I was very, very young, but I just remember that little--that little ride down the hill and they, and they had chickens in the yard and you always--it was fun; I was there a lot, but not a whole lotta memories--not like on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 105919
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up--your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I have two that I remember when I was very young.  I don't know why I just remember that my momma [Martha Brownlee] would take me downtown; I would wanna stop and go places I'm not supposed to go, and she would almost like yank me by the arm.  Oh, no--ridin' the bus goin' downtown.  Goin' downtown, I always wanted to sit in the front of the bus, and we couldn't; we always had to sit in the white line--behind a white line; I hated that, and I would like to slow down.  I guess I'm tryin' to drag when--in front of the bus, and she'd like yank me, almost by the arm, out the socket, and go to the back of the bus; that was a image that's always in my mind.  And another one seein' my mother come home; even though I was very young, seein' my mother come--my mother did domestic work; but I saw my mother come home in the back of a car and just two people in it, that my mother had done domestic work all day.  She was good enough to clean their house and cook the food and take care of the kids, but when time for Momma to come home, she had to be in the back of the car, and I 'member askin' one day, "Momma, why you do that?  Why do you take that?"  And she start cryin'; she said, "Well, I gotta feed you."  And, course, I felt like a penny waitin' for change then, havin' asked that question, but I--but it put an idea in my mind that--I was the oldest, I was the only boy, and my three sisters and I, weren't gon' live like that--that we were not gonna live like that.  If we ride in the back of a car, somebody would be chauffeurin' us.  And so I, I became a very--and some say I might still be--a very driven person because then I was on a mission; I was on a mission for my childhood that my three sisters and I would not live like my parents lived in Alabama.
Story_ID: 105920
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about life growing up.
Speaker 2: Emm.
Speaker 1: Were holidays very special times in your house?
Speaker 2: Holidays--if you'll see from some of the pictures, were--I didn't know we were poor 'til we got to be adults; I mean all that time never thought we were poor 'cause everybody was poor around me.  And my mom [Martha Brownlee] would spend money on cowboy suits and cowgirl suits; you know, there's a picture--a famous picture of me and my little sister, well, the one next to me, Charlotte [Charlotte Ann Purvis]; I, I--we're around this Christmas tree, and I got a gun out and she got her little white doll there (laughter); ahh, always a time of excitement--skates--whatever Momma bought.  I mean, I'm rippin' and runnin' playin' ball all the time.  And so yet there were big deals all--that was a really, really big deal when the holidays came around or when birthdays came.  My mother--my family never made more than $5,000 a year, but my mother would have parties at the black recreation center, and she would give swim parties; we had a lotta pictures of those, I didn't get any of those--that, that the swim parties--that, that they were givin'.  They would just rent out the swimmin' pool and all our friends would come and we'd have--go to a swimmin' party.  I never--as poor as we were, I was never deprived of anything.  I remember though, I was in elementary school, that I, I saw my mother cry one time because she didn't have fifty cent to give me for art money, and there were a lotta things like that.  My sisters and--I don't think they ever understood that 'cause they know that Momma and I are tight, but they don't exactly know why, and it's because that I've seen a lot and we've gone through a lotta that.  I remember one time I had to play Santy Clause because my stepfather [William Polk] was drunk and had gone out all night on Christmas Eve, and so I had to go next door to get the toys and bring 'em back into the house and stuff; so a lot--it's--a lotta experiences are very bonding experiences like that that I have with my mother, and that remains actually to this day.  They think it's because I'm the only boy, but that's the real reason.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what daily life was like in your house as a small boy.  Say you'd wake up in the morning and--
Speaker 2: You know, you go to school, you always had to study, and you get in trouble 'cause, you know, your momma's gon' know the teacher and the teacher's gon' talk to 'em and you know, teachers lived in the neighborhood then; they didn't live somewhere else, or you go to school and you're rippin' and runnin' and you get back and play.  Summertime, you live on the--I lived on the basketball court even though I end up playin' football in high school and college, but I lived on the basketball court all the time, just rippin' and runnin', and that was a happy time.  There was a store in our housing project they called the Blind Man Store, for obvious reason; so you get in, go in there and get two-for-a-penny cookies.  I remember I was a kid, I had a View-Master; I don't know if you--it was before your time--little (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No, I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--thing you look through 'em.  Well, I would charge two pennies for people to look through my View-Master, and then take it back, and I had money to go to the Blind Man's Store and get cookies (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where did you get the View-Master from?
Speaker 2: Momma bought it; Momma bought us all that st--I don't know how Momma bought all that stuff, but she always worked two or three jobs, and we never really suffered for anything.  My mother washed and cooked, and she loves doin' it to this day.  She tol' me she watched a 60 Minute [sic, 60 Minutes] piece one time about this Italian mother who sons all live in the neighborhood and she does their laundry.  She say, "If y'all let me, I would still do it now."  She told me she would do my laundry and put it on the bus to me every week.  That's my momma and we're not gon' let her do it, but that's her.  So, that's how I grew up.  I make it a point, when I go back home now, to go and visit those old ladies who always encouraged me, and one just died a couple of weeks ago, a friend of mine, Howard McCain's mother, and I had to go to--I went to the funeral there because it, it's family; it's just--you feel like you lost a family.  I just got back last night from speakin' at a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner in Detroit [Michigan], and I saw my first grade teacher; she lives there; I stay in touch with her.  And so you just really--those people are just--they shielded us from a lot, and they gave us a lotta confidence, and they always told us that, "As bad as segregation was, that one day you gon'--it's gonna be different--integration's gonna come."
Story_ID: 105921
Speaker 1: Could you please give us the names of your siblings, including yourself and, and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: 'Course I'm number one (laughter)--February 23, 1947; next is Charlotte Ann, married name is Purvis, P-U-R-V-I-S, July 12, 1951; next is Sylvia Christine Polk, P-O-L-K, March 2, 1956, and the baby girl is Susan Carol Gandy, G-A-N-D-Y, August the 18, 1958.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the community where you grew up?  Like do you remember the name of your street?  And can you kinda describe it for us?
Speaker 2: There's a picture I'm gonna show you.  I was born in--I'll tell you exactly where I was born; I was born in my Big Momma's [Sylvia Harris'] house, 2721 15th Street, in Tuscaloosa [Alabama].  People always refer to 'em as shotgun houses because you can stand on the front porch, shoot straight through the house.  Well, I say it was a BB gun house; we didn't, we didn't rank a shotgun house; but that was where I was born.  I was delivered by a midwife as, as were my other three sisters, and so--they call it The Bottom, that section of town, The Bottom, is 15 Street; they got a overpass goin' over it now, and it was--they call it The Bottom, it was just that, it was a very--with a lotta--shacks--it's nothin' but shacks; less than fifty yards from a train crossin', and so a lotta time the train--we hear the trains bang against each other but you got used to that kinda noise, and I remember when I was in elementary school, a guy try to go under the train and he had one of his limb, limbs severed tryin' to beat the train.  But it was a shack, and we called it The Bottom, it was wooden houses, shotgun houses, and later on, I guess I was about the seventh or eighth grade, we moved to the housing projects, and that was the highlight of the--I got my own room for the first time and it set--and, and, and, and the housing projects in the South are not like the North; they're not like State Street or this high rise rows and rows, or like New York [New York City, New York]; they are townhouses, one level, four units connected, you have your front yard, your backyard, and you had better keep it clean 'cause they had rules; if you didn't, there was a whole line--long line of people who were waitin' to get your house.  And so when we moved to the housing project, which is where I lived 'til--well, actually through high school.  We lived at 5-D first--I remember that; then we moved to 75-A, and then the 52-B--that was where we were; that's where I was--I finished high school; it's also where Sue was born.  I think Chris was too, but I was outside playin' when Sue was born, I remember that.  And, and that was a community; that was a community.  That was--there are people there, like I said now, that I went to the first grade with, I'm still in touch with--I'm friends with them.
Story_ID: 105922
Speaker 1: And it was that--the hou--the head of our housing project, Mr. Glynn--a Robert Glynn, G-L-Y-N-N, he was the person, I think the first person, that really taught me that poor people could go to college; I had no idea.  He would tell me about how he didn't have any money, and how he went to Alabama State [University] in Montgomery [Alabama], and how he had shoes that had holes in the bottom that he had to put newspaper in it, and--and just--it's like he would tell us all these stories.  He had this big ol' cigar and would just be sittin' there puffin'; you'd be chokin' but you'd be listenin' to all the stories.  And he would like tell you, "George, a poor person can go to college."  And that--like a light went off in, in my head, and so I had the--Mr. Glynn did somethin' else; he bought membership--now I told you the Y's and everything else was segregated.  There's a black Y called Barn--Benjamin Barnes Branch; he would buy us memberships every year, to the YMCA, and I wasn't the only one--a lotta other kids.  One day, I decide I wanna go; I, I was walkin' the town, and I looked on the back of my YMCA card and it said, "Good anywhere in the world."  And I figure Alabama might not be the United States, but at least it was in the world, so I decide to go to the white Y; I didn't plan it, I just decide to go in there.  I went in there and it was a little kid playin' ping-pong--a white kid.  I say, "You wanna play?"  He say, "Yeah," and we start playin'; we gettin' along--we got along fine until the manager threw me out, and before I got home, apparently had called Mr. Glynn or whoever had checked the records, and knew I--and then, when I got home, Momma [Martha Brownlee] knew I had already been there, had been thrown out and everything else.  But the white kid had no problem with that; he and I were fine.  And I've always said this 'bout the South--leave the kids alone, they can handle it; the adults the ones get in trouble.  And I, I'll, I'll just never forget that.
Speaker 2: Was Mr. Glynn a role model for you?
Speaker 1: He was a role model for all of us, yeah, yeah, he was all--I mean--'cause he dressed, he was exquisite, he always dressed well, he spoke well, you know, had his well-manicured mustache--big mustache, and he took a interest in all of us, and he took a interest in all of us.  And you hear these stories; see, we didn't see it--it was a like a world outside of Alabama and we had to get to it.  My high school principal the same way; it was like--he would take me around when he would speak around the state to the black colleges--Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University] in Huntsville [Alabama], Alabama State [University in Montgomery Alabama].  He would say--we called him "the Bear," okay?  He look like one, but you wouldn't call it to his face; he's also a former football coach.  And so when you get ready to go to high school--now, my high school at that time went from seventh through 12th grade.  The first story to tell you is about Mr.--'bout the Bear; they said he was walkin' the hallway one time, and somebody say, "I smell a bear."  He say, "What'd you say, boy?"  He say, "I smell fresh air" (laughter).  You do not challenge Mr. [MacDonald] Hughes; he was a iron-fisted person, and--but he had goals for all of us, and he would (unclear) Sports Illustrated, we have Career Day; he started that, everybody went through it and became successful, we had to come back that day of the year, so kids who sat where you sit--were sittin' where you sat, could see you--who grew up where you grew up that you had--that's how they showed role models to other kids, not in Sports Illustrated; he didn't ask you could you do it, was your schedule convenient, he didn't give you the month, he said, "Curry, I want you to be here May 1," and you say what you always say, "Yes Sir, Mr. Hughes."  And so he--I was, I was asked to be a pallbearer at his funeral; that was one of the--that was one of two biggest honors I ever had--one as a pallbearer at his funeral, and also my college football coach because they had touched so many young men lives--so many people lives, and the fact that the family asked you to be a pallbearer was like, "Yeah, thank you."
Story_ID: 105717
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Curry, tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Really, it's just goin' around and bein' around my cousins.  I, I mentioned that I wasn't close to my father [Homer Lee Curry], but I have a million cousins in Pickens County, Reform [Alabama], and I told 'em--I used to come over there every summer, and told 'em, "I stopped comin' over here 'cause everybody"--it's not just my cousin and first cousin, nobody (unclear); it's just too many Curry's over there.  But goin'--even now, goin' back over there with my cousin, rompin' in the streets, not any intellectual discussions about anything, raggin' on each other as we always do, just havin' fun with it, even now, on both sides of my family when I think about, that's when I'm happy--that, that's just, you know, that's what I enjoy.  We always have a lotta stories and stuff that my cousin and I tell on each other.  But it was just bein' around my folks and bein' down there where my grandfather [Joe Curry] had bought that land and that land is still there.  He say, "Boy, I got kinda--some kinda hair (ph.); I got some history.  My, my granddaddy bought this--Pa, Pa bought this land, yeah--just been my folks.
Speaker 1: So, that's probably a sight; so what smells and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, basketball court; basketball court is the sound.  Just--right now, I can go out there now, I'm ready to go play basketball--well, football, either one.  Just the memories that you just--any ki--the energy you have as a kid; you just don't get tired and you just play and play and play, and so that would be that.  Someday that would be my momma's [Martha Brownlee's] chocolate cake, or any kinda food--southern food that my Big Momma [Sylvia Harris] would make, yeah.
Story_ID: 105718
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What--do you remember the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure I do; two of 'em--Central Elementary School on 15th Street [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], 32nd Avenue Elementary [School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] which is now converted to a, a junior high--both of those.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: I, I just saw my first grade teacher, Johnnie Anderson Giglio; Giglio now, was Johnnie Anderson, and she was just outta college; striking woman--still is, even to this day, she's seventy-four, just a beautiful woman, and I was in--the most beautiful woman I had seen in all my six years, and so I had a crush on her, of course--my first grade teacher, so I learned my alphabets very quickly.  I learned 'em very, very well and they, they helped me later on.  But I wanna well in there; she was a, a good, a good teacher.  I, I remember some of the other elementary school, but the first one has, has the most impact.  The thing, I think, that stands out most for me, and especially even when I look now, is that I have always been around teachers who set a high standard; they set a high bar.  They never thought because you were poor, or because your parents did menial jobs or domestic work, that that somehow would excuse you from doin' your best, and they insisted on excellence.  And so, really--I might get in trouble for sayin'--I'm gon' say it anyway, though.  There--I would never go back--wanna go back to segregation, I'm glad we have integration, but one thing about segregation was you had teachers across the board who believe that you could achieve, and they didn't accept excuses.  And integration, which happened after I left, there are some, not all--some teachers who just want you not to be a discipline problem; they'll pass you through, and just get you outta my way.  Those teachers I grew up with cared about us; they, they were vested in us, and they had--I don't know if they ever (unclear)--they never had imagined how high we would have risen, but they knew we were gonna do somethin' with our lives, and so they, they didn't--I (unclear) remember--I think even kids in Special Ed [special education], they just said, you know, one day you get outta Special Ed; they just believe in you, and so when they believe in you, you have to believe in yourself.  I remind Miss [Hazel] Hackett, my guidance counsellor, she gave me $20.00 to apply to college--I didn't have it, you know?  I'm sure I wasn't the only one, and I'm still in touch with her.  She just moved to the--West Coast, California; she been in Tuscaloosa most of the time; when I go home, I always go home and see her.  I call her, I see her now.  They just believe in you and just--you really can underestimate how important it is to have people to believe in you at that age, and I had a lotta people like that.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, English, I guess always been, then favorite; definitely wasn't math (laughter)--English, social--social studies I always liked, history I always liked.  Yeah, those were my favorite.
Story_ID: 105719
Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I, I, I did pretty well; All four of us were honor students.
Speaker 1: And was that driven at home--driven especially at home?  Was your mother [Martha Brownlee] like saying, "Okay, you all have to do well in school," or how was it at home?
Speaker 2: It's interesting; my stepfather went to the fifth grade, I believe, and my mother went to the eighth grade, but they had an appreciation for knowledge.  My stepfather probably--William Polk, P-O-L-K, probably had more impact on me than anybody--my intellectual development--than anybody; he was self-taught, and so when I was growin' up, we got in our home the newspaper every day, and we had discussions around the table.  He would watch the news every day; Huntley-Brinkley I can--"Huntley-Brinkley Report."  I don't care what happen, at 5:30, he's goin' to watch it.  "I'm goin' to catch the news."  I don't know how fast he was runnin' but he was gon' catch the news.  And so we had newspapers.  So, I remember one day Sue, my baby sister, said somethin' at the table.  I say, "Sue, how did you know that?"  She said, "I read it in the paper."  You know, it was like, 'you read in the paper.'  My stepfather also got the Pittsburgh Courier, black newspaper, and that opened up a whole new world for me too, because see, you, you learn about Booker T. Washington, and they have Booker T. Washington High School in every, in every black neighborhood in the South; they don't have a W.E.B. Du Bois High School 'cause they don't teach you to be rebellious, and so he opened up that whole world to me.  And he would talk to me about Africa, that's why I was so glad to go to Egypt; I, I had gone to Senegal when he was alive, and so he went there--that was a--he had always wanted to go and never went to Africa, so when I went, that was good, and I was--I wished he were alive when I went to Egypt.  When I went to Egypt, I thought about him; in fact, I wrote a, a column, like a letter to him, when I went to Egypt.  Self-taught, never fell for the stereotypes about Africans; he would tell us, "You live in the kingdoms while other people were in caves," and would talk about ancient African history and knew it left and right.  And so I grew up around that.  They would bring books from University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]; he drove a dump truck there, they'd bring books home there.  In fact, when I went to college, I just had a love for books that I had so many black history books in the Reconstruction Era, which is my favorite subject, that my football coach and other people would come to my room to borrow books because I had this books, but William Henry Polk gave me that and, and probably had more to do with my development--although I had great teachers--than anybody else, because he gave me a love and a thirst for knowledge and a thirst for books.
Story_ID: 105720
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you, around the elementary school years?  Were you obedient?  Were you a little mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I was all boy, I'm told (laughter).  That is, I would go out and fight with the best of 'em, you know.  You gotta protect yourself, you gotta establish yourself when you're young.  I remember this friend of mine died of a heart attack not long ago; we had to go on a first grade with me--a Reginald Henderson.  Reggie had curly hair; all the girls loved Reggie, so we'd beat Reggie's butt all the time 'cause we didn't like that at all.  We had anything but curly hair; in fact, we used to say we had post office hair and somebody say, "What is that?"  Say, "Each nap got its own route" (laughter).  I mean that's, that's the way we ran.  So, I would al--I fought with the best of 'em, I played ball, I did everything.  I did things that Momma [Martha Brownlee] said don't do, and got butt whoopin's and all that other--had to go get the stick and the whole bit, and I heard all the--you know--I told you that--I think they went to a momma school; they have certain sayin's, you know; "This gon' hurt me more than it's gon' hurt you."  "Well, then let me whip you."  But I wasn't that crazy.  Momma would tell you, "Don't eat banana puddin'", which I loved too, and when she go to sleep, I would go do it, you know, and got my butt whipped 'cause she knowed what was there.  I was--I, I think I was well-balanced; I'm very happy for--I played ball but I also got my lesson, and that's kinda been, been the way I've operated.  So you coulda called me a nerd, even though I was a honor student, because I was playin' ball, you know, so I did both of those things.
Speaker 1: And did school--was it kind of easy for you, or did you have to really study hard, that kinda thing?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's easy; I think it's easy for my--at least two of my sisters, Charlotte [Charlotte Ann Purvis] and Sue [Susan Carol Gandy]; Charlotte skipped the first grade.  I remember she came home and she was readin' "Chicken Little," and the principal came in; Miss Watley [ph.] came into her office, and here Charlotte was talkin' about, "The sky is fallin', the sky is fallin'!" and told my momma, "This girl needs to be in the second grade" (laughter), and she was.  I'm not as smart as my sisters; I think they're all smarter than I am.  I, I, I work hard, and I've never been afraid of hard work, but I, I did all right; I had--I was a honor student, too.
Speaker 1: And during elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations during that time in your life?
Speaker 2: No, I was playful; I was a kid, I was into rompin' the streets and havin' fun and I don't think I was concernin' myself with the larger issues of the day other than that I recognized that, that there was segregation, and it was racism and discrimination, and I hated that system and I prepared my whole life to get away from it.
Speaker 1: At, at a--at that young of an age?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Even in elementary--oh, yeah, even elementary school, even elementary school--yes.
Story_ID: 105721
Speaker 1: Do you remember some specific incidents of discrimination or racism?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, absolutely.  God, where you wanna start?  Like I said, the buses, always; I remember goin' to the five and dime store Crest [ph.], uptown, and they always had these two water fountains, one marked "White" and "Colored;" but I never did like colored water, so I never wanted--so I always went to the White fountain and they would chase you away--they would chase you outta the store for doin' that.  When I was in junior high, actually high school, I remember gettin' in the front of the bus and a friend of mine, Clarence Hurst [ph.] and I, goin' to work in the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], washing dishes after school, and we sat in the front of the bus and a guy actually chased us out the bus with a knife; fortunately, we were gettin' off at the next stop--barely escaped that--but just determined to do that, just determined to do it.  When I was in the tenth grade, one of the girls were killed in Birmingham [16th Street Baptist Church bombing in Birmingham, Alabama], the four girls, and a friend of mine had a car and it had one (unclear); we played hooky and went up at the protest, and my mother [Martha Brownlee] never knew about this 'til I was givin' a speech one time as an adult (laughter), and when I told it, Momma say, "I didn't know that."  I say, "Well, Momma, it wasn't exactly somethin' I was gon' tell you."  But I always fought--I always rebel, and when I saw those ads in the paper--they would have segregated ads in the paper sayin', "Colored busboy wanted," or "White Christian woman roommate needed"--in the newspaper every day, and I saw it; I was confronted with this every day, and I knew that there had to be somethin' better than that.  And so my whole aspiration was to get out, and get my sisters out.  I hated that system, but some people it crushes; some people--and I--so I don't use myself as an example--some people gave up dreams and aspiration, but for me, it was like "Shoot your best shot."  And after you survive that, you--it's a confidence in you, like "Shoot your best shot, I've been through this.  You can't hit me any harder than that?  You don't discourage me, you know; you don't run me away 'cause I've already withstood that test."  They had a KKK [Ku Klux Klan] livin' in my hometown; lived across town--my hometown.
Speaker 1: Did you see the KKK a lot, and their activities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, we didn't see it; no, we didn't see it 'cause we--I was on my side of town (laughter).
Speaker 1: But did they have a lot of public activities?
Speaker 2: I can't say that I saw it; we knew about it all the time, it was in the paper, but we were on our side of town; we were in our own little insolated world, but we knew about it--certainly knew about it, yeah; certainly knew about it.
Speaker 1: And as a young boy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Let me add one thing.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I have often thought about what it would be like not to had--have to carry around the burden of race on your shoulder.  Here I am a kid, growin' up, and I gotta deal with this; I gotta deal with seein' those signs that have 'Colored Restroom;' I gotta deal with the indignity of getting my mom on--takin' my mom to get her driver's license, and they waited on every white person in that room, and then they waited on my mother and other people.  I'm a kid seein' this; I'm a sixteen year-old takin' my momma to get a license--that I wanna sit by the front of the bus, that because of the way God made me, I gotta move to the back.  I mean I wonder what it would be like, not havin' to carry that burden around; I'm not complainin' about it 'cause I dealt with it but still, I just wonder what life would have to be like to not have that, and the closest thing I've ever come to havin' that was I visited Amsterdam, Holland [sic, Netherlands] one time, and I've been to London [England], I've been to Paris [France], you know, Rome [Italy]--I've been, I've been around the world, but that was the only place I've ever been to I just really felt that race didn't matter, and so I see why so many expatriates are there; it's like you don't even feel it, like it's irrelevant.  But it was very, very relevant in my life, and I'm reminded of it day-in, day-out.  I was in tenth grade when George Wallace stood in the schoolhouse door at University of Alabama, and state troopers were all over our neighborhood searchin' cars and comin' through our community, and things like that.  I remember all of that; I don't ever wanna forget it, I don't ever wanna forget it because I always tell kids, "If we could survive that, we can survive anything.  So whatever you may toss me, I'm gon' laugh at you 'cause that's all you got?  I've been tested; I don't buckle."
Story_ID: 105722
Speaker 1: And, and did you always know that you were gonna do something with your life at--even in the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I have never had any doubt about that; I didn't know what (laughter).  I never had a doubt that I--see, my mission was to get out, so I figured that would be freedom, you know?
Speaker 1: But what did you equate success with in terms of being able to get out?  What did you equate success with?
Speaker 2: Well, education was always the ticket out, we knew that; there was no other way of gettin' around it--you see it all around you.  Gettin' out wasn't a job to me as much as it was to not be seen--treated as a second-class citizen; that bothered me more than anything else.  The job part I could, you know, figure out how to do that, but to go somewhere where I rise or fall based on my ability--James Brown had a song back when I was in high school, say--he said, "I don't want nobody to give me nothin', open up the door, I'll get it myself."  Now he didn't have the same English teachers I had (laughter), but I understood the point.  I don't want you--just give me the opportunity to rise or fall, and that's all I want.  And so, as a kid, it wasn't so much like, you know, "You wanna be a policeman, you wanna be a journalist [ph.], you wanna be a foot"--I wanna get out, and I wanted to take my sisters out, and so that we can be free to not be walkin' around with this backpack on your--wherever you're goin'--a heavy backpack of racism over the way that God created you.  There were ministers who came on TV who would say, "If God had wanted us to be equal, he would have made us all the same colors."  On TV, this is stuff I heard; so, the way you deal with--you flip it.  I always said, you know, people say, "You wanna be equal?"  "No, I--why would I stoop to wanna be on their--at their level?"  If that level was equal, I had to stoop--drop down a couple notches.  You find different ways of, of dealin' with it.  You, you think--if you think about it--you always joked about it because you had to remove the sting because we always tell the story about the day, it hadn't happened yet, when, when the, when the bus was first integrated, that all the blacks got in at the first stop and they all got to the front of the bus, and so all the whites got in, they had to go to the back, and the driver, just to keep the white people in the front, he drove in reverse all day (laughter).  You just find all kindsa ways to deal with these kinda things and laugh at it because actually, deep down, it stung.
Story_ID: 105723
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about junior high school--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --the junior high school years.
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Did you go to a different middle school or junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, no middle school.
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: On one side-a town you got black schools, other side-a town you had white.  Later on, they divided 'em up from, from--divided them, rather; from the seventh grade to twelfth grade, we're all together--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and there was no middles; everything there--and that's why I know a lotta people older than me.  One, Leslie ["Speedy"] Duncan, played football for the San Diego Chargers and Washington Redskins, All-Pro; in fact, he came to me recently when I was--I used to be on BET every week, with Lead Story, as one of the panelist, and he came up, "Man," he say, "Man, I see you on TV; I'm so proud."  I say, "Speedy Duncan."  I said, "You don't remember me, I was a little nappy-head boy in the seventh grade, but you used to go and sing in a talent show in high school, at Druid High School [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]," D-R-U-I-D, "and we had to pay a dime."  I say, "You had a flat top-hairstyle, and the song you would sing 'Is There Something on your Mind Pretty Baby.'"  He just fell out laughin' because they have no idea how under-classmen looked up to them, and we did.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in junior high school, or middle school, around those years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think I've been pretty consistent; I think I've always enjoyed reading a lot, I've always enjoyed English, I've always enjoyed social studies; I've never liked math, never really cared for the sciences and all; you do what you gotta do on those but, but I leaned more toward a liberal art, and they, they're pretty much my, my best.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends during the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: Let me think back--Reginald woulda been--Reginald Henderson, who died; Calvin Brown who had gone to elementary school with--from those years; Howard McCain whose mother who just died; Miss Dot [Dorothy Corder Smith], all her kids; oh, she had like twelve but you'd think she own the whole community--I always go see her, Miss Dot, that's my baby--love her.  And, you know, she had thirteen kids; it's like all of us were her kids.  She the first person in my neighborhood who had a television; we used go there and watch cowboy movies all the time--Indians always lost, of course.  Saw her get Jean, Lu; they were all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And what, what, what kinds of things did you all do?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The guys played ball.  See, see, you gotta realize, we were at McKenzie Court we had a basketball court where we had much area that we can play football and baseball and everything else; we did all those kindsa things.  I didn't go to a movie a lot 'cause blacks had to sit upstairs at the movie, so didn't do a lotta that.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't wanna sit upstairs?  You felt that was degrading?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't do that.  I don't think my mind was much into movies and secondly, I certainly wouldn't be volunteerin' to do that.  Folks have a little money, a whole lotta money; in fact, I can't think of a single time, before I graduated from high school, that my family went out to dinner--I can't.
Speaker 1: At a restaurant.
Speaker 2: No, I can't think.  Now, I'll go down and get some fish and come back, and you can run those errands, but I can't think 'cause you didn't have money but it didn't matter--they cooked and ate well.
Story_ID: 105724
Speaker 1: And during this time--during the junior high school [Druid High School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] years--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --were you starting to develop some dreams and aspirations?  What were some--what were you thinking you wanted to do when you grew up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Eighth grade, eighth grade, eighth grade--I was 'bout in eighth grade when I decided I wanna be a journalist; I probably couldn't spell it, and knew exactly what it was (laughter).  I certainly didn't get any inspiration from lookin' at TV 'cause they're all white; the newspaper had no black reporters.  In fact, I got a job at Sports Illustrated 1970, when I couldn't get a job at my hometown newspaper.  I should send 'em a Thank You note now, but when I go home, they always compliment me; they gave me the Key to the City one time, it was funny.  I went back and he said--you know, when he considered my background, and the mayor gave me the Key to the City and I say, "That's really great, now gimme the key to the bank and the combination to the vault;" he--I'm still waitin' for that.  But it's changed a lot; I don't wanna knock it too much because I think the South has changed more than any other region, and I think they changed because they been more honest about race.  If they didn't like you, they tol' you; believe me, they tol' you.  And when they dealt with it, they dealt with it openly, and that's why the south is the most desegregated region in the whole country right now.
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit to when, around eighth grade, when you were thinking, "I wanna be a journalist" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Be a writer, yeah.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--when I grow up.'  Now, you used to read the newspaper a lot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and your stepfather [William Polk] read the newspaper a lot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I read somewhere that you would read stories and you'd say, "I think I can write better than that."
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought that the local newspaper could pass for the Weekly Reader; you probably don't 'member that (laughter)--somethin' you had in elementary school, little rag (laughter).
Speaker 1: Still have them.
Speaker 2: I won't call it a rag; for that age group it was age-specific, but he shouldn't be writin' it for adults.  The thing about it that motivated me was that I read papers, and the only time I saw images of black people were when they were athletes, entertainers, or suspected of a crime, and I always knew there were a lot more stories goin' on that they could write about, and I felt I was gonna be the person to write it, and it was just that simple.  I knew I couldn't do it there, didn't know exactly where, never knew that I'd start Sports Illustrated, I--I just didn't know where, but I just know that's--I wanna write, I wanna tell a story.
Speaker 1: Let's talk now about high school.
Speaker 2: Emm.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Druid High School, D-R-U-I-D, and I was named--go look in my Yearbook--Best All Around (laughter), which may--again, I played ball and got my lessons (laughter).  I was a sports editor of the newspaper, the Dragon's Tale, T-A-L-E, and I played football; I guess football, the paper--Oh, God, I forgot about this!  When I was about in the seventh or eighth grade, we had our newspaper and we didn't start--we started our newspaper with memograph [sic, mimeograph] machine, and the pigeon's--tail of the pigeon--something, and I took typin'; the only reason I took typin' was because I heard if you went to college, you have to type term papers, and I knew that I wouldn't be able to afford that, and that's the only reason I took typin'.  So I took typin', and we had this paper we put out, and we would do it on memograph machine.  Mrs. Wilson was my English teacher, and she did that, and we would really get fancy; sometimes it would be pink, and sometimes it would be green, it would be blue--there would be different colors; we put it out, and that was our first newspaper--first newspaper.
Speaker 1: And this is in eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Seven or eighth grade; I've completely forgotten about that, but that's when I took typin'.  And now, later on, that's what I do (laughter) when I write, but that's the only reason to type, 'cause most--in--durin' that generation, typin' was for girls who wanna be secretary; you don't go type, but if you goin' to school, plan--plan to go to college, if you don't have the money, guess what?  You learn how to type, and that's what I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, in high school, you were sports editor of the newspaper, football team; what other kinds of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Went to all the dances--sock hops at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]--
Speaker 1: Did you date a lot in high school?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, but yeah, I dated some; in fact, I still know the people (laughter) I dated in high school.  Oh, God, how do I explain this?  You know what?  There were some guys who really date, and some girls who really, really dated--I wasn't one-a those; I, I dated.  There were some friends I know walked on the other side-a town, the south side, they be like three nights a week; my momma [Martha Brownlee] wasn't hearin' that, I would Sunday night and that was it 'cause they grades showed that they were walkin' over there three times a night.  Date--I only dated young ladies who were smart.  Every--I think every young lady I dated was a honor student; I believe that.
Speaker 1: So that was your type?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If I wanna have a conversation with somebody, yeah (laughter)--yeah, yeah, that's true.  But you know what?  Most of my friends didn't have the burning desire, I don't believe, that I had, to get out, you know.  They, they would--had their goals like I had, like everybody else have different goals, but with me it was just like a passion; it was like a--just fire inside of me that I was just compel to lead the way for my sisters and them--we gonna get out; we had to escape.
Story_ID: 105725
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about what type of young man were you developing in?  What type of young man were you starting to become?
Speaker 2: We were all mannerable.  Like when I spoke last night to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the first thing I did was to introduce my first grade teacher, and got a picture of her.  You aknowledge people; we were all mannerable, you know, we wasn't crazy, and we all--soon as we get back whip our butts in the community--any mother who saw us do anything wrong.  Again, I had this fire for Civil Rights, so when they had demonstrations to integrate the buses and stuff there, I participated in that.  They had the cars they would drive along the bus routes 'cause you couldn't just go out and charge people for it because they'd get your for bein' a taxi without a license, and so what the organizers did was to go around and have people volunteer to get cars to go along the bus routes to pick up people when we were boycottin' the bus company, and I borrowed my uncle's car and I would do things like that.  I would march and threw tare--tear bombs in the, in, in, in the First African Baptist Church and all that; I was a part of all that and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Tell us about when you went to Birmingham [Alabama] to protest against the bombing; you were in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was outside of 16th Street Baptist Church, Ingram--Kelly Ingram Park, which was where they beat all--the famous picture we seein' people gettin' beat and the dog put on him and the hoses, that was right there, so after the girls were there and went up to the church and we protested there.
Speaker 1: How did you feel being there and participating in this protest, and I know then you probably didn't know that it would, you know, have the notoriety that it did, but how did you feel being there?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was angry, I was angry 'cause see, my thing was that my--my idea was that if you would kill little girls in Sunday school, you would do anything.  What kinda beast--that's not a person--what kinda beast that would kill innocent children and blow up a church?  That's plain sick.  And so, the thing to do was to show up and--so that you wouldn't express fear; that you don't scare us.  If you kill me, I rather go fightin' than not go at all.  There's a old famous Civil Rights song ["Oh, Freedom"], and the phrase go, "Before I be a slave, I'll be buried in my grave and go home to my Lord and be free."  I participated in the Selma-Montgomery March [1965], last leg of that, because I wanted--I would always want to resist it; I didn't care about whether I died or didn't die because to me, the greatest honor in life would be dyin' doin' somethin' you wanna do, or doin' it for a cause.
Speaker 1: But did you really not care?  You had dreams and you had things that you wanted to do with your life.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I had dreams, but I had to do this.  See, this is what I'm tellin' you; I had to do this.  See, I can't go back and face my sisters when I had four girls up here dead and I didn't do anything.  Look, they coulda been my sisters; so, you have a obligation to go do it, or what are you?  You've been kowtow, you a coward; they have scared you.  No, you don't scare me; you can put your hose, your dog--you don't scare me.  You do not control me; I control me, and if you're upset because of the way God made me, then you get over it.  And it's just a thing that comes into you; I don't know where it comes from, it just--no--not no, hell no!  Use all the bombs you want.  We are gonna fight until we are treated like we're supposed to be treated in this country; or however long that takes or however many lives it take, so be it.  And there were a lotta people much more braver than I was who went out there--people who were sharecroppers in Mississippi and Alabama, and that was the only way they can make a livin' and they went to register to vote.  Case after case of people gettin' shot in front of the courthouse, the sheriff present, not bein' prosecuted.  Case of the FBI--were watchin' people gettin' beaten, seein' the crimes committed, did nothin' about it.  So, I mean, you gotta take a stand, and in the South, there are a lotta women like Miss Dot, lotta them stood up more-so than the men.  The pastor of my church--this is when I lost respect--
Story_ID: 105726
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's pick up where we left off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--About my pastor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, talkin' about your pastor.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: (SCOTT STEARNS:) Yes, we're rolling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A lotta women were prominent in the Civil Rights Movement in my hometown [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and they were very brave; a lotta men were not.  Ow, boy, this gon' be a broadcast and somebody's gonna hear this, but I don't care; my mother [Martha Brownlee] does not know this--until she hears this.  I lost respect for the pastor of my church when he said--and when he wouldn't march and take part in demonstration, and he said, and I quote, "It's not in my contract with God to do it."  Now, that much--you can't find a, a person who raised more hell than Jesus when he walked on this earth--for righteousness.  You're a pastor, you're independent--he was--you, you, you can afford more than anybody else, and you're not gonna participate and change things that need to be changed.  I lost respect for him that I never re-gained.
Speaker 2: And especially since a lot of the movement started out initially in churches.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah; in fact, that's where all--all the demonstrations were handled at First African Baptist Church in, in Tuscaloosa; in fact, that's where I met [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  Dr. King came there and spoke.  In fact, two things about Dr. King; one is, I wrote him a letter one time and he wrote me back with a stamped signature, but I still got it.  And the other one was that he would come in--I've never, to this day, seen a speaker like him; not a note anywhere, and give a perfect speech.  In fact, Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] would say that Dr. King give a speech and use all these big words; he said, "We didn't know what they meant but the white people didn't know what it meant either" (laughter), 'cause it's eloquent, it's just eloquent.
Speaker 2: What year was that that you met Dr. King?
Speaker 1: Oh, God, I guess around '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: When you were still in high school [Druid High School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 105727
Speaker 1: One of the things we didn't talk about that I'd like to ask you about is if your family--if you all attended church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what your experiences were like in church.  What was the name of the church that you attended?
Speaker 2: The last one was Elizabeth Baptist Church, and the one before that was Weeping Mary Baptist Church.  But we went to church, we had to, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was it typical church--Sunday experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was typical play-on-the, play-on-the-emotion church, yes; there's the shoutin' stuff, you can imitate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Last all day long?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't last all day long but it was, it was typical; very vigorous and exciting and lively.  I go to a church now, that John Cherry is the pastor of, that--and I never had experience like this in my life; he teaches and he gives you the scriptures, so you come there with your notebook and I like that.  So not a hoopin' and hollerin' which is where I grew up, it's like, here it is.  If you don't believe--if your pastor tell you anything, he should be able to show it to you in the scripture; if he can't, then that's him talkin', not, not, not the bible, and that's been good.
Speaker 1: But as a-- And I didn't get that in Alabama.
Speaker 2: Did you look forward to going to church on Sundays, or was it something you dreaded?
Speaker 1: It didn't matter whether you looked forward to it, you went, you know (laughter).  You didn't say, "Oh, boy, let me get up and go to church;" you know you were goin' so it was like you were goin' to school--whether you liked it or not, you were gonna go, and I'm glad we did even--all of us at some point go off and become heathens, but we always come back at some point 'cause you really never forget it.
Story_ID: 105728
Speaker 1: So, going back to high school [Druid High School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama], what were some of your thoughts about college?  You knew, at an early age, you were going to go to college--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm
Speaker 1: --but high school--
Speaker 2: Didn't know how.
Speaker 1: --Right--so what were your thoughts about how you were gonna go to college, where you were gonna go to college--what were some of your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, we were poor, and I figured that I would go to college and get some financial aid based on need--whether it was loans or whatever, and so I had part scholarship, you know, for athletic, but I also worked durin' the Christmas holidays, waitin' tables on a train--terrible! terrible!  In fact, a ol' pro say, "I don't know how y'all get all this money."  See, you go in there, you put the fork on the wrong side of the plate, upside down, you know, this durin' the Christmas holidays.  You go up, be--first thing you say was, "You gonna enjoy your Christmas holiday?"  "Oh, yeah, where you goin'?"  "Oh, yeah, what are you doin'?"  "I'm waitin'--I'm a college student, I'm waitin'--I'm workin' durin' the holidays."  "Oh, take this $10.00" (laughter).  And so you learn to say that.  It was so bad; the guys say, "Look, you (unclear), you college boys, 'cause y'all wouldn't make it out here tryin' to make it with that kinda service."  So I knew I had to work, wasn't afraid of that; I had worked in a high school.  I had worked since I was in sixth grade; I actually cut the lawn of my elementary school principal, Miss Maude Whatley.  And in high school, I worked washin' dishes at University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  I was washin' dishes when Vivian Malone integrated University of Alabama in 1963; in fact, I worked in the same dormitory and would look through the little window and see her--I was just so proud.
Speaker 1: What was--what was it like on campus during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was hostile, and a lotta N-words, everything else, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Did you feel the impact at all, even as a worker?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, you feel it but, you know, you go in there, you go to work, get back; I don't care, you, you--we learn to become oblivious to it.  You gotta realize, you know, a lotta these people--I won't sa--Robert Shelton, like I say, the head of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan], he was--he was not just poor white trash, he was poor white trailer park trash; many white people didn't wanna be associated with him, so it didn't matter what they said or how they looked at you, it was how you looked at yourself, so I never got into that so it didn't matter.  I came out there to work, get some money, and, and, and get ready to go to, go to school so--didn't know how I was gon' go to college, didn't exactly know where; I know I wanted to leave Alabama, so (laughter), so I went to Tennessee; I got to Tennessee and thought I was up North (laughter), so I went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 105729
Speaker 1: How did you decide on Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Part in financial aid-- mostly, and also it wasn't far from-- a lotta my relatives live in Johnson City, Tennessee; in fact, my oldest aunt lives there, and then everybody else start migratin' there.  And so it's about hour from Knoxville, so I can go up there, weekend, and eat and have fun, and that kinda thing.  And Knoxville was a very small college; it was just perfect for me 'cause I grew so much.  I was very raw, I believe; I was, you know, well-read and all that, but we're still raw--we were still raw, and Knoxville College changed all that.  It was a small school, it was affiliated with a Presbyterian church, you knew everybody on campus, and so there I was quarterback of the football team, I was the editor of the paper, I was--we--they put three students on the--as associate members on the Board of Trustees--I was one those, and I really--I really found myself at Knoxville College (laughter).  I remember an argument I got into with the history professor, Dr. [Thomas] Cragan, C-R-A-G-A-N; we got in a big argument about reconstruction era, which is the era after Civil War, my favorite period.  And he had gone to University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]--he's from East Tennessee; he said, "There was a terrible time in American life, Reconstruction."  I say, "That's not true."  He say, "Ah, yes it was, Mr. Curry, I beg to differ."  I say, "Don't beg, that's not true; it was the best time for African Americans."  He say, "I don't know how you can say that."  I say, "Tell you what--next class period, why don't we do this--I'll go get my books and make a presentation, and you get yours and lets the class decide."  He say, "Okay."  So I did, I came back; I didn't have to go anywhere but home--but my, my dorm room, brought my books back up there 'cause I had read Reconstruction ["Black Reconstruction in America"] by [W.E.B.] Du Bois and everything--I, I was ready; so I came in, I lay all the books 'cross this, and I say, "Bang, bang, bang, bang, bang," and I say, "Okay, I'm finish, your turn."  He said, "What you want--do you wanna teach the rest of the course?"  I say, "No, that's your job," grabbed my books and walked out (laughter).  You know, you could do that--you could do that.  I didn't know how to debate; we had--Mr. Austin taught me debate skills at Knoxville, and that's why I love debatin' to this day; you can know the argument, you can make the argument, you can anticipate what the argument's gonna be, and you prepare yourself for it, and you always be better prepared than the other person.  That's what Knoxville taught me; you can't--it's not enough to just be prepared, you must be better prepared than everybody else.  And it gives you a certain confidence when you go in.  People ask me, "Do you get nervous when"--no, I don't get nervous, no I don't get nervous because I prepare--I know I am prepared; I don't go on TV unless I'm prepared better than anybody else.  Bob Dole and I got into it--Senator Dole; he went arguin' about somethin' and he said--I say, "Senator, you seem like you're a open-minded person."  He say, "Oh, yes, I am."  I say, "You seem to be a fair-minded person."  He say, "Oh, oh, yes I am."  I say, "And why is it that you have the worse rec--one of the worse civil rights records in, in the Senate."  "Uh-uh, I, I, don't agree with that."  He--you know, he had that little pen--not makin' fun, but he had his pen he carry with his fist, he drop it--DeWayne Wickham would never let me forget it; he drop it, he was so nervous.  I say, "Well," I say, "Well, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Report Card said you had the worst record," and he said, "I don't know that."  I said, "When we go to break, I'll show it to you."  And so we came--when the break came back, I said, "That is what it say."  "Well, yeah, that's what it say but that's--."  I prepared; I don't care, I don't care.  I am--I don't care about--you have (unclear); wouldn't bother me 'cause they have not been--been trained any better than I did--I have been trained.  And when I show up, I will have--be--I will be totally prepared, I had document--anything I said, that's why it doesn't bother me to have these debate; bring it on, I don't care.
Story_ID: 105730
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Druid High School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Five [1965].  And I were--I don't tell people this; I don't--few--very few people know this.  I went to University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] a year; it was the worse year of my life, and I really don't tell 'em 'cause I don't wanna give 'em the credit for anything.  You will not see 'em on my resumes, you will not see it anywhere 'cause I hated it.
Speaker 1: Why was it the worst year of your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--'Cause I was called an N-word, [Barry] Goldwater had--runnin' for president, and over all the water fountain at University of Alabama was a sign, "Goldwater."  I was in a work-study program, and it's a big white guy didn't wanna do work and I was supposed to do mine, and there was a woman that--who was an admitted segregationist--admitted!  But she told 'em he was wrong--that, that, that everybody had to work; she say, "I don't like this equality stuff, but everybody has to do the same thing."  That, that's crazy 'bout the South; I'm tellin' you there's such a inconsistent.  Somebody told me one time that the difference between the North and the South is the North will accept you as a group, and the South will accept--but not as a individual, and the South will accept you as a individual but not as a group--or you're different; yeah, you're different like that.  So, I went up there, I actually worked--this is also not on my resume--a summer in SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 1: And was this the summer of 1965?
Speaker 2: Sixty-Six [1966]--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  And my mother [Martha Brownlee] hated that; my grandmother [Sylvia Harris] called it SLICC (laughter); she couldn't pronounce it.
Speaker 1: Because were they concerned about your safety?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't want me out there doin' it, but I was in Atlanta [Georgia] while [HM] John Lewis was there, Stokely Carmichael was there, [HM] Julian Bond was there; I worked on the Julian Bond communication department.  And so I really got steep in Civil Rights history, and I think that really pushed me over the edge even more so, because these are young men and women who were brave, much braver than I, and had been out there battlin' the front line, goin' in and getting people registered in counties, all-black counties, where nobody registered to vote, and being chased out and life threatened.  And then, from there, I went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  Actually, no, did I go to Knox?--Yeah, I went to work for--I went to--worked a semester with my cousin in New York [New York City, New York], and then I went to Knoxville.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about what it was like working with Julian Bond and Stokely Carmichael, and John Lewis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was great; I was hungry.  Again, this is my background; I've been fightin' for all this, but not like these people.  They been right doin' it.  And so I got a chance to work under Julian and work with, with John Lewis and, you know, to this day, I'm friends with 'em.  It really was a special experience.  And that's why I guess I get on [John] Kerry and [President George W.] Bush all the time like when they were my age, they didn't do anything like this; they weren't arguin' about who went to Vietnam or who--when it came to civil rights, neither one of 'em were there, you know.  Kerry didn't have anything to do with civil rights; he didn't march anywhere.  Bush can come to work in a political campaign in Alabama, but he didn't go Selma-Montgomery march, so don't tell me about--the bravest people I, I have the most respect for are civil rights workers, not people who go to war, even though I have relative who've gone to war.  The bravery is--'cause when they go to war, they have guns--they have protection, they have ammunition.  Civil rights, you got just yourself and God.  And for these men and women, knowin' the repercussions of it, and still go out there to do it, I have nothin' but the utmost respect for--people who fall out there when it was really, really rough, and they did.  So, my opportunity to go there and work for SLICC, as my Big Momma call it, it was just great.  It really--I don't think I would be the person I am today if I hadn't done, if I hadn't done that.
Story_ID: 105731
Speaker 1: So, when you were at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], did you say, "Okay, next year I know I'm gonna be someplace different?
Speaker 2: I actually worked for the newspaper there; yeah, I knew I as gon' leave there, but I worked for the newspaper when I was there.  I got some tips somewhere (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What kind of articles did you write?
Speaker 2: They didn't cover the black college, Stillman College, in the same town [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], so I was writin' sports at the time, so I did that--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and it was good.  That--now, I don't wanna give you the wrong impression; there were a couple--there were several people out there, white students, southerners, who were brave, and wrote about issues in the right way in terms of civil rights; Bill Plot [ph.] was of 'em--I think of him right away, and they were called all kindsa names, they were ostracized, but they would write the truth.  And so even in that evil system, there were whites who grew up in Alabama, knew it was wrong.  In fact, I met one--this is funny; I was on C-SPAN one time, and lady call in and said she was from Tuscaloosa--a white lady--call in from New Mexico, and she said her name was Moaney [ph.]; I say, "Hmm."  My mother [Martha Brownlee] used to do domestic work for-- Moody--domestic work, domestic work for, for the Moody's; I think they own a bank or somethin' there.  And I thought, I say, "Here I am, I'm on C-SPAN--the kid from the bottom, the kid from the housin' project, and here this young lady come from all kindsa money and she's on a Indian reservation or somethin' in New Mexico--how odd; you know, she's the one supposed to be on TV, I'm supposed to be out there, but God had other plans for me, he had other plans for me.
Story_ID: 105732
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I played football at Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], my coach was crazy; they all crazy (laughter).  Coach Brown--one of the things he would do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--This is your football coach?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One of the things he would do is try--he say he wouldn't cut you, you would cut yourself.  So that means like a hundred guys go out, we need--we gon' have fifty; we not gon' have a hundred uniforms, so you gon', you gonna quit.  So he would get into his station wagon--I 'member this--air-condition station wagon, in August; sit in it while we ran around the football field, and people'll fall out, they be throwin' up, callin' Earl--we call it Earl, and be just quittin', and I said to myself, "You know, he's gonna run outta gas before I quit."  I just wouldn't give him the satisfaction of that.  But we survived that kinda stuff; it makes you tough, it makes you a better, a better player and you just don't learn to quit; it's just not accepted that you quit.  So, those are the primary things I did in Knoxville.  I wrote a lot, I led a lotta protests (laughter).  I remember we had--when I was editor of the paper, we wrote a cart--we, we would complain about the burning issue of the day--food in the cafeteria.  And so we would talk about how bad it was; in fact, I remember we did a editorial cartoon.  It had the cemetery--tombstone; each tombstone had "KC Student"---Knoxville College Student, "KC Student."  And then we kept complainin', nothin' happen, so we met one night and we said we gonna go in there at 12:00--we gon' turn the tables over.  That exactly one minute to 12, we start beatin' on the table with our salt and, and pepper shakers, and then rip--turn the tables over at 12.  We did just that; that afternoon, we had steak, and the silverware was clean and everything else.  Before long, we were back to the same ol' food.  But then I had fun at Knoxville; I remember one night we were--I ran pretty fast, I ran 9-600 [ph.]; I was--I played quarterback, I also ran fast.  And there's a guy challenged me in the cafeteria that he could outrun me, and I say, "Man, you can't outrun me," I said, "I'll spot you 10 yards a hundred yard dash."  He say, "Oh, you know you crazy now."  I say, "Oh, yeah."  I say, "Boy, I can bend a wheelchair and put combat boots on the bench."  We was talkin' all kinda noise.  So we had a big crowd; this time, we ran out there--went outside and I gave him 10 yards like a fool, and--but I beat him, and when he--I see him now, Gates; he, he withdrew from college after that (laughter).  We'll do stuff like that, 3:00 in the mornin' talkin' 'bout who the fastest, go out and run in the rain up and down--just, just boy stuff, you know, just--it was fun stuff, yeah.
Story_ID: 105733
Speaker 1: And you were a history major in college [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking you wanted to do professionally?  Still think you wanted to be a journalist?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I still, I still thought I wanna be a journalist, but I just thought I need to be in two fields and, and also Knoxville did not offer journalism courses, let alone a major, and I'm amazed that this little small school, at the time about 1,300 students, has--had just produced so many black journalists; [HM] Vernon Jarett was a legend of--a press--second President of National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], syndicated columnist; Barbara Rogers is a TV anchor out in San Francisco; Ralph Wiley, was younger than I am, he went to Sports Illustrated, later on he went on ESPN; I was the second African American at, at, at Sports Illustrated--all from this little small school; so, so there was a good liberal arts--people taught us well there.  So I was kinda--wanted to do that; now, what happened was--end of my sophomore year, Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] and Columbia [University in New York City, New York] had a program where they try to get people to come and spend the summer there--intensive summer study program, and see if you like it, and try to get you to come and go to grad school.  So--but I had a, a--I had to drop outta school; I skipped a summer.  I had to drop outta school a semester when I was in college 'cause I didn't have the money, so I went to work in New York livin' with my cousin, and I worked as a mail clerk at Life Magazine, and so that was a--that changed my life because what happened was there I was a--was a black guy in personnel name Bill Trent--Dr. Bill Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.]; his daddy [William Trent] used to be head of UNCF, United Negro College Fund, and so I worked there as a mail clerk, and I knew what journalists we were readin' because I was deliverin' the mail; sometime I read it before they did.  And so I went to Bill Clint--Trent, I say, "Dr. Trent, one day I wanna come back here and be a reporter."  He said, "Sure, kid."  I say, "I'm serious, I wanna be a reporter."  "Yes, kid, yes, kid."  So, anyway, end of my sophomore year, I had--I told you Harvard, Yale, Columbia had these programs, so I had a summer scholarship to go to Harvard in history.  You go there, spend the summer and they give you $500, I guess it was, everything, you get credit and all that; and [W.E.B.] Du Bois got a Ph.D. from Harvard--I had--didn't forget that, that's my hero.  And so he offered me a internship at Sports Illustrated and--well, I had this offer to go to Harvard.  So I wrote him, I said, "Dr. Trent, this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; I'm goin' to Harvard."  He said, "Well, go ahead, I understand."  Next summer, he offered me a summer internship again, and I got a summer scholarship to go to Yale, and I said, "Dr. Trent, this is second-in-lifetime opportunity."  He said, "Look, boy, come by here on your way back to go to school, spend three weeks," I think he said, "and then we--you see how you like us and we like you."  I say, "I can spend two 'cause I have to go back to football practice."  Came back, spent that time, in September, my senior year, I had a job offer for the Sports Illustrated after the year.  The interest thing about goin' to Sports Illustrated was I had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So this is in 1971 when you were with Sports Illustrated?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--'70 [1970], '70 [1970], 1970.  Interesting thing about that was, and I have to admit this, I had very limited contacts with whites, prior to then, except your mother work people, and that kinda thing--not real social relationships, so, I had come from that background in Alabama.  There's another young guy, Larry Keith, who rose to be assistant managing editor, came from North Carolina; Larry came definitely from a North Carolina background.  Ron Scott was a Mormon, he came from Utah; he had a different background.  Jim Kaplan came from Boston [Massachusetts], he went to Yale; his daddy was a judge.  All of us started at Sports Illustrated at the same time--very varied--varied backgrounds; we hadn't had that much interaction.  We jelled, we became friends, we played ball together, we partied together, and that was a real rich experience for me when I first went to Sports Illustrated was--you know, despite your limited backgrounds, you go in, you compete with everybody else, and people are just people.
Story_ID: 105734
Speaker 1: And when you went to Sports Illustrated [in 1970], you were the second African American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--either after [HM] Jonathan Rodgers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you had accomplished, you know, some of your dream of making it out?  You kept saying to yourself, "I'm gonna, I'm gonna make it outta here."  Did you feel like Sports Illustrated was that?
Speaker 2: I'm gon' let you in on a secret.  I don't know if you ever feel that you've made it, I really don't.  It's like you run a track meet, you start off sprintin' real fast, and you could have crossed the finish line, but you still run like you come out the blocks.  That's about the best analogy I can come up with; you don't stop--you're scared, you're scared to slow down.  That's a fear--of slowin' down because you might just have to start over.  And so you push--I don't know, somethin' in the backa you just kinda push, push, push.  I don't need anybody to motivate me, I motivate myself 'cause I wanna be better than anybody; I wanna be the best that I can be; don't mean to be the best in the world, I wanna be the best that I can be.  So we have this thing--that push inside of you, so when I got to Sports Illustrated I, I enjoyed it, I got experience about goin' to all-star games I'd never been to before, got a chance to travel; it was a wonderful experience, but a--this is what memory is so important.  A friend of mine is Ernest Holsendolph, H-O-L-S-E-N-D-O-L-P-H, was a writer at Fortune Magazine.  Ernie was an African American, had gone to Columbia [University in New York City, New York], smokes a pipe, you know; I talk to him all the time.  He said, "You need to leave outta here, this is great experience; you need to get some newspaper experience."  He claims--I don't, I don't remember this, but he claims I said, "What?  Leave Sports Illustrated?  Are you crazy?"  How can you leave Sports Illustrated?"  So, the way he tells it, is that a year later, I said, "Tell me what you doin' when you leave it" 'cause Ernie had had experience in newspaper.  He said, and he's right about this, it was good goin' to Sports Illustrated, but as a person goin' just there, you need to go out and get some newspaper experience, someplace where you can write more often, and really grow--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and I was reluctant, except if--I have given that advice to a lot of people I have mentored, and they had that same response I'd have and--but they've done it and it been the best things, so--
Story_ID: 105735
Speaker 1: I applied to, I guess, about a dozen papers; the two finalist that won were the Detroit Free Press [Detroit, Michigan] and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch [St. Louis, Missouri]--this was 1972.  I had preferred to go to Detroit over St. Louis, but I felt that goin' to St. Louis would give me the best opportunity as a journalist, and it turned out to be the--the best decision.  The first story I wrote was on front page (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--At, at St. Louis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--At. St. Louis Post-Dispatch about, about housing project guards sellin' drugs in the projects.  I got three, or five, I forget which one--fired; got 'em fired for sellin' drugs.  And my first year, I was worried about.  And this is somethin' you change up.  You always have these inhibition worry; I'm on a plane goin' to St. Louis, sayin', "You know, can I really write on deadline?  This is a newspaper, it's gon' be more pressure."  My first year, I had twenty-five stories on front page, so I was worried for nothin', so I got a chance to write a lot there.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you this--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at St. Louis Post-Dispatch, were you thee, the black reporter who covered the black stories?
Speaker 1: No, no, no; this is the problem that all African Americans have, whether it's journalism or not; it's what [W.E.B.] Du Bois talkin' about the turn of century; it's a, it's a--you just two-ness; as your world--one foot in black America and one in white America, and so you just know that it's two things I insisted on one--I would wanna cover some black stories; I would wanna go there and write a story about a housing project where people are messin' up 'cause, 'cause I grew up in a housing project.  At the same time, I don't want anybody to limit me from doing anything, so I wanna do other kinda stories as well.  And so I did that, and I was very proud; we did a series on public housing and won some awards for that--I really enjoyed it.  and something happened, I think it was '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]--I think it was 1973.  In all my thirty-four years of journalism, this is a story--there some more I remember, but this is the first one that had an indelible impact on me.  There was a young man name Mark Essex, E-S-S-E-X. from Emporia, Kansas, got very embittered in the navy, went down to New Orleans [Louisiana], got on top of the Howard Johnson hotel and had been killin' a whole lotta people.  The expert marksman ended up killin' him, and I was sent to Emporia to cover his funeral.  I thought then, and I think now, how that coulda been me; that had I not handled the racism and discrimination in the right fashion, I could have become embittered, and done somethin' stupid that would end my life.  I think Mark Essex was about twenty-three years old.  I interviewed his mother, sister, his father; in fact, I got a speech in Topeka [Kansas] in January; I'm gon' try to go find 'em again and go talk to 'em.  That impacted me.  I said, "You know, that could have been me."
Speaker 2: Do you think there were a lot of Mark's out there?  That, that could have been a lot of other people, as well?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  You have to find your own way how to deal with the system; it can crush you.  I would suspect that for every George Curry who survived and thrived on the challenge, I suspect there are probably fifty George Curry's who got crushed and, and gave up hope, and so it becomes important what kinda--how you are mentally, so you can withstand that, and I just thought a lot; that coulda been me.  You coulda, you coulda got to you so much--eats--erodes your system, and you go somethin'--and do somethin' stupid like that in your life because you can't handle--you can't deal with it.  I had a young man at St. Louis Post-Dispatch could write--Vandell [ph.] Well [ph.] could really, really write.  Somebody tol' him he couldn't write; he believe it, he quit that paper, and accordin' to his sister and his momma, end up drinkin' and on the streets of some city in Connecticut.  He could write; Vandell was a very talented--somebody tol' him he couldn't write, and that's why I tell my kids at Journalism Workshop [St. Louis Minority Journalism Workshop]--somebody somewhere will tell you you can't write.  First, you gotta make sure it's a lie, and secondly, you don't believe it.  So, to me when I teach journalism to high school kids, and that started in St. Louis, I teach the mental part as much as I teach the actual writing.  And I also will start each workshop, with "Eyes on the Prize," showin' 'em a segment of what it was like; let 'em see Emmett Till, and everything else, and whether they ever learn journalism or not, they'll know somethin' about that struggle and they'll know somethin' about their people.  So do you become tenacious mentally?  And so it's--I don't, you know, I don't, I don't, I don't think the--that everybody came out the way I came out; there were a lotta people who crushed because of that system.  I think--when I go back to Alabama now, I say, "You know, just imagine how much talent left this state.  What would this state be like if all the people who left here, because condition were here, be so much further along."  So it was their loss, not mine.
Story_ID: 105736
Speaker 1: And what was the reaction back home [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] with you doing so well, you know, becoming a journalist.  What was the reaction back home?
Speaker 2: They're proud.  You know, I've written three books, okay?  I wrote one ["Jake Gaither: America's Most Famous Black Coach"] in '77 [1977], my first one, and my sister Charlotte [Charlotte Ann Purvis] said, "You wrote a book, what am I supposed to do?"  I say, "Read it; this is not a competition, read it."  Charlotte is excellent at what she does; all my sisters are, and the mistake I think some people make, includin' one or two of my sisters, is that--I hope they forgive me for this, but because I have a very visible job, and people are always askin' about me, that somehow it kinda robs them of what they deserve, in a way.  I mean if we were writin' on national television, people see you do--if, if you do well; they don't understand the other side of that.  The other side of it, if you do badly, people will see that, too (laughter), and I can't do that.  But because I have a visible job, and people say, "I saw your brother on TV, I saw your brother do this, I saw your brother do that."  And plus, I'm the oldest, so they've always had to live with that; they're like, "Oh," my younger sister say (unclear) "You're George/Charlotte's sisters aren't you?  You're George/Charlotte"--and then later on, of course, you become their brother because they're--nobody knows you anymore.  But it's visible and--I, I kinda feel for 'em in a way because it's not their fault; I mean I'm--what I do is visible; I choose that this is what I wanna do.  I didn't plan to be on TV (laughter).
Story_ID: 105737
Speaker 1: My sisters are proud of me, and I'm proud of them, but I sympathize with them because, because I am so visible; people always come up to them and ask them about me.  I have one sister, Chris [Sylvia Christine Polk], say somebody was comin' up, say, "Well, I, I saw your brother George."  Say, "Oh, yeah, he's fine; well, I'm doin' all right, too."  You know, it's a--they must feel guilty because--I'm not doin' any more than anybody else is doin'; it's just that what I do, people can see it.  For example, I went to Doha [Qutar] to cover the war, and people say, "I saw yo' brother over there with [HM] General [Vincent K.] Brooks," you know; it was like--they have lives too, and sometime people insist that because it's they--your brother, and--I'm their brother; I'm not a celebrity, I'm not a journalist--I'm their brother; I'm their big brother.  And so a, a lotta them have a lotta pressure because people always askin' 'bout me, and don't have a conversation with them.  And when they--so when I say, in the fam--I'm the dumbest in the family; they're all smarter than I am--they are.
Story_ID: 105738
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about some of the work that you did in St. Louis [Missouri] with--when, when you started your student journalism workshops [St. Louis Minority Journalism Workshop] in--around 1977.  Why did you decide to do that?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I--growin' up, I had never met a black journalist, and I don't want these high school kids to be able to say the same thing, so Gerald Boyd, who was a manag--the first black manager ever at the New York Times, and Sheila Rule, who worked for the New York Times--his ex-wife, among other people, all part of the black journalist group [Greater St. Louis Association of Black Journalists], said we wanna start--we want our own organization, and started the workshop.  So I got the job to be the director of the, of the workshop.  And basically, it was a program of seven or eight Saturdays, all day, taught by professional journalists, and the students were high school students.  The idea was to give them a sample of what journalism was like; we would have them writin' on deadlines, we have the mayor come in for press conference or Congressman Bill Clay [HM William Clay, Sr.] come in for press conference; they would have to write, they would have to put out a newspaper, and everything else.  We had no idea the impact that would have at the time; we just sayin', "This is a good thing."  So we started that in 1977, and when I moved to Washington [D.C.], which I'll catch up a little bit, we started one here, we started one in New York; now, there are twenty-five workshops around the country patterned after the St. Louis--on the St. Louis model.  But the best part is I have students who have gone through my workshop who are now not only my colleagues, but they started their own workshop.  Of all the things I've done in my life, I'm proudest of that; I'm proudest of that, and I'm proud that the people who went through our workshop realized that they had an obligation to reach back to the next generation, and the idea is that generation will reach to the next one, and that's somethin' Mr. [Robert] Glynn taught me.
Speaker 1: Were you active in the National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been active in it.  What was it--2003, I was Journalist of the Year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Journalist of the Year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Last year--I had to remember (laughter), yes; but it wasn't my priority.  My priority has always been these kids, so when I was goin' to different cities, I--although I was president of the St. Louis Chapter once; they kind of drafted me to doin' it; I never wanted to do that.  My goal has always been the children because--some of the journalist, by the time they become journalist they, you know, you, you can't do a whole lot with them at that point.  They don't wanna learn, or they're closed, but kids are curious and they have so much potential, and I've always gotten the greatest satisfaction from that.
Story_ID: 105739
Speaker 1: So let's talk about when you went to Chicago Tribune [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --in 1983.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What precipitated that move?
Speaker 2: I had wanted to leave St. Louis [Missouri] before; I had--I was in St. Louis eleven years; I wanted to do national news, I knew I was capable of doin' national news.  One thing I tell my students is that "You're gonna run into some people along the way who will be helpful, you're gonna run across people who are not gonna like you because you speak your own mind, or you don't shuffle, and when you're not--go anywhere and you smile when you're not tickled"--I'm not that kinda person.  So there were people at the St. Louis Post-Dispatch who were not interested in seein' me progress, even though I told you I had twenty-five stories, even just that first year, on front page, and would not give me the job I wanted.  I wanted to be the Washington [D.C.]--go to the Washington Bureau; I wanted to cover national news.  And so I applied some other places, and I finally got a job at St.--at the Chicago Tribune; they said, "Come work for us a year in Chicago;" and most of the time I was on the road coverin' [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson then--"and then we'll send you to Washington as a Washington correspondent."  I mentioned it to the people of St. Louis Post-Dispatch and said, "You know, got this offer, I'm gon' do this, and do I have any prospect of goin' to Washington Bureau?"  And they said, "No."  Now, here I'm goin' and workin' for one of the top ten--top five newspapers in the country, gon' take me, no experience with them, and make me a national correspondent.  And here is a place I worked for eleven years, not gonna give me that opportunity; and so I, I left and was glad to leave; I had good experiences at St. Louis.  And this is somethin', too; somebody said you, you just always gotta be willin' to learn, and that even--I'll never forget this--somebody tol' me that a broken clock is right twice a day (laughter), okay?  You can learn from everybody.  There was a man who probably influenced my writing as much as anybody--name of Carl Baldwin; he was a white fellow from--grew up in Merrillville, Illinois, finish high school; never spent a day in college.  And they had somethin' called Baldwin School; the, the reporters who weren't that good, they would go back and he would work with them on their skills.  I begged-- and Sheila Rule with the New York Times-- we begged to go.  "I wanna go to Baldwin University."  He said, "You can't go, you too good, you don't need--"I say, "I wanna go," 'cause Carl Baldwin taught me to capture drama, to re-create it, to make you see it, smell it, touch it--that he could take you to the scene.  I learned that skill from Carl and I begged to get in there, and they let me in there.  And that's where I learned it from.  Somebody else might look at him sayin', "Oh, here's a guy that didn't even go to college, he didn't"--Carl was the best, and I learned from the best, and to this day, I love drama; I love to re-create the (unclear), and I learned it from him, I learned it from him.  And so I did have a lotta good experiences there; the first managing editor there, Ev Graham [Evarts A. Graham, Jr.], was very good; Dick Weil, my executive--they were all good people, encouraging people.  And there were some, quite frankly, who was quite--were, were creeps and had their favorites, and I wasn't one of their favorites, so--I had the option of going to the Chicago Tribune, I had a excellent opportunity; they put me covering Jesse's [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr.'s]first crusade; I wouldn't call it a campaign, that was a crusade (laughter), and then I went to Washington as a correspondent for five years, and then they name me New York bureau chief for Chicago Tribune; then from there to Emerge.
Speaker 1: So, 1989, you were named New York bureau chief.
Speaker 2: Yes, about that; I have to go back and look it up; I think it's about right--from '89 [1989] to '93 [1993]--'93 [1993] is when I left.
Story_ID: 105740
Speaker 1: So, tell us a little bit about how the Emerge magazine opportunity came about in 1993. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 1: Were you kind of thinking, 'Now, the next thing for me to do is to go and write for a magazine,' or did it just kinda come about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, even when I was in Washington [D.C.]--Emerge got started in 1990 [sic, 1989]; Wilmer Ames, who also worked at Sports Illustrated and Time Magazine, started it--it was his baby; it was a, a concept of havin' a news--a black news magazine.  Wilmer asked me to write for him, I did; in fact, I wrote his first story on--a cover story on [HM Minister Louis] Farrakhan.  In fact, Farrakhan cried in the interview; he said it's the only time he's ever cried.  I was talkin' to him about Malcolm X and he start cryin', and I was shocked; so when--later on, I always tell people, like "Don't mess with me, I made Farrakhan cry," you know (laughter).  Anyway, I used to write for him, but I was frustrated because--it was like there's this natural thing you should do that they wouldn't do, and, and Emerge had like a, an identity crisis; sometime we have a entertainer on the cover, sometime we have a newsmaker, and like you didn't know what it was--it was schizoid.  And I would talk to Wilmer about and never got anywhere but it was all that.  And then Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] got control of it--must have been late '92 [1992] or so, maybe a little earlier, and I wrote him a, I wrote him a--I came across it the other day--I wrote him a long email sayin'--a long letter sayin', "This is what's wrong with this magazine; this what it takes to fix it."  He called me, to my surprise, I was in my office; he called me and said, "I agree to everything you said, we're gonna address this," and all that.  Later on, even though Wilmer had fire--had started a magazine, he was, shall we say, forced out.  Wilmer couldn't be a strong editor of Emerge because of two things--one, he was a Republican, and blacks are not Republicans, so he had conservative philosophy; and two, he was a closet homosexual, and so he had this like--mixed com--he was mixed up 'bout who he is--who he was, so he was never really a force, strong force there.  But Wilmer and I had talked, and he told me--Susan McHenry would never like this, but--he was the managing editor--he told me I was his choice to succeed him, even though Bob was gonna make the decision, he said, "But publically, I gotta talk--say I'm supportin' my managing editor 'cause she's been here."  I don't think Susan ever forgiven me because I got that job, but--hey, it was Bob's call.  So I had the blessin's of Wilmer, and I had the blessin's of Bob Johnson, and they interviewed me and I told 'em exactly what I would do and--in fact, [HM] Debra Lee who's president of BET [Black Entertainment Television] now, said that she didn't think Bob would have--would hire me because I was so strong and clear on what I wanted to do, and it was exactly what Bob wanted, and he was an excellent boss.  And so that was my dream job 'cause I had a chance to remake Emerge and give it cutting edge.  In my seven years there (unclear), we made more than 40--more than 40 national--won more than 40 national journalism award; during the time I was there, I was elected President of American Society of Magazine Editors, the first African American, and it was a great time that I enjoyed.  I had to get my own team together goin' there; that was painful for some people, but they had to get over it.  And I'm on a run here, I'm gonna be judged, I gotta put my team in place--and I did, so we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was there a learning curve?
Speaker 2: I had come outta magazines, remember, initially, so I, I--so there were some things I had to learn, sure.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But I think-and--but was there a big difference for your--a reporter for a magazine now--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --an editor, so--
Speaker 2: Good question.  Not as much because it was a news magazine; I think had it been any other, any other kinda magazine it might have been, but I had been in magazine sports, and I had been in news, and to me, a news magazine combines the ele--the best elements of both.  And so it wasn't as big of a curve there, I had a very clear vision.  My motto of my paper in, in Knoxville [College in Knoxville, Tennessee] was "To comfort the afflicted and to afflict the comfortable," that's a quote--sometimes attributed, sometimes they say this guy name "Anonymous"--everybody knows him.  (Unclear) but I just love the--I first read him when I was in college; it's like it, it, it characterized me.  This is my motto in life, to comfort the afflicted and to afflict the comfortable, and so we set about that mission with Emerge.  The first story we did was on police brutality, where cops had this guy handcuffed, his arms up in the back, his pants fallin' down, and we just took no prisoners; we (laughter), we had some very interestin' covers (laughter).
Story_ID: 105741
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about one issue in particular--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --mandatory sentencing--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and Kemba Smith.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about who Kemba Smith is, and why that was such a crusade for you.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Kemba Smith was a twenty-four year-old woman who had gotten twenty-four year mandatory sentencin' on drugs case; she basically fell in love with a thug who was a drug leader--he end up gettin' killed.  The Feds admitted that she never used or sold drugs, but because she was part of this "ring," as they put it--
Speaker 1: And part of it being that she was the girlfriend of the boyfriend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She was the girlfriend of the guy who end up bein'--they found him dead, so they had to find somebody.  So Kemba got sentenced to twenty-four years and life, and with mandatory sentencin'.  I found out 'bout Kemba's case through a, a friend and writer, [HM] Reginald Stuart, who wrote for me regular at Emerge, and he had to go on to a reunion at Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee], I believe, and one of Kemba's lawyer had gone in, was a friend of his, and told him 'bout this case.  So, I said, "Go forward with it."  And he did, and he got ready to write it and I said, "Go ahead and write it.  Reggie came back with this huge story ["Kemba's Nightmare"] that, never in the history of the magazine, had we run a story that long; it would require emptying a whole feature (unclear) having one story in order to run this story.  And Reggie always writes too much anyway, and I told him it takes him too long, and he writes too much--I, I tease him about that.  And so he gave it to my managing editor, a Florestine Purnell who--my--she saw everything before I did, and I said, I said, "Look at this thing, Flo; let me see it when you chop it down."  She said, in her own understated way, "I think you oughta read this."  And I said, "You lost your mind, too?"  I say, "You know we don't have the room for this."  So I read the story, and I had a little pen, I would--I say, "I'll decide where to cut."  So I would turn the page, and I had my pen poised; I was turnin' the pa--I kept turnin' the page to the end.  I say, "Boy, this a powerful story" because-
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: --she was candid, it was some very embarrassing things in there but her parents were candid, both her mother and her father, Gus [Smith] and Odessa [Smith]--fine people--how they rearin' her son that she had in jail, and so I had to make a decision.  We had never done this in the history of the magazine.  If I wanted to run a story like that, I would not run another long story in the book and--in fact, Clarence Brown, the production guy, said, "Look, you can make the decision you want, you're the editor."  He say, "but, you know, the key to a magazine is to have different things that different people want."  He say, "If people love this, you'll be okay."  He say, "Don't, guess what?  You gon' have a buzzard on your hand."  I said, "I have no doubt about it--let's run it."  And so we ran--I think it was 24 pages--17--total of--package of 24 pages that first time; we did three stories--two cover stories.  And we ran it, and the response was unbelievable; people would call--I can remember one person, and I happen to remember a guy in Jackson, Tennessee; he say, "I am cryin' as I'm writin' this letter."  People would call me, and said, "You know, I wanna have a talk wit' my daughter; I have not had this talk."  And that's what churches and synagogues and Muslim mosques around the country will be usin' as teachin' tool; it was that kinda phenomenon.  We had no idea it was gonna be all that, we just knew it was a good story, and we follow it.  And [HM] Elaine Jones, who was head of [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund at the time, read it; she's from Virginia, and she said they, they wanna represent Kemba, as they went to represent Kemba in all different settings and they never able to get her out, even--and one judge said she doesn't belong in jail, but he said his hands were tied--
Speaker 1: Right, because of the mandatory (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--because of mandatory sentencin'.  Well, Legal Defense Fund stood there the whole way.  Finally, right before [President Bill] Clinton left office, they filed a Petition for clemency, and he granted her clemency, and Kemba was free.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Nineteen Ninety [1990]--oh, no, 2000--I'm sorry, 2000 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Two Thousand [2000]; and she served (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The magazine had closed then, I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and she served--right--she served seven years of her sentence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--About that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And we had planned that--you know, we just thought we were doin' the right thing.
Speaker 1: And as a result, it--her story, and others like it, got huge coverage.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Coverage, everybody--everybody start pickin' up after we did, and we, we're glad to do that, but I don't wanna take too much credit here; I'm not a lawyer, don't play one on TV.  If Elaine Jones hadn't stepped up and said, "We're gonna do our part--you've done your part, journalists, we're gonna do our part legally," she would still be in jail, so they deserve as much credit as, as we do.
Story_ID: 105742
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about when the magazine [Emerge] shut down.
Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me just mention one more story before we do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Sure, play it.
Speaker 2: --'cause there were, there were two stories that affected me most when I was at Emerge; you named one, Kemba [Smith]--the other one was called "Rape of a Spelman Coed;" one of my staff members got raped, Lori [S.] Robinson.  Lori was like a, a kid to me and these, these are people I hired basically outta college.  I had some people I hired--I had--my philosophy was to have young people with basically no experience, and veterans, and mix 'em, so I have both of 'em, and Lori was a kid I hired almost straight outta college--I think she had one or two years.  She graduated magna cum laude from Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]; I think she majored in Spanish--just bright kid, just nice person.  I got this call one day--one mornin'; Lori said, "I can't come to work because I've been raped."  I said, "Don't worry 'bout that."  I said, "You get all the help you can get; whenever you come in, your job's waitin' on you, and we'll be prayin' for you."  I sent Flo [Florestine Purnell], my managin' editor, out to see her, and there were other people workin' around her helpin' her to get treatment and things like that.  And it just tore my heart apart because nobody deserves to be raped, first of all, and then here's a person who was so community-conscious and just a good kid tryin' to do the right thing, and gettin' violated like that; I was just--made me just so angry.  But the police department wasn't doin' anything around here much either, so I wrote a coupla letters to them and the mayor, and everybody else to get them jumpin' on that.  But Lori recovered, and she wrote a book about her experience ["I Will Survive: The African American Guide to Healing from Sexual Assault and Abuse"], and she's doin' fine today, and I, I'm so proud of her; she end up getting married and everything.  But Kemba and Lori-- Lori --and the way that Lori 's story end up--so, so, so what happened later on, there was a, a incident where some students at Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia] were accused of rapin' some student at Spelman, and mind you, Lori is a graduate of Spelman.  We had had a staff meetin', and I talked to Flo; Flo always--that's, that's my barometer; she tell me whether I'm right or wrong; I'm doin' somethin' right, she tell me I'm wrong, she's the first to tell me.  So we waited 'til everybody left the room, I said, "Flo, I'm thinkin' 'bout askin' Lori to do this story."  I said, "It would be a powerful story to go in the Alma Mater--write about the story, and then mix her, her, her experiences with that."  I would not have asked Lori to do a story if I didn't know that she had already planned to write a book; no way, I would have asked her that.  So we let everybody leave the room.  I called Lori back, I said, "I got a proposal for you--I want you to think about it, and if you are the least bit uncomfortable, don't do it, and it'll be as though we never talked about it--the choice is yours; I want you to be completely comfortable with it."  So we did; Flo and I were in the room when she left.  I understand later on, she wrote--talked to a guy--a (unclear)--a rape counselor, and the rape counselor said, "You gotta do this story 'cause you can help so many people."  And she did that story, and that's a very powerful story of what was goin' on then, and the rawness of her own experience--just a, a lotta courage.  That was, that was a hard story.  She helped a lotta people, too--a lotta people.  And I think she won a award; she won a lotta awards; I think she won one from the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] for that story, and she got a book contract, and she--because she wanna help other people; remarkable young lady.
Story_ID: 105743
Speaker 1: Any other stories from the magazine [Emerge]?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of 'em--the [Supreme Court Justice] Clarence Thomas one is one that people talk about the most.  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And these are the, the covers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we (laughter), we decided we'd (laughter)--well, let me give you the background.  We--what I wanna do was a--Clarence Thomas was on the [U.S.] Supreme Court--there was a--in the, in the community, there were very mixed feelin's about whether to support him or not, knowin' that he was a, a zealot--right-wing zealot.  There were some people, even the civil right establishment, sayin', "Give him a chance; when he gets on, he's gonna change."  And there were other people sayin', "Not in this lifetime--not even the after-life."  So, my initial story I did, which somehow gets lost in all this because of the fanfare around the cover, was that I would go back to people who had initially said, "Let's give him a chance," go back to them, I think, two years later and ask 'em what they think.  And boy, what they--they said worse than anything I would say.  That was the idea.  So, the stories are ready and everything, and we had a story meetin', and I walked in the conference room and looked at Flo [Florestine Purnell], I said, "Well, gimme a rundown on a story;" that's the way we did it--she would tell me where we are.  So she got to the Clarence Thomas story and she said--I said, "Well, gimme a description of it."  She said, "Well, the people who had supported him, they are, they are basically--how do I put this?  They're basically callin' him a handkerchief head."  And I started laughin', and she knew--Flo knows me; she knew immediately what that meant.  The rest of the staff men didn't, but it did wind--said, "Well then, let's put a handkerchief on his head."  And the art director said--Wayne Fitzpatrick said, "You're kiddin' aren't you?"  I say, "No, I'm not kiddin', I mean it."  So, I said, "Let's do it."  So, we had the artist--they, they draw sketches before they do a cover and a paintin'--they, they'll do a sketch of it.  So they sent me a--some sketches to choose from.  Well, they had some sketches that basically looked like the, the gang rag tied to--I say, "No, no, no, no; I want the knot.  I want the Aunt Jemima knot on it."  And my art director say, "You sure?"  I say, "I'm absolute sure of this."  And so we did the (laughter)--just that, and boy did that create a ruckus.  Most of the people--It was almost evenly split, to my surprise; I thought people would just agree with us; it was about evenly split that first time 'cause they really hadn't gotten to know the damage that he could do, and so--ev--but everybody talked about it, and they--and Randall Robinson--I remember TransAfrica--he say--I showed him a copy when it got off the print--hadn't even bound it yet.  "I gotta have it, I gotta have it."  And so we did that, then I think a couple years later, we ran him--I think three years later, we ran him as a lawn jockey, you know, and then the artwork inside with him shinin' [Antonin] Scalia's shoes.  I want--I--these are original artwork, and I--the second time we ran--the second cover, everybody was agreein' with us by then.  But I bought the original artwork, and I said, "Now, what can I do with this?  I, I, I don't wanna look at Clarence Thomas every day.  Where, where can I put him in the house?"  And so I put him in the toilet, which was the appropriate place.  People come in the bathroom, and they would come in and then run right back out, they don't stay long.  And so we were noted for our covers because we didn't have marketing.  The only advertising we got was on BET [Black Entertainment Television], which is not our crowd; that's what Bob [Robert Johnson] did 'cause he owns it, and so we--but people talked about our covers.  We ran Ward Connerly as a puppet one time; had little strings on him.  We, we, we were bold (laughter).
Story_ID: 105744
Speaker 1: And so let's talk about in 2000, the magazine [Emerge] shut down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know it was coming once Bob Johnson [Robert Johnson] had sold BET [Black Entertainment Television]?  And so did you, did you think it was next or did you think the magazine was gonna survive?
Speaker 2: Well, what was happenin' at the time, and I didn't know, that Bob was preparin' to sell BET to Viacom for $2 billion.  So what he did was stripped of--many of his subsidiaries and farmed 'em out to other people to do, and in this instance, he gave it to Keith Clinkscale [sic, HM Keith Clinkscales].  Keith had a vision of his own he wanted for a magazine; don't think he was very fond of Emerge.  He and [HM] Roy Johnson had this, this, this image of a magazine that they wanted.  I was very angry because one, they were lyin'--they were bein' deceptive; I asked 'em what they plan to do with Emerge.  "Oh, we not gon'--we haven't decided what we gon' do, we gon'"--I knew all along exactly what they were gonna do; they were gonna close it to make way for a lifestyle magazine for men.  I felt betrayed, I felt that Bob coulda kept the magazine goin' because, you know, you can write it off and, and it was years and years before The Nation and New Yorker Magazine--New Yorker had just recently start makin' money.  When I say it, I wanna say--same time sayin' that all this time I was writin' all that stuff 'bout Clarence Thomas and runnin' these covers, Bob was the best employer I ever had because he gave me freedom to do it, and even though people criticize BET for all the rump-shakin'--yeah, they had the rump-shakin', but he had never once told me to tone down anything; he was the ideal boss, so I wanna say that in fairness.  But at this time, especially as angry as I was, I felt--I felt he could have stayed there, but he was--his mind was other places.
Speaker 1: Do you think Emerge was kinda the equalizer for--like all of the criticism about the programming on BET.  Was Emerge the equalizer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It, it, it helped--it helped a lot; they--he could always point to Emerge, there's no question about that.  And in Bob's defense, even though he had all the rump-shakin', he also, at the time--they aren't there now--they had "Lead Story," our program, they had "Teen Summit," they had Ed Gordon [BET News with HM Ed Gordon, III], they had more public affairs shows, BET did, than the rest of the cable companies combined; so, so it can be--so at that point--but then, later on, got rid of all of it.  But at the time, he still had that.  So, yeah, he could always point to Emerge.  So, Keith kept pretendin' that it wasn't gon' happen; I know exac--I got (unclear), so I knew it was gonna happen.  In fact, I wrote a--my last editorial was really hot, sayin' that some people don't believe that black people want serious news and all that, and he was livid because it went by him, and he was on his watch then; I knew it was gon' be the last one we had; it was June, with [H.] Rap Brown on the cover, and I wrote my editorial, sayin' what I wanted to say.  They gave us severance, closed the magazine, and boy, did I get emails and everything.  People--I can't go nowhere now; people are sayin', "When you gon' bring back Emerge?  When you gon' bring back Emerge?"  And I am gonna do something, real soon; probably 'fore the year's out.
Speaker 1: And would you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Wait, lemme tell you the rest of it.  The other story was he replaced Emerge with Savoy--
Speaker 1: Right, and tell us a little bit about what Savoy is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--which is--Savoy, you know, they call it the "black Vanity Fair;" it wasn't, it was like a--you didn't even know what it was; it had no identity, I didn't know what it was, but it certainly wasn't Emerge.  So Keith them got that--had--BET Weekend was second to Ebony in circulation; they closed that when he closed Emerge, and they brought the Savoy out, and it did these other ma--Honey and all the others, and the long and short of it is this year, 2004, they went bankrupt, killed six black magazines; so, in, in a four-year period, they killed six black magazine.
Story_ID: 105745
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the closing of Emerge.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are--there--it's been said that you plan to revive the magazine; do you plan to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  First of all, let me, let me say that that was the best job I ever had in my life.  I told my stepfather before he died-William [Polk]--I say, "You know"--he was so glad I took the job.  I say, "You know, it's different;" I said, "It used to be that white newspapers would come in and steal from the black press and take people to their publications."  I say, "I'm doin' the opposite; I'm takin' people from there who've been trained and bringin' 'em back home," and I was very proud of that.  I was very sad, and very proud of what we did, very proud of what we did.  We been tryin' to raise money recently, havin' been able to be able to do it, but I have come up with a plan; I am goin' to come back out online, maybe do a print product, maybe not.  I--I finally concluded--I, I--that initially, I guess, because I'm just a ink stain journalist, that--that there's another way of doin' it.  AllAfrica.com, Charles Cobb [Jr.] over there, tol' me that they get like--they've gotten like five million unique hits--five million; and they've had some pages been hit like two million--you get two-million hits, or somethin' like that.  I could have a greater reach doin' it online than doin' it publishin', and I won't have to pay for production cost and mail, and all these things, so I am definitely comin' back online.  Where I'm shootin' for right now, my team and I, to get out of--we haven't told anybody this, so this is news here--we're gonna probably get a special edition out for the election--before the election, and then come back after that but, but just stay online, do it online.
Speaker 1: And you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Not sure what the name is gonna be 'cause there may be some problems; I've registered several names, one includin' Blackperspectives.com, and may use that, may not, but we're still toyin' with that--but we're comin' back.
Speaker 1: And tell me about the book, the Best of Emerge ["The Best of Emerge Magazine"]?
Speaker 2: Best of Emerge is my third book; my first one was "Jake Gaither: America's Most Famous Black Coach;" it was about a football coach who went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] but coached at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida, also known as FAMU], and the second one was "The Affirmative Action Debate," and the third one is The Best of Emerge, almost 700 pages, where we pulled the best stories; the story you mentioned about Lori [S. Robinson], stories on Kemba [Smith]--all of those are included in, in the collection.
Story_ID: 105746
Speaker 1: And the work that you're currently doing now.
Speaker 2: I am now editor-in-chief of the National Newspaper Publishers Association News Service [NNPA], which is a mouthful.  Basically, we are the Associated Press for black, black newspapers; we are--got a federation of more than 200 newspapers, and so we run a news operation outta Howard University [Washington, D.c.], so we interact with students, and send out the--things out to our publishers every week--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and that's also been fulfillin'.  As I said earlier, I got chance to go cover the war at Central Command there with [HM] General [Vincent] Brooks in this position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--the Iraq war (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, in this position.  It's interestin', you know, all those big places I worked for out here, I had to do that; here is where I won Journalist of the Year working for the black press.  And so people have too generously credit me with helpin' revive the black press; I just wanna be able to be a part of it.
Speaker 1: Do you think you have helped revive it?
Speaker 2: I think I've done some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And brought some credibility to it?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I think I always had credibility, and like I said, when the Pittsburgh Courier when I grew up, they always had credibility but I, I've been able to do--raise the standards and we, we've been winnin' some national awards.
Speaker 1: And do you think that--it's always had credibility in the African American community--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but do you think that now it has credibility in general in the, you know, community in general; do you think that at all?
Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause I don't care (laughter), 'cause I care about is my primary readers; my primary readers are people who look like me, and they come to me for a different perspective; they don't come to me with--what they get the Washington Post or New York Times, they come to me for a different perspective just as they did at Emerge, and that's my audience; if everybody else wanna chime in, that's good, but what I found here, and at Emerge, is you all--there are quite a bit of whites who would turn to black news outlets because they want the real deal, and they are not gettin' it, too, so I would estimate, even at Emerge--I think about twenty-five percent of our readers were white; I can tell because when they wrote letters to the editor, we'd always check 'em out, and then you go there and you find that out, so everybody wants this--just wants some good news sources because the problem is conglomerates have bought most of your news outlets, and the emphasis is not on news, the emphasis is on makin' money.
Story_ID: 105747
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you, and why?
Speaker 2: You writin' my obituary?  (Laughter)--what stands out the most?  Hmm.
Speaker 1: Well, when you look at where you are now, and you think back to, you know, your Big Momma's [Sylvia Harris'] house where you were born, and you look at where you are now, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but just--what stands out the most to you out of all that when you just take a, you know, a broad stroke of your life?
Speaker 2: I guess I really don't--I don't, I don't revel in where I am; I really don't think about it, I just thank God that it was just so many people who believed in me before I believed in myself, and that I got a opportunity, and then when I got opportunities, people had prepared me to walk through the door.
Story_ID: 105748
Speaker 1: And what advice do you have for people or students who are interested in a career in journalism?
Speaker 2: Be prepared for rejection, be prepared for "No."  I remember readin' about--one kid said somebody wrote him a letter and said, "We don't want your application," then, the kid wrote back sayin', "I reject your rejection note."  That kinda attitude is that you really--particularly a person of color--that you go into these organizations to bring a different perspective, to bring somethin' different.  If you gonna go in there and be homogenized and sanitized, there's no need for you to go 'cause I, I think that they are makin'--I'm gonna--know I'm gon' get in trouble for this, but I don't care.  I think there are some deliberate decisions bein' made to hire a different type of reporter now; I don't think a lotta places would hire me now because I'm very cock-sure of myself and my skills and my perspectives.
Speaker 1: And do you think you're considered too radical?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And, and--hold on--and a lotta the hires they're makin' now are people who have similar backgrounds as whites, grew up in a suburb, don't wanna see a housin' project, and they're really no different; they're Black Anglo-Saxons--it's a book by [HM] Nathan Hare.  And be who you are, but also go in there and give voice to the voiceless.  If you can't go out there and help somebody who don't have access to the media until--then why are you there?  So be very clear on why you're there, make no apologies for it, cover the stories that are important to your community, but cover any other stories available as well.
Speaker 1: But certainly, you don't think that just because you grew up in an integrated society, and that you've never seen a housing project, that you--as an African American, that you don't have a pers--African American perspective.
Speaker 2: What I said, and I'll repeat--what I said was they are hiring homogenized negroes, if you need me really to be explicit, who deny who they are, are not interested, tryin' to neutralize their race as though it is not a factor in America when in fact it is; you're doin' nothin' to add to the contribution even of your viewers or your readers, that's what I'm sayin'.  I don't say because you live in a certain circumstances you can't have a powerful perspective--of course that would be ridiculous; but I'm sayin' I think there is deliberate effort to hire safe negroes who (unclear) nothin', wanna have anything to do with race, and I stand by that.
Speaker 1: And why is it--why is it important to have different perspectives, particularly in the newsroom?
Speaker 2: Newsrooms should look like America.  America's not all-white, in fact, it's changin'.  Shortly after 2053, whites will be the minority in this country for the first time.  It should look like America across the board; then you're servin' community in a fair kinda way and not just one perspective because no race or group has a monopoly on truth or knowledge.
Story_ID: 105749
Speaker 1: And do you ever wish you would have taken a different career path?
Speaker 2: Oh, no; Oh, no, no, no.  I was born to be a journalist; I was born to be a journalist.  There's noth--think about this--here's this kid born in "The Bottom" [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] who moved to the housing project-the height of his career, moved to housing project.  I have traveled 'round the world, I have met five or six presidents, I've covered the White House, I've flown Air Force One, I have met the Pope, I have been to Egypt--countless experiences I would have never had had I been in another profession.  If I had been the greatest accountant in the world, or greatest mathematician in the world, I would not have had those experiences; and more important than that, I've been able to impact some change, and that's what I feel proudest about.
Story_ID: 105750
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You still tryin' to kill me off, aren't you?  (Laughter).  Well, it's very simple, very simple; just goin' right back to my motto that I quoted earlier from Anonymous--Mr. Anonymous sometimes, sometime somebody else, but I had it on my college newspaper and I wanna--'em to put it on my tombstone, he--I want 'em to say, "He comforted the afflicted, and he afflicted the comfortable."  That's all, just that simple.
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I never think about that--probably my bebe kids, my journalism bebe kids--these kids that I met in high school who had dreams like I had, who went through my workshop [St. Louis Minority Journalism Workshop], who completed their training, working for the best institution across this country, started workshops for another generation of black journalist, and never forgot that they have an obligation to pass it on to the next generation.  That's how I wanna be remembered more than anything else; not that I was Journalist of the Year, or that I was on NABJ's [National Association of Black Journalists] list of A Hundred Most Influential Journalist of the Century, or that I was the first African American president of American Society of Magazine Editors--none-a that; I just wanna be remembered as a person who's tried to comfort the afflicted and to afflict the comfortable, and to train another generation to do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much, Mr. Curry.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Scott.
Story_ID: 105751
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we're good to go.  Go ahead with your description.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite childhood photo; I was about two years old, and Momma [Martha Brownlee] had outfitted me with my shorts and stripe tee-shirt, and I had my tricycle.
Speaker 1: About what year was it taken?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Forty-Nine [1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That picture with those big glasses is when I was with the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.  My guess is that picture was probably taken around 1976 or so.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I don't know how old I was, but I know I was frightened there (unclear) Santa Clause; I don't, I don't know, I guess I would have been about 4--3 or 4.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would that be?--about 1940--'bout 1950 maybe?
Speaker 2: Fifty-One [1951] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was 1977; those are some of the kids that were in my journalism workshop program with--we had a scholarship dinner.  Just lookin' at one--the second one from the right is Alvin Reid; he's a managin' editor for--of the St. Louis American Newspaper.  Two persons to his left, a young lady, Ann Scales, works for the Boston Globe, and there's a--one far right used to be editor for St. Louis American; now is in PR, and there're some others on there who are also in journalism.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That says on the back, I think, does it?
Speaker 1: Yeah--yes.
Speaker 2: What it say?
Speaker 1: Sixty-One [1961].
Speaker 2: All right.  That was 1961, I was explorer scout, Troop 249, Tuscaloosa, Alabama.  Before, when I joined the scouts, I used to be in North Port, and used to have to walk about ten miles each way to go to scout meetings.
Speaker 1: And this one doesn't say anything.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Laughter).  Oh, that's a--I guess that's probably my second favorite (laughter) picture.  I'm in my cowboy regalia; my gun, of course, and I have three sisters--Charlotte [Charlotte Ann Purvis] is the oldest one; she calls herself "Sister Number One," so she's there with her white doll that drove my stepfather crazy--he wanted black dolls; we eventually got black dolls, but they weren't makin' black dolls then (laughter).
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: I guess I--3, maybe 4; I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was it l9--early 1950s (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay; yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This one says 1962 on the back.
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Two--that was 1962, I was in high school [Druid High School in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] then with my button-down plaid shirt.  I remember that shirt, too; I liked that shirt.  That was one a-my better pictures.
Speaker 1: Now, this one doesn't have a year on it.
Speaker 2: Look at the other one; does it have one?
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You look about--
Speaker 2: That's one a-my elementary school pictures with my bow-tie, and I was not in the Nation of Islam.  Had to be somewhere between the first and third grade.
Speaker 1: So, late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Early to mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: That be the same period 'cause it's the same bow-tie--early to mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: This one didn't have it on the back.
Speaker 1: I think I was about in tenth grade with that pic--ninth or tenth grade where that picture there was taken.
Speaker 2: So, that would have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Ahh, been roughly 1963 or 1962.
Speaker 2: Okay, early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: That's a prize picture of mine; the house on the right is where my grandmother [Sylvia Harris] lived, 2721 15th Street; we lived two houses to the left.  I was born in my grandmother's house, and that was The Bottom I was talkin' about--a very, very poor neighborhood right by the train tracks.
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: That was probably taken--it was before they were torn down 'cause I had my scout master go over to pick--to take a picture of it.  Probably around 1980 or so. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a close-up of my Big Momma's house, 2721 15th Street in the Bottom.  If you look real close, you can see similar houses in the back; they were basically shotgun houses.
Speaker 1: There's no date on this one either.
Speaker 2: That picture--probably 1959 or so.  My sister Chris [Sylvia Christine Polk] on the right, who's  a--middle girl, and the one left is Sue [Susan Carol Gandy], the baby girl.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Now, that is criminal; you're not supposed to show that picture.  I--I mean that's my gangster picture (laughter).  I look like I'm seein' Santa Clause again.  I don't know how old I was then--two?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two--maybe 1949.
Speaker 2: Nineteen Forty-Nine [1949].
Speaker 1: Now, this one says 1968 on it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was 1968; you can hardly see it, that--old pictures weren't that good, but you can see I had the turtle-neck on and the matchin' pocket.  That was in front of McKenzie Court; the housin' project I grew up in is front of 52-B, McKenzie Court in Tuscaloosa.  If you follow that road in the back, you go straight to the basketball court.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, that's me in probably '64 [1964] or 1965 with a friend who lived in the, the project; his name is Bill Bishop.
Speaker 1: The other picture should be 'round at the same time, '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  And standin' next to me is one of my best friends--high school, Danny Richards, and next to him Hazel and Bobby Carter, who were friends, and went to the same church I went to.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Did I say Hazel?  Actually Betty--Betty Carter.  Let me give you a correction on that picture you have now; that's Betty and Bobby Carter to the right; I'm on the far left, and next to me is Danny Richards, my best friend, and we played football together.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right, and--
Speaker 1: And that's one we did while-ago; that's Bill Bishop on the left and me on the right, around 1965 in front of 52-B McKenzie Courts.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right, okay?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my stepfather [William Polk]; I think that's Sue, my younger sister, in the chair.  That's in front of 52-B McKenzie Court, which is the last place we lived in the housing project.  And that's the man who had the influence on me, intellectually, more than anybody else.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?  Go ahead, we've seen that one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my baby sister, Sue, with her doll; all my sisters had dolls, plenty of dolls, and that's Sue on the left and Chris on the right; again, at 52-B McKenzie Court, the last place we lived.  Look how they dressed to be poor people (laughter).
Speaker 1: About what year do you think this is?
Speaker 2: Lemme see; Sue was born in '58 [1958] not '61 [1961]; probably about 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a picture of me when I appear to be about 12 or 13 years old in McKenzie Court, and that's also, I think, 52-B.
Speaker 1: That's me standin' with my sisters, probably 1964, '65 [1965]; left is, is Sue, and on the right is Chris.
Speaker 2: I don't know who that is; my--they probably claim that--I don't know who that is, I'm not takin' credit for that one (laughter); I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: That's me and my momma [Martha Brownlee].  That's me and my mother in the first place we lived in the housing project; it was 5-D.  We lived right there on the end; Miss Dot [Dorothy Corder Smith] lived next door, she was the first person had a TV in the whole neighborhood.  I guess I was about--I guess I--what, five years old or so; maybe 'bout 1952 or so.
Speaker 2: That's 1964, 1965 when I was in high school, and the last place we lived in the housing project.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's the youngest girl, Sue Baby--Susan--Susan Carol.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my momma.  I know exactly where that picture was taken; it was taken at our old church--our first church, Weeping Mary Baptist Church, in Tuscaloosa, and Momma's standin' on the steps of the church.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think it was taken?
Speaker 1: Aw, man--'55 [1955]; I probably say around 1955, 1956.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's Chris, the middle girl; probably the third or fourth grade.  Chris was born in '56 [1956], so she may have been 'bout ten years old or so.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And both of 'em were taken about the same time (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's it.
