Story_ID: 192074
Speaker 1: Fortified with a cup of coffee in preparation for teaching at Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was probably about 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Energy session with members of the Black Theology Project in London, England where were engaged in dialogue, ecumenical dialogue, around issues of Africa.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: About 1986.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 2: As educational director of the solo circumnavigation of [HistoryMaker Capt. William] Bill Pinkney, making plans with Captain Pinkney for his solo sail around the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that. (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you remember the year?
Speaker 2: I'm makin' up stuff now.  Nineteen Eighty-Nine [1989]; I'll have to look this stuff up.  I'll give you the year--
Speaker 1: New York City [New York] declared a day honoring the life and legacy of Dr. John Henrik Clarke, and I am there with his wife Sybil Clarke, his sister, and his niece, and myself at the New York City Library [New York Public Library, New York, New York] where this event was held.
Speaker 2: Can we go from left to right and identify everybody?
Speaker 1: Sure, okay.  At the New York City Library on a special day in which the city actually honored the legacy and life's work of John Henrik Clarke, and we are at the library there with his sister, [Eddie] Mary Hobbs, Dr. Clarke, then on the left is myself and his niece Lilly Hobbs, and Dr. Clarke's wife Sybil Williams Clarke.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  Is it the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, ready.
Speaker 2: Being selected as the faculty member at Northeastern Illinois University honored to present the award to the most beloved Rosa Parks, Mother of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: And that's about when?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Nine [1979] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 1: Attending to administrative tasks as chairperson of the Department of Sociology at Northeastern Illinois University.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: About 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The next--y'all got time?  I got time, okay (laughter).   Demonstrating the--a software that I had developed, TK's Quest [ph.], which was an African/ African American history software for which I was awarded the ComputerWorld Smithsonian Award.  Nine (laughter)--something like that, I don't know.  I--these dates--I'll have to give you the right dates, okay?
Speaker 2: On the television set with LeVar Burton as co-producer of the 'Know Your Heritage Television Show,' an academic quiz show on African-African American History--1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready?
Speaker 1: Taking the Pride of Baltimore out of the harbor in Chicago [Illinois] where I had been selected to sail with the actual crew, along with the captain standing there, Jan [Miles], taking the Pride of Baltimore out of the harbor.
Speaker 2: What's the significance of the Pride of Baltimore?
Speaker 1: The Pride of Baltimore is the diplomatic boat that goes around the world in the--in--to, to build bridges of diversity--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --from the Baltimore City [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Sailing the Nile in 1972, looking at the awesome legacy of African people in North Africa.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: On a dare, daring to be a balloonist at the International Balloonist Show; was invited to join someone who was expert (laughter)--first and last time (laughter).
Speaker 2: We used to bring John Clarke and Dr. Ben to Dayton [Ohio] every year--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --about--we did it about three years.  We had 'em in Dayton one year, Cincinnati [Ohio] a year, and Columbus [Ohio] another year--from Chicago.  We would like--and I'd--I'd always be the one to go get 'em (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Go get 'em, yeah.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--bring 'em down and talk to 'em (laughter).  When you come to another city, you feel like a step-person; you can't, you know, you can't have access.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Around 1977, privileged to have been the photographer and the host of the foremost esteemed historians of African-African American ancestry.  Dr. John Henrik Clarke, Dr. Chancellor Williams, Dr. Ben Yosef Jochannan [sic, HM Dr. Yosef Ben-Jochannan], and Dr. John Jackson; and at that time, Dr. Jackson was living in my home, and so this was a picture in the living room.
Speaker 2: This was about 1977, is that right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Carrying forth with an oral history project interviewing Brother [Charles E.] Fraser, who was the person most responsible for building a bridge from Hilton Head [South Carolina] to the Main Land--one of the oldest living persons who was born on the Island of Hilton Head, which is where the first so-called freed slaves were brought--in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: You know what?  I've driven across that causeway.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 2: In one of my moments of being a grandmother, in delight, with my granddaughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what's her name?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Nineteen--19--this must be--what is this?  This is 2003?
Speaker 1: You got it.
Speaker 2: Ooh, gosh--1999.
Speaker 1: Now, whose daughter is that?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's Darnell [Carruther]'s.
Speaker 1: Darnell's?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I saw in a--
Speaker 2: Oh!  You ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, can you tell us about the photo, please?
Speaker 1: This is a photo of, of me with my classmates in nursery school, and I'm pleased to say the three of us are still friends that talk on a regular basis.  And underneath--you can go the one underneath.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 1: This is a family photo with my mother [Lois Johnson] and father [William H. Johnson] and brother [William Johnson]; I think it was a card that my father sent out for holiday greeting--the Johnson's.  You can go to the next one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: This is one of the few pictures of my father that I have, in which he served as a Tuskegee Airman; he was one of the first Tuskegee Airmen.  They called him Candy; his name is William Johnson.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I've interviewed a few of 'em--about three, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can go underneath that--with me and my brother. (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right?
Speaker 1: That's a loving, protective picture of my brother and me although I was always the one more mature than he (laughter).
Speaker 2: He was bigger (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: You get back-up.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my first husband, Ralph Wells, who is deceased, who died in a boating accident at the age of twenty-seven, and I was a widow with an eleven month-old son.  He was a all-star player, and played for the Chicago Zephyrs [later, Washington Wizards, Washington, D.C.] for a short period before they became the Chicago Bulls [basketball team].
Speaker 1: He play with Guy Rodgers and them, and Elmo Batey [ph.] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my son Chris [Wells] with his father Ralph, one of those few moments that they were able to share together before he died.
Speaker 2: I am making a presentation to the Vice President of Development for Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] for a scholarship in Ralph's name.  It has been the first, and I think only, endowed scholarship of an African American, and some thirty students have now been able to go through Northwestern University because of that scholarship.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful but, but to think it's the only one.
Speaker 2: That last time I checked it was; it may be some since then.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that was '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Chris having graduated from Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia]--it was on his graduation day.  And then go to the next one; it's a picture of Chris and I at his graduation from Northwestern University as a legacy student when he got his master's Degree in integrated marketing.  And you can go to this one right here.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, to the left of that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah--sharing a moment of relaxation just before we go to the Gullah Festival in the Sea Islands in South Carolina with Dr. Clarke and my mother.
Speaker 1: Where was the festival held at?
Speaker 2: It's held in Beaufort County [South Carolina] in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Do they call that Beaufort [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Sharing a moment, gratefully so, with my mother in the backyard in Hilton Head.
Speaker 1: This is about what year?
Speaker 2: This is about 19--this is about 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He has a sister that makes dolls.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready?
Speaker 1: This is a moment of survival as a single parent, raising two teenage boys (laughter).  And then you can do the other one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: My two sons, Chris and Darnell.  We were as a family in Kenya, and at that point, they both appear to be twins, both in size and looks.  This was 1970.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 1: Like a mother on her perch, over-looking my students, my undergraduate students, who I had taken to Senegal to study with Cheikh Anta Diop, and we are in Cheikh Anta Diop's office at this time, listening to his profound wisdom and articulation of history.
Speaker 2: This is at the University of Dakar [Dakar, Senegal]?
Speaker 1: At the University of Dakar which is now called the University of Cheikh Anta Diop.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: That's in 1975.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: After having coordinated the implementation of a computer center in a regional area of Ghana, Saltpond, we--I was then showing staff and students, for the first time, the computer.  And I think, at that very moment, I was showing them encruma (ph.) on an encyclopedia, an electronic encyclopedia.  And you can go down to the top quadrant, at the top there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 1: As a part of my ministry at Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois], I'm blessed to be planting a tree of life in front of the Saltpond Redevelopment Institute where our church had sponsored, in collaboration, a development of an educational center, and so I was planting a tree as a part of the computer center that we had dedicated.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Fulfilling one of my life's dreams, standing at the Zimbabwe--what is called the Zimbabwe Ruins, which is great evidence of the wealth and capacity of civilization of African people in Southern Africa.
Speaker 2: --Sharing a sacred moment with Mommas in South Africa at the home church of Albert Lutuli, who was the first African person to get the Nobel Peace Prize, and who was one of the initiators of the African National Congress.
Speaker 1: Did the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--L-U-T-H-I-L-I [sic, L-U-T-U-L-I] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Celebrating a moment at the W.E.B. Du Bois Pan-African Center in Accra, Ghana with Pastor [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A.] Wright [Jr.], Deacon Preister [ph.], and the president and executive director of the Du Bois Center; actually celebrating and sharing the placing of Dr. John Henrik Clarke's picture upon their wall, their legacy wall of Pan-Africanism.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: On the camp grounds of Gianda [ph.], which was a camp that I started, and this is the area that was dedicated to Kikuyu land, and here you have several of the parents who are counselors working with the children.  This was a survival cultural educational camp that was started as a cooperative--in 1974.
Story_ID: 192075
Speaker 1: Participating in a reunion of some of Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke's students on the occasion of the dedication of the street named after Dr. Clarke, where his brownstone is, and where he spent most of his life--his adult life--as a scholar and a activist in the Harlem [New York, New York] community.  Many of the scholars that he had impacted returned on that day of dedication, and Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan], his life-long friend, is also encircled by that love.
Speaker 2: There you are (pointing).
Speaker 1: And there I am (laughter).  Okay, can we move that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Accepting my award as the--one of the ten 2000 Entrepreneurs of the Year, bestowed upon us by Small Business Administration and the National Foundation of Elected Women Officials, at the Washington, D.C. Press Club, year 2000.
Speaker 2: Being able to help Dr. Clarke fulfill a wish to be able to walk in the new erected Camille Cosby Library on Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] Campus.  I am with Sybil Williams Clarke, and myself, with Dr. Clarke in-between.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next?
Speaker 2: Breaking through barriers of understanding as executive eirector of the Black Theology Project, a delegation sharing the common issues that we have in Brazil.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I was able to take two of my students with me to Ghana, their first trip to Africa, in order to help me install the computer center, and they said they had never worked so hard, but also they've never had such a profound educational experience, and behind my back they had held up this note, "Master Iva, We's Done!"  And so then we took a picture of that when we were able to celebrate having installed the Computer Satellite Center.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?  All ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was in recognition of an award that Ebony bestowed upon a few of us.  My award was for mentoring in celebration of Mothers and Daughters' Day Empowerments Seminar in 2001.  Okay?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sharing a, a wonderful moment at my goddaughter's christening ceremony, and that's my mother [Lois Johnson] and I at a party of celebration of that ceremony in 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, Lois Johnson, and myself, and my cousin, who is my mother's generation, Kathleen Lopez [ph.], in Brazil.  It was her father who ex-patriated to Brazil in 1919 and our families have reunited, and there are five generations of Brazilians in our family.  And we were in Brazil at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother when she was five years old; they had just migrated to the Chicago [Illinois] area from Little Rock, Arkansas, and she is now eighty-four.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: One of those unforgettable moments, having had an audience with Archbishop [Desmond] Tutu in South Africa in year 2001, along with other members of the Board of Trustees of Shared Interest, which is an organization that provides the underwriting of loans for black South Africans for the reconstruction of South Africa.
Speaker 1: Bishop Tutu (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Bishop Tutu and myself, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 2: Yes; exiting from Lois House [Chicago, Illinois] in the process of the construction.
Speaker 1: With a smile in the midst of anxiety over having become construction manager of a total rehab project for Lois House.  That's it.
Speaker 2: Looking beyond what is to the vision of what can be--this was the way Lois House looked when I decided to undertake the task of rehabbing it and turning it into a house for ministry, retreat, reflection and renaissance.
Speaker 1: About what year is it?
Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, can we get the other person--on the right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yes, there.  Okay.  A moment of celebration at the dedication of Lois House; from left to right, myself, Sybil Clarke, Professor Clarke's widow; there was a room dedicated to Dr. Clarke; [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr.] Jeremiah A. Wright and his wife, Reverend Ramah Wright, and Mary Hobbs, the sister of Dr. Clarke.  We are now standing in the room dedicated to Reverend Jeremiah A. Wright, Sr. and Jr.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--This must have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--2000 and--two--was that 2002?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: A special moment of dedication--a shot of my mother standing in her room holding the license plate souvenir from Brazil that identifies Lois House's ties that bind--again, 2002 at the dedication of the House in her honor.  That's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: The spirit of Lois House is represented in the symbols that embellish the Clarke-Wright Library, and has as its meaning that We shall never forget.  In the left-hand upper corner, you see the sign of the ankh--of the Egypto-Sudanic civilization.  Next to it, you see the sign of the cross, representing the salvation to Christian faith, the faith that brought Africans of the Diaspora so far through the Maafa.  On the right corner, you see the sign gye nyame, which is the sign of only God in the Akan Adinkra symbol.  Underneath that, you see the symbol representing the first successful military liberation struggle, the people of Haiti.  And underneath that, you see a sign and symbol represented by the Olmec Heads, which are the evidence of African presence in the Americas 2000 years before the sailing of Columbus.  Underneath that, you see the sign of the Sankofa Bird, which represents the mandate that you must go back to know who you are in order to move forward; you must go back and recover your past in order to declare your future.  Next to that, you see one of the icons of a slave ship, many of the slave ships named in the spirit of Christian faith, such as Jesus, and this particular icon was on the ship showing the absolute crime against humanity perpetrated among African people.  The next symbol [Akoben] is another symbol from the Akan people, and it represents the warrior and the war cry that we shall never forget, Aya-Alsanta-Wa [ph.].  The symbol above that is the symbol of liberation and power and conscientiousness that grows out of the struggle of the Brazilian South American Africans represented by Quilombo.  And above that is the symbol of the birds that come from the great Zimbabwe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --faith as we move from a period of deconstruction and rehabilitation at Lois House.  Okay; that's it for those two (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --placed by IBM, celebrating women in business.  The firm that I founded, Nexus Unlimited, was the first African American-owned IBM dealership in the country, and this was an ad; in the background, you will see my son Christopher who, at the time, was supporting me as marketing manager.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --of teaching and ministry in South Africa at the International Women's Convocation convened in January, 2003, by Reverend Dr. Jessica Ingram.  There were some 900 women from the United States who joined 400 women in Africa to claim ourselves as the Balm in Gilead.
Speaker 1: Interesting, I have on the same outfit.  This is a moment in Brazil with members of my Brazilian family having had lunch at a, a restaurant--several members of my Brazilian family.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: A delegate to the 2001 United Nations Conference--wait, while I tax my brain; a delegate to the 2001 United Nations World Conference against Racism and Racial Discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.  That's a picture of myself with Dr. [HistoryMaker] Conrad [Walter] Worrill, from the [National] Black United Front [NBUF], who was also a delegate, and we have been colleagues at the university [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover and I actually on the floor, where only delegates could participate, at the United Nations meeting.  Danny Glover--I represented shared interest and Danny Glover was an advisor not only to shared interest, but actually was the United Nations ambassador for that conference.
Speaker 1: What is this, 2003?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yes, this was on occasion of my retirement from Northeastern University--Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois], where I was bestowed the, the status of Professor Emeritus; this was in 2002.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This picture reflects the moment of celebration of my graduation from Garrett [Evangelical] Theological Seminary [Evanston, Illinois] in year 2001, and in this picture, I am being celebrated and anointed and dedicated.  I'm on the far left by Mrs. Sybil Williams Clarke; next to her, Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, my brother [William] Skip Johnson, and my mother Lois Johnson.  It was held at Akainyah [Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] art gallery.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 1: Serving as a pastoral liaison to a group of sojourners to Belize from our church, Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] representing my pastor.  I was in a pastoral role of presenting our thanksgiving to one of the pastors, lay pastors, who was a part, and is a part, of the movement of reconstruction, representing the Mayan people.
Story_ID: 192076
Speaker 1: In Belize, in a moment of instruction, celebration and thanksgiving, making a presentation before children and teachers of a Garifuna school--a Garifuna school in Belize, and that you see is the, the flag of the Garifuna people.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: In Belize, introducing our church delegation, and witnessing for our commitment to the reconstruction and the salvation of African people connecting the dots between people of the Diaspora--again, in Belize, speaking to, largely, a group of children.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: Most grateful to be able to take this picture of my eighty-four year-old mother [Lois Banks Johnson] at the Cape of Good Hope, which fulfills her dream to havin' been on all four points of the African continent.  This was in year 2003 as a part of the International Women's Convocation.  We're at the Cape of Good Hope, South Africa.
Speaker 2: Celebrating the moment at the Cape of Good Hope with my dear friend [HistoryMaker] Dr. Ann Smith, myself and my mother--having a wonderful time.  Okeydokey.
Speaker 1: Can you come out--zoom out so we can get some of the shovel?  Yeah.  Breaking ground for a new health and educational women's center in South Africa in one of the townships, along with the prelate--presiding prelate of the African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] church, Bishop Gregory Ingram.
Speaker 2: Sharing that same moment with my mother, who was a part of our delegation.  Okeydokey.  That's it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready.
Speaker 2: Again, in Brazil with Reverend Santana, who is the Executive Director of the Ecumenical Council of Churches for Brazil, who also led the delegation from Brazil to the UN [United Nations] 2001 meeting on racism [World Conference Against Racism 2001]; he was successful in being able to bring forth the issue of reparations back to his country, and we had been friends many years before, when I worked with the Black Theology Project as executive director, and we bumped into each other in South Africa and we reunited, and so I was there in Brazil with him.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Also, in Brazil, finding--again, the providential moment to bump into a life-long friend in the center, Dr. Carlos Moore, who had been exiled from Cuba for over 30 years, who has now settled in Brazil.  And we had occasion to meet with Mamma Diop [ph.], who is the widow of Alioune Diop, who was the editor and founder of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Presence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Presence Africaine, yes.
Speaker 1: So that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--another HistoryMaker, huh? Yeah, okay, I guess I'm bring us another history there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A special, special reunion with my dear beloved friend, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Samuel] Billy Kyles, in which he was accepting the invitation to preach for me as president of Urban Outreach Foundation at our conference.  Reverend Billy Kyles is the last living person to have been with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] on the day of his assassination.
Speaker 1: At the moment of it actually, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. King was actually going to his house for dinner at the time he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: A high moment of ministry and sisterhood with the Reverend Dr. Jessica Ingram in South Africa at the International Women's Convocation--year 2003.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A moment of instruction and ministry, along with the members of my church, Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois], as we sojourned throughout Belize.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: A moment of instruction and introduction--me in a teaching moment.  That's fine.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ma'am.
Speaker 2: This is a picture in front of the Du Bois Center of Pan-Africanism in Accra, Ghana, and here I was verifying that they had received the picture of John Henrik Clarke.  I'm standing there with the board members and director.
Speaker 1: Now, Sybil's got a print of that too, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That's the actual print that has--hangs in Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]; it's life-size.  I never seen it, but Cornell has a library named after Dr. Clarke.
Speaker 1: The butterfly is a, a symbol of my ministry, and has been a symbol of something I've collected for many years, and I was in Aruba at a butterfly farm, and one came and lit on my foot and went up my dress, and that's supposed to be a divine message from God, so it was very special to capture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Again, being blessed to share a wonderful moment with my mother; we are at the top of a mountain in Brazil, and again reconnecting with a part of our family of the diaspora in year 2001.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the butterfly?
Speaker 1: That's the butterfly.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Evidence of the butterfly, the divine sign of God leaving my foot and moving up my leg (laughter).  It was such a profound moment that the woman came out and actually took my camera and took a picture of the butterfly--who owned the place.
Speaker 2: This is the last one, I guess.  This is one of me and [HistoryMaker] Bishop Vashti McKenzie here at Lois House [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, she's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, first woman bishop of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The word--the word of God stands forever.  This is an occasion of the visit of Bishop Vashti McKenzie, first elected female bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal church visiting Lois House, at which time she autographed many of her books for an upcoming book party and reception that we were hosting in her honor, 2002.
Story_ID: 192077
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey; observing is Lois Johnson.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My name is Iva Elaine Carruthers, I-V-A, E. Carruthers, C-A-R-R-U-T-H-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: All right, and when were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois at Provident Hospital April 5th, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am, by profession, now a minister, and I am a professor emeritus of sociology from Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 11th, 2003?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, and where are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous)--Ahh, today's the 12th, actually.
Speaker 1: Oops, 'scuse me.
Speaker 2: This is the 12th.  All right, I'm sorry; my fault.
Speaker 1: Okay, you want me to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just say it again.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is March 12th, 2003.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're presently at 4533 South Lake Park [Avenue] at Lois House, which is a house that is dedicated in honor of my mother Lois Johnson, in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 192078
Speaker 1: All right.  Before we get into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  They just require a short answer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food.  Well, I don't have a food obsession as such, but I do enjoy macaroni and cheese (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color is blue and/or purple.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring time and summer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wherever it is warm, and somewhere between Africa and the Caribbean and in the United States--the Sea Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying; in any context?  (Laughter).  Nothin' but a God.
Story_ID: 192079
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history, I mean in terms of its origin.  Have you been able to--how far back can you trace your family?  Do you have any stories from, you know, way back?
Speaker 2: I can certainly trace my family four generations back, particularly on the maternal side of my family.  My family on the maternal side came out of the Arkansas-Mississippi area; my great-grandfather migrated north as a part of the, the promise of better times and, and places up north, and my grandparents followed him, and as a result of that, we have been a part of the community, primarily of Evanston, Illinois, for five generations now.  Some of the stories have to do with reactions to the racism and white supremacy of the early 1900s.  One family story in particular that has had significant historical consequences was one in which my great-uncle had been involved in an incident where it was demanded of him as--by a white woman, that he sell a postage stamp to her and it was against the law and he refused, and my grandmother tells the story that she remembers him coming home completely frustrated, and said that he was tired of the racism and that he was leaving, and he literally packed up his young family, and some years later, about 1923, we received the first letter that got to my grandmother in which he had indicated he had settled in Brazil and he had bought some land; he now had a successful fruit farm and a language institute, and so we have five generations of our family in Brazil who are part of the [African] diaspora, and one member of that family married a Nigerian--my generation--I call her my sister Suelie [ph.], and her children who are my children's generation, their daughter--because they were born in the United States, now holds three citizenships, so it's like a full cycle of our connecting in terms of Nigeria, and the continent, and Brazil, and the United States.
Speaker 1: Now this is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: This was my great-uncle; it was my grandmother's brother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --oldest brother, who was an expatriate from the United States.  His story has been written up in the Little Rock Times [Little Rock, Arkansas] in 1919; it was also written up in Ebony many years later when Ebony did a story on blacks who had settled in Brazil.
Speaker 1: Now, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Frank McMurray.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you spell McMurray for us?
Speaker 2: M-C-M-U-R-R-A-Y.
Speaker 1: We ask people to spell these things 'cause of the historical record.
Speaker 2: Sure, I understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, any other--what about your father's [William H. Johnson] side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father's side is a little more elusive for me; my maiden name is Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, and as you might imagine, that's not as easy a name to track back.  My parents [sic, grandparents] on my father's side came from the East Coast, somewhere between Virginia and Pennsylvania; my father grew up in the Pennsylvania area.  I never knew my paternal grandparents; they died at an early age, and in fact, my father's youngest brother was actually raised by my mother and my father.  He came to live with them when he was a, a young teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did they pass along any stories about--on either side, about life in the 19th century, or life during Reconstruction, or any of those kinda stories?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a cousin who has done some family history on the McMurray side, and we know that there were--there were just a lotta hardship; hardship in terms of the ability to sustain family.  One of my, my maternal--let's see, she was the maternal grandmother of my mother, actually died at an early age and, and her father re-married and so there were what they call step-children, but of course the children of the families blended and bonded, and so there was never that kind of distinction.  There was always the issue of whether you would invest in girls to go to college versus the boys, and the advantage of investing in girls to preclude them from having to work as a domestic, and so forth; and also who would help to support that, and so we, like many African American families, have histories where the younger siblings lived with the older siblings, and those older siblings helped them to go to college and they gave back and created this cycle of, of giving and attempting to sustain the family, and that was always the case.  And that, that was the case on both sides of my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--but nothin' from way back; no stories from way back.
Speaker 2: No.  If you're talking--I guess there is one--one, one piece that I can put together is that we do have family property on my grandfather's side, my maternal grandfather's side, in Gessamain [ph.], Arkansas and--to the extent that that family had property in a community and there was a family church--there is a family cemetery, so to speak, where people are buried on the church grounds, but beyond that, it is, it is pretty elusive in terms of, of my family history.  I'm not able and, and have not been able to do what Alex Haley did for example.
Story_ID: 192080
Speaker 1: Well, could you tell us something about your father [William H. Johnson]?  What was his name and when was he born?  And can you spell his name, please?
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  His name is William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D Johnson.  He was born August 25th, 1915, and he was raised, as I said, in Pennsylvania, outside of Philadelphia, came to the Midwest as a military person, stationed at Chanute Air Force Base [Champaign County, Illinois], and actually met my mother [Lois Banks Johnson] while he was there, and was assigned as one of the early Tuskegee Airmen.  And so my mother and he married in Tuskegee [Alabama], and my brother [William Johnson] was actually conceived in Tuskegee and born in Chicago [Illinois].  I was born in Chicago, and at the time I was born, my father was already in Europe during World War II [WWII], and so he did not see me at birth, he saw me after he came home.  One of my earliest reflections about my father is the special bond that we had--ooh, goodness!  When I was born, and he wasn't in the country, he sang me a song, and I used to tease my family and tell them he was like Nat King Cole and they would tell me I had an exaggerated love for him.  But he sang a song for me and sent it to my mother, and it was a little record that we had, but it got burned up in a fire.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a nice memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  I don't know why I'm cryin'.  Beyond that, indeed, my father was the most important person in my life in terms of representing the love of a black male who had struggled and survived and evidenced giving his best to make me feel whole and, and affirmed.  I am one of the few people--as I get older, I find, who can honestly say that they grew up in a very happy home; I absolutely grew up in a home of love and affirmation.  What I usually characterize this family situation as one in which my father led me to believe that the world was my stage, and my mother had me to believe that she would defend anyone getting in the way of giving me that world, and so, as a result of that, and in addition to which I grew up in an extended family, it was a house that was a bi--two-level house; my grandparents were upstairs, and again, in response to the necessity to make ends meet, we always had roomers, and so I grew up in a house with aunts, uncles, grandparents, my mother, father, and brother, and several roomers, and those roomers became extended family members.  And for those of the younger generation who don't know what a roomer is, a roomer is someone who's not biologically related to you, but who may live in your space and pay a little rent to do so.
Story_ID: 192081
Speaker 1: That, that [having roomers] was a prevalent situation back in the--
Speaker 2: In the '40s [1940s], and the '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s], absolutely.
Speaker 1: Until people started like moving out to, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--became more available for black people.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And I grew up in a community that many associate now as a middle-class community, Evanston, Illinois; it's a part of the North Shore, but in reality, Evanston in terms of the black community, was no more than a community that emerged out of the domestics who moved with the higher-income whites as they left the central city, moving further north in the suburbs, and the domestic class that moved with them became the first quote Negro Community of the North Shore.  And, as a result of that, you had a very distinct separate but equal environment, as you did in the south.  I grew up at a time in which there was one hospital where blacks could go; the reason I was born in Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] was that the Evanston Community Hospital [Evanston, Illinois] was not a hospital that could accommodate any special needs.  My mother [Lois Banks Johnson] actually was not supposed to have any children and I was her second child, and so she had special attention and her doctor was at Provident Hospital which is why I was born in Chicago; but she could not have had children in the white hospital in Evanston, so during this period of separate but equal, you had distinct school systems for the black children.  My mother went to the same schools that I went to, my grandparents, like my parents, were very active in the community civically, and as a result of that, I've heard stories.  For example, in my mother's generation, when the white principal and teachers wanted to take her class and force them to clean and wash the clothes of the teachers because they were preparing them to be domestics, my grandmother's generation protested and prevented that from happening.  Very similarly, when I was in six, seventh, and eighth grade, there were issues that became budding issues to the Civil Rights Movement around separate but equal, and my parents were very active in destroying that whole system of segregation.
Story_ID: 192082
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back and ask you about your, your mother.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you give us her name, and spell it for us, and her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name is Lois, L-O-I-S, C., Banks, B-A-N-K-S, which is her maiden name, Johnson.  And she was born in, in Little Rock [Arkansas] on August seven--I'm sorry, August 17th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your mother like moved to Chicago [Illinois] with her--
Speaker 2: She moved to Chicago when she was five years of age, right, right, and she lived in Evanston [Illinois] because that's where my great-grandparents had settled, and they all lived in a house together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother like?  And forget that she's here lookin' at you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  What was she like growing--when I was growing up?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah--we, we, we ask everybody.  What were your parents like?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very loving, however, very instructive and firm and, and fairly clear; I mean she set out her expectations--you either did it or you didn't.  You didn't have much of a problem with her as long as you did what you--what she told you to do; her expectations were clear.  She was a marvelous role model for a woman who defied all the odds and who also managed to juggle multiple responsibilities, and to make good on the promise of nothing but a God.  When my mother was in high school, shortly thereafter, she contracted tuberculosis, which was very common at that time, stayed in a sanitarium for a year, defied medical science, and literally had three-quarters of a lung removed and seven ribs, was never supposed to have children, ended up marrying my father [William H. Johnson] and had my brother [William Johnson], and she had no problem with that birth whatsoever.  And then when she tried to give birth to me, I was breach (laughter), and so they actually pronounced her dead on the operating table.  But given that history, it is, it is remarkable that she has been able to maintain absolute marvelous health, and I'm blessed that, you know, she's about to celebrate her eighty-fifth birthday.
Speaker 1: That is remarkable.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 192083
Speaker 1: Now, I want you to reflect on your childhood and give a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growin' up in the neighborhood you did in Evanston [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think that central to that experience, which is unfortunately not the case very often today, is that I grew up in a community where the biology of your parents was not the only thing that mattered in terms of who you were as a child relative to your accountability to adults, and as a result of that, I had many, many parents, and so from Mrs. Avery [ph.], who sat across on her porch of the street, I was as accountable to her as I was to my mother [Lois Banks Johnson], who was at work.  My grandmother's peers were also considered to be grandmothers of, of mine, and so I had many mothers in that sense; I had many eyes watching me.  Part of the advantage of that segregated system as well was that we had role models that reflected the cross-section of our community, and I was not considered in--from a family of the lowest-income families in the sense that two streets--two blocks down the street there was public housing; we did not live in public housing, but on the other hand, my teachers lived around the corner--many of my teachers lived around the corner and so there was always a doctor, a lawyer, a teacher as a role model that was very connected to you in terms of your church, in terms of your civic activities.  And so the issue of whether you were from a, a lower-income family or a higher-income family really didn't have the same meaning that it often had in the white community.
Speaker 1: Or, or that it does now, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or that it even does now in the black community, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--everybody's poor or--
Speaker 2: Right.  And so in that sense, it was a very wholesome environment.  The other piece of that was that the community was very church-centered, and the church became the nucleus of not just a Sunday experience but a nucleus for community and social experiences as well.  And so out of the church, out of a sense of civic responsibility, out of a sense of struggle so that the next generation will always do better than the prior generation, I was always engaged in experiences that affirmed who I was as a African American person, and that I should have a vision to, to do well.
Story_ID: 192084
Speaker 1: You were talking about the significance of the church (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your church?
Speaker 2: The church is, is Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] Church [Evanston, Illinois].  As you may know, that was the first major black denomination that started by Richard Allen out of a situation in which blacks were removed from a Methodist church at the altar, and told they had to go to the balcony, and out of that grew a African American denomination, which is now the oldest black denomination really in the, in the nation.  I am blessed to--again--to talk about in terms of my family havin' that building which was built in the 1800s--stain glass windows that have been dedicated to the work of my, my great-grandparents and so, again, that represents five generations related to that church.  A couple of things that I remember about that church in terms of spiritual development growing up was a, a sign that hung over the pulpit which said, "Prayer Changes Things," and so I grew up with a affirmation that somehow one's spiritual connection, one's relationship to prayer, could always make a difference--whether one was in a storm or whether one was standing basking in the sun.  The other thing that was very important, that I remember, has to do with the development of a pageant around Easter in which for us, particularly as young children, we were able to see the presence of Christ mirroring who we were racially, and so that pageant had a black Jesus who was my father's [William H. Johnson]--my friend's father, it had black disciples, and so there was never this dissonance or, or discontinuity between who I was in terms of my black identity and the notion of, of who God's people were.  And that became very important when I think about it retrospectively, in terms of my own sense of identity as both a Christian and an African.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unusual and it's--in the black church, you know.  Those of us have--most of us have grown up in the black church and don't necessarily get the image of a black Jesus, but a A.M.E. church has a particular--I know one of your heroes in the A.M.E. church is Bishop [Henry McNeal] Turner.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--talk about that; I mean do you think that's part of the influence that this--
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure of that; I think that more it was not so intentional to deal with the issue of being black as it was intentional to create a dramata--the dramatization of a biblical story using who we were as a people.  And so there were probably far more churches who historically used dramatization, use oratorical contests, et cetera, to prepare the next generation for being on the world stage, and I think we've probably moved away from that to a large extent, but in the olden days, so to speak, churches were centers where you prepared the next generation for the future, and so the use of drama, the use of communication skills was always a part of that.  And so every child had to memorize their verse, every child had to do their Easter pageant, et cetera, et cetera and, and in our church, and in many churches across this country, blacks did a dramatization of the Easter Story.  And I think what I'm saying is that the impact of that, maybe it was unintended, was one in which I never felt anything other than my people looked like God's people and were God's people, and I would not be denied that.  And so later on, as an academician, as a historian, when I came upon the life, the history, the legacy of Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, it was a very natural way for me to relate to the role and the history of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in founding many principles of Pan-Africanism in helping to foster the reconnection that had been so much a part of the dismembering of our people as a result of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--so, the church is very important in your early development, as you alluded to; it's a place where young people could get that kind of encouragement in preparation for the world.  What kind of activities did you specifically get involved in as a youth in the church?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, if we wanted to do anything socially, we had to go to church, so it was not even debated as to whether my brother [William Johnson] and I (laughter) got up and went to church; if we wanted to go to the movies, we had to go to church.  So, that was a given in our household; my, my grandparents and my parents [William H. Johnson and Lois Banks Johnson] were active in the church, so that was a given.  But the church became the center again because of this period of separate but equal; I mean the Girl Scouts met in the church.  The drill team that I was a part of might have met in the church for certain kinds of meetings.  There was also a recreational center that was a part of the separate but equal structure of the community, but all of that was centered around what church did you belong to and, and how did those who were members of the church take on the responsibility of the collective we--we-ness, and the well-being of the community.
Story_ID: 192085
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school.  I mean where did you go to school, and how did you like school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was always an avid reader and I liked school, particularly those teachers who I knew loved me and affirmed me and encouraged me.  I was a stutterer, believe it or not, and my brother [William Johnson] would oftentimes tease me; however, in competition and, and in anger, I--there was one incident my mother [Lois Banks Johnson] and father [William H. Johnson] tell where he was crying and having a little immature fit, and I was like three years old and I stepped over him; he was five years old and I told him to "taint then", meaning "faint then."  But I did, I did have a speech impediment so-to-speak, but I had a black speech therapist who diagnosed the fact that my mind was moving faster than my mouth, and actually I went through therapy and I overcame this, this stuttering.  But, again, in the context of separate but equal, there were some very, very important personal experiences that shaped who I became, and who I am as, as a scholar and, and as a--as one who is committed to the faith.  First of all, I guess I, I would say that growing up in a separate but equal school, many of my teachers were black, and they absolutely had a high expectation for you to work beyond your capacity, and that was very, very important.  You also had the other extreme, however, of white teachers who came with an assumption that you were not equal, and so there was always that tension.  I can remember in third grade reading a book that has been a book that I know changed my life, by Willard Motley who, again, was an expatriate who lived in Mexico, who wrote a book, 'Knock on Any Door,' [Willard Motley] and it was a book that helped me to see that I wanted to reach out and do something in relationship to social work, or giving and community, and ultimately sociology; and I read that book in third grade.  I had my own bedroom, and I used to sit over the radiator and read a lot.  And so that book became very important, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)Now this was a book written for adults, basically, not--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but I was an avid reader (laughter); yes, I was an avid reader, and I read a lot.  And I, I also remember when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to Evanston [Illinois], and my father was one of the host for Martin Luther King as one of the officers of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I was as close to Martin Luther King and my father sitting at a table; I think it was in my church [Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church, Evanston, Illinois] where that meeting took place, and it was just the three of us that I remember in the room.  When I got into sixth grade, I had a white teacher who had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Excuse me--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I wanna go back.  What year was that, and how old were you when you--when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to Evanston [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was in--probably--I was probably about--ooh, let me see; I was born when I said I was born (laughter).  I was in my adolescence when Dr. King came to Evanston; I was probably closer to ten or--somewhere between ten and twelve, perhaps.
Story_ID: 192086
Speaker 1: When I was in sixth grade, I had a white teacher, Mrs. Whitmore [ph.], who was one of the ones who had this notion that people were inferior who were people of color, and I did finish my work quickly most often; I did, at that particular time, finish an exam, and I tried to get the attention of another young lady who was still taking her test and I started making faces, and she reacted tryin' to respond back and she fell out of her desk, and it infuriated the teacher and she came over to me and she grabbed me and she hit me on the top of my head and I slapped her, and I told her she should not put her white hands on me.  Well, my mother [Lois Banks Johnson] was president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], so I ended up in the office with the principal calling my mother up to the school, and the long and the short of that was that I was expelled from the school, which was a school where only the black children went.  They then did psychological testing on me because how dare I hit a white teacher; and what they found out, accordingly, was that I was very bright and perhaps I was not being challenged at the black school.  And so my punishment was to send me to the white school where I would be intellectually challenged.  They saw that as the reward; I, of course, saw it as a, a gross punishment because it meant I had to leave my classmates and the, the sense of, of community that I had with my friends.  And that experience--first of all, my mother never felt compromised as president of the PTA; she supported my action.  I will never forget when we walked into the superintendent's office downtown in which they gave her the results of my test, my psychological test, et cetera, et cetera, and the issue was that I was just too bright to be around the other black children.  The next particular benchmark for me in, in that situation was one in which--at the white school, then I excelled, and in the process of getting ready to graduate, I was one of the, the high honor students, and I was practicing for the ceremony, and I started having heart palpitations; as a result of that, the school nurse determined that I was probably on drugs and--because you know, a black child just couldn't have heart palpitations out of anxiety or nervousness; that wouldn't fit.  And so she actually said that--she wrote that, and she advised the principal that that was her suspicion.  Needless to say, my parents got her fired, and it was a clear call to me, though, about the nature, the systemic nature of racism and white supremacy in this country.  I ended up graduating and going on to high school.
Story_ID: 192087
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school you graduated from?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, that was--I went to Foster Elementary School [Evanston, Illinois], which is now called [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr. Literary and Fine Arts School, Evanston, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess now it's black now after all those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, it was black originally, as Foster, it was the school my mother went to when it was separate but equal; it was the very school where they intended for my mother's [Lois Banks Johnson] class to wash the clothes of the teachers so that they would be prepared to be domestics, and that was the movement that my grandparents and their generation stopped.  I went to that same school and had the incident with a teacher [Mrs. Whitmore (ph.)] hitting me and I hit her back.  The next school was a junior high school and it was called Haven Junior High [sic, Haven Middle School, Evanston, Illinois], and from Haven, everyone went to Evanston Township [High School, Evanston, Illinois], including my--my mother graduated from Evanston Township.  When she went, it was a totally segregated school; they could not use the swimming pool, their classes were entirely segregated, et cetera, et cetera.  By the time I went to the high school, that was not the case, it was a tiered system but it was not officially segregated.  What I do remember though that was very important in terms of the high school experience at Evanston Township was the Monday after the Birmingham [Alabama] four girls were, were, were bombed [16th Street Baptist Church bombing], we went to school and the principal intended to have the normal assembly--business as usual, as though nothing had happened.  And when I realized that there was not going to be any acknowledgement of that horrific event, when I realized the anger that I felt over that, I led a walk-out of the black students from the auditorium, and we went in the halls and start banging on the lockers and making a scene, et cetera, et cetera.  And it became clear to me that my life would be committed to issues of social justice and the whole issue of racism and white supremacy, and by then, I had formed in my mind that somewhere between being an academician as a sociologist and a worker, in terms of social work, was where I was being led to, to go.  And as a result of that, I can say quite emphatically that I knew in high school that I wanted to be a sociologist.
Story_ID: 192088
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what were some of--were you engaged in the typical high school activities when you were in high school [at Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois], or did you, did you--were you--did you play an instrument, or did--or were you in the clubs, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I was in the French club, I, I danced, I was in the, the dance club, I did hold an office or two, but quite frankly, as you've already pointed out, I was always doing things that were ahead of, of being--my brother [William Johnson] was three years ahead of me in school, and so I was around and wanted to be around his peers.  I was intellectually advanced, and as a result of that, there were many activities that I just thought were very childish, and so by the time I was a senior in high school, I was dating a person [Ralph E. Wells] who was at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], and I was very clear about what I wanted to do professionally.  I wanted to go to college, I wanted to become a sociologist, and I was very focused on those goals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any role models in terms of becoming a sociologist?  Were there any black people that you knew that were--
Speaker 2: No, actually, I did not have any role models as sociologists as such; what I did have, however, was a father [William H. Johnson] who understood that desire, and I remember that when I graduated from high school and I was about to leave for the University of Illinois [at Chicago, UIC, Chicago, Illinois], one of the gifts he gave me was Gunnar Myrdal's book, 'An American Dilemma' ['An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy,' by Gunnar Myrdal], which is a classic book on racism in the United States, done by a Swedish anthropologist, and he presented that book to me and I still have that book in one of the early editions of that book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's an important book.  What about E. Franklin Frazier?  Had you heard of him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had not heard of E. Franklin Frazier, that I remember, at that point in time, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 192089
Speaker 1: And so I went away to the University of Illinois [at Chicago, UIC, Chicago, Illinois].  In my freshman year--I was always very independent.  I had worked since I was thirteen, not so much because I had to but because I wanted to, so I either--first of all, my mother [Lois Banks Johnson] insisted I learn how to type so that I would never be a domestic.  As a result of that, I was typing the community newspaper, using stencils and the mimeograph machine at a very early age.  I then had a quote real job in a cleaners, you know, bagging up cleaning, et cetera, et cetera, so I always worked, and I was an industrious kind of, of person.  And when I went to college, though I got a scholarship, I also worked in the lab actually doing what you would then call random assessment and testing that it turned out to be in the context of metallurgy, in which we were preparing information around what would happen when you sent spaceships up, and so I was one of the ones working with a metallurgist, not really clearly understanding the implications of what I was doing, but actually doing analysis of, of data, doing random testing and then taking pictures and developing them.  And so I had some stint in photography in a lab, and that was, that was good, too, because my father [William H. Johnson] was a, was a, a photographer, and so it connected me again with, with something I finally remembered about my childhood.  And so when I went away to school, as I said, I had--I was dating, at that time, a person [Ralph E. Wells] who had been at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] or who was at--who was at Northwestern, and we decided that we would get married; my parents were not pleased about that at all but, you know, I felt I was in love and he felt he was in love, and he graduated, and so my sophomore year, I decided that I would get married and I would continue to go to school part-time.  My mother, in particular, was very disappointed, and expressed that--she supported it; I had a wonderful wedding.  I remember some of the first gifts; I got great affirmation from people like Deton [Jackson] Brooks [Jr.] who my father had worked from--for who was one of the more important senior people in Mayor [Richard J.] Daley's office, et cetera.  By now, my father had retired [U.S.] Military; he had worked with the federal government and he was now in charge of the facilities for the Department of Human Services for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  My mother was working as a job counsellor--employment counsellor for the Illinois State Unemployment Service, and she was very disappointed and thought that I would not finish college.  My husband-to-be [Ralph E. Wells] assured my parents that I would absolutely finish college, he would see to that.  And so we got married.  He worked, I worked, and I went to school; and I'll never forget, after our honeymoon, we got back, my mother came to visit us, and she brought me a dress and he gave it back and said, "I am to take care of my wife; you do not need to do this anymore."  And that's--level set, I think everybody, about the nature of the relationship, and indeed, I did finish from the University of Illinois in Chicago [UIC].
Story_ID: 192090
Speaker 1: And when I finished school [at the University of Illinois at Chicago, UIC, Chicago, Illinois], I had been married for four years and I was all of two months away from delivering our first child.  And so I graduated from college in June and I delivered my son [Christopher Wells] in August, and I had been married for four years.  Everything was wonderful; I was beginning a career as a teacher, he [Carruthers' husband, Ralph E. Wells] had moved from teaching and coaching, as I had indicated, perhaps before--in some of the photos, he had been a--an all-star basketball player, he had been a, a player with the Chicago Zephyrs which became the team that we now call the Chicago Bulls [sic, Washington Wizards, Washington, D.C.] when it was with the ABA [American Basketball Association], before they merged into the NBA [National Basketball Association], and he had moved into corporate America; he had become the first manager for RR Donnelley [Chicago, Illinois]--that was, that was an African American, and I had an eleven month-old son on August 1st, 1968 when the police knocked on my door and told me that my husband [Ralph E. Wells] had drowned, and they were still looking for his body in Lake Michigan.  He had called that evening and, and asked was it okay if he stopped to go on a business meeting on a boat, and I said, "Sure," and I would hold dinner for him because we always ate together.  And immediately--this happened about ten o'clock; about five after ten at night--I remember because usually I watched the ten o'clock news; this particular night, I did not watch the news, and within three minutes after the police knocking on my door, neighbors were there because they had heard about this.  Somehow, I dug deep into my spiritual well; I did hear the voice of God, and I heard the voice of my husband which affirmed that he would not want flowers, and that instead I should establish a scholarship fund in his name at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and that's what I did.  He had been raised on the West Side of Chicago in public housing and so he and himself--he, himself was a role model--had chartered new territory; he was the first African American from Chicago public schools, he had been on the championship Marshall [High School] Basketball Team--'58 [1958]--to go to a Big 10 school and, as a result of that, he was well-known.  And somehow, I knew that he would want--rather than flowers to be wasted for his life to have more meaning, particularly, for children like himself.  So, the criteria that I established for the scholarship fund was that it would be first offered to a student from the West Side of Chicago who had demonstrated a capacity to, to go to a Big 10--to a Northwestern University.  And so I am pleased to say that in retrospect now, some thirty-four children have gone through Northwestern University as a result of that scholarship.
Speaker 2: And that was established back in sixty--
Speaker 1: It was established in 1968.
Speaker 2: Sixty-Eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, my son was born in '67 [1967] and we were married in '64 [1964].  My son was born in '67 [1967], Ralph died in '68 [1968], the scholarship was established in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: All right.  That's--okay.  It's still the only one, right?
Speaker 1: Well, it's--when, when they wrote me last, a few years ago, I know that it was the, the--I know it was the first, and I think it was the only endowed scholarship of an African American at Northwestern.
Story_ID: 192091
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What did I do next?  Oh, that was a good question.  Well, let's--after the shock of it all, I mean it was, it was a, it was a very challenging period one might suspect, but I also knew that I was--had to deal with the reality of taking care of an eleven month-old child [Christopher Wells].  I mean in those days, you didn't think about insurance; there wasn't money for insure--I mean there was--it, it was just like, you know, it's you and this child, what are you gonna do?  And I decided that the practical thing to do was to go to graduate school, attempt to get a master's in counselling because a bachelor's in sociology meant nothing, and I didn't think a master's in sociology meant anything much, and so I decided I would get a master's in counsellor education.  I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and met with the dean and said that I would like to go to graduate school, and they admitted me and gave me a graduate assistance-ship, and so I ended up teaching at Northwestern, at the graduate level, to undergraduate students in terms of--a part of my area of expertise in teaching was curriculum development.  My, my vision then was that if I could get a master's in counselling, I could make $10,000 a year and take care of my son for the rest of my life and I would be fine.  I was on that path, and it became clear to the university as well as to, to me that I, I did have interest in, in moving forward with a doctorate, and they offered me a scholarship to continue to get a, a Ph.D. in sociology, which was my passion.  And I said to them that I could probably--I was working two jobs at the time, but that if I could get the course work done in another year, I would certainly do that, and so that's what we agreed to.  I ended up finishing the course work, and then writing my dissertation, and so from the time I went in with a bachelor's, I came out three years later with a Ph.D. in sociology, and I did not know at the time until, really, many years later, that I was the first African American woman to get a Ph.D. in sociology from Northwestern.  My mentor and advisor was Ray Mack, who was the President of the American Sociological Association, whose area of study was race, ethnicity, and power.  And so my area of concentration was around those issues as well, along with medical sociology.  And so I came out of Northwestern with a Ph.D., and began to teach part-time, and ended up being sought after because by now, you're in the height of the movement, the undergraduate students all across this country were beginning to demand certain kinds of, of equity in relationship to higher education and in relationship to the Black Power Movement, and I was sought after and I was--I ended up in Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois] in the Sociology Department--recruited to absolutely start a, a, a curriculum around sociology of racism, which is a course that I taught every semester, for thirty years, at that institution.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Okay.  And you did it the tough way too, you say you had two jobs, a baby, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes; I had two jobs, I had a baby, and I was a student.  And, again, when you go back and connect the dots, it was that sign that says "Prayer Changes Things," it was the notion that God was in control, it was growing up in an environment that was very affirming, that somehow I knew that despite this, I had two choices--I could turn lemon into lemonade, or I could just sit there and bemoan my situation.  And so it was important for me to, to, to translate that trauma and those experiences into ways that had benefit for others as well as that helped to heal--to heal me and to strengthen me to move forward.  I truly remember that--one of my jobs was on the Black Studies Program at Kendall College in Evanston, Illinois, and the chairperson at the time was a person a little older than me who is now president of a junior college in Chicago, Wellington Wilson, and we're good friends, and he introduced me to one of his best friends who at--about two weeks after the demise of my husband, her husband was killed on a train wreck, and he introduced us, and I remember that the difference between Barbara's reaction and my reaction to the death of our spouses was that Barbara didn't have anything to pull on in the way that I did, and that was particularly having the responsibility of a son, and when you look at a hopeless, helpless child, I mean you really got to, you know, get up and do something, and so I was challenged to do something.
Story_ID: 192092
Speaker 1: Tell me about your involvement in African studies.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess when I really connect those dots backwards, one of the things that I did when I was an elementary school teacher for that brief time before my first husband [Ralph E. Wells] died, was I was the curriculum specialist to help bring quote Negro History to school districts, and I was a consultant as a teacher in, in my particular district; I was working in Park Forest [Illinois], and in doing that, I got very impassioned about the role of our history in relationship to development--child development, and the issue of identity, and became very curious myself around this quest for knowledge about my people.  And so, even as a graduate student, even though I was quote in the Sociology Department, I was very, very interested in history and began to do more and more in terms of history.  As a part of my commitment to the movement, I ended up getting more engaged in community activity.  I never saw myself as just an academician, but always one who would attempt to connect the academy to the community, and got involved in teaching and in exposure to the activity of the Communiversity, which was a place where people, regardless of their educational backgrounds and social economic backgrounds, met at the Center for Inner City Studies [later, Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Chicago, Illinois].  The Center for Inner City Studies was an extension of Northeastern [Illinois] University [Chicago, Illinois], and in fact, my first husband, Ralph [E. Wells], was a part, along with myself, to choose the first faculty and the first student body of the Center for Inner City Studies.  He had gone on to get a master's at Northeastern, and one of his teachers, he had become very good friends with, and one of his teachers was one of the persons who spearheaded the founding of that center.  And so we sat in his living room, this teacher's living room, and went over the applications.  Well, the Center for Inner City Studies became Northeastern's response to how they show some accountability to the black community, so it was an extension campus established on the South Side of Chicago in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 192093
Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about that building [of the Center for Inner City Studies, later, Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: The building is a historic building in that it was a building of the Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois], where a lot of the settlement, social work settlement activity had begun in Chicago [Illinois], and it's a historic landmark building.  And as a part of the way in which the black students and faculty were entrusted with extending their research into the community, on Saturdays emerged a kind of informal, and then a very formal process of people gathering, and it was called the Communiversity, and it was out of the Communiversity that really gave rise to a great deal of, of intellectual richness in the reconstruction of our history, in the reclamation of what it meant to study the role of Pan-Africanism in our struggle, and what it meant to, to provide critical intellectual analysis to our situation.  And so the Communiversity was a place in which giants, from street scholars to giants in the academic community, would come and meet the community.  As a part of, of that activity now as a, as a, as a professor, and as a, as a community activist, I would later meet my second husband, who is Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] who, at the time, was also a faculty member at the Center for Inner City Studies [later, Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Chicago, Illinois].  And we actually met going on a consulting trip to Dayton, Ohio, as a part of the Model Cities Program, which was one of the early responses to, "What do we do with these people now?" in relationship to the urban riots and so forth and so on.  And we ended up getting married, we ended up adopting a son, and so my second son is Darnell [Carruthers], and Darnell is the, the, the, the evidence of the union between Jake and I, and so Jake and I had actually three sons; he had a son by previous marriage, and so we bonded as a family with, with three boys.  Jake is, as many people know, a genius of a historian, one who has committed a great deal of his life to unearthing many, many lessons of ancient antiquity in terms of African history, and in, in, in sharing that journey with him, we became--and our home became a, a centerpiece of the Pan-African Movement, not only in Chicago, but indeed in the world.  So, we were both blessed with compatible interest as professors, as academicians, as committed to the struggle, and out of that, a lot of activity and relationships were born which were life-long, in terms of their commitments and in terms of being surrounded by people that I am indeed proud and pleased to have been mentored by.  Those people include the giants of, for example, a John Henrik Clarke, who I later would become the executor of his estate because he became like a father to me.  John Henrik Clarke's teacher was John [G.] Jackson, and it was John Jackson and Arthur Schomburg who took John [Henrik Clarke] under their wings when John Clarke hoboed to New York [New York] as a young man.  And I had, in 1975, decided that I would take my first group of students to Africa, and several months before that trip, this group that I referred to as the family of the Communiversity, had invited John Jackson to speak in Chicago, and he spoke and we had lunch at my house; I had fixed lunch--there were probably fifteen people there, and in the discussion, it became clear to me that John Jackson, a man who walked with Schomburg, who had given his life, and given up much of the material benefit he could have had for our people in order to work on the history of African civilization, had never been to Africa, and I was appalled by that, and so I asked Professor Jackson would he travel with me if I could make arrangements for him to go on that trip.  He was deathly afraid of flying.  He challenged me because he said, "You know, young people do a lotta talking but very few of them act out what they say."  And he told me, "You know, I caught the train here; I don't like to fly."  He said, "But, you know, I've probably written my last book.  If you're serious about this, let me know; I doubt that you are."  And so when he left, I challenged everybody in that room to get me a hundred dollars, and I called him two days later and told him I had garnered the resources for his trip, and I hoped that he would honor us by being our senior elder scholar on the trip.
Story_ID: 192094
Speaker 1: That was significant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous It was very significant.
Speaker 1: You know, from other parts of the country, we saw this developing--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: James Cage [ph.], who was the book-seller--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Mass Incorporated, who used to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --from Chicago [Illinois] all over the country with books from, from Chicago's publishing houses and other publishing houses in the Midwest--Broadside Press [Detroit, Michigan], and other presses--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, told us what was goin' on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We, we had John [G.] Jackson in Dayton in '75 [1975]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and we were really pleased to hear about--you know, Jackson was just starting to emerge--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as a lecturer personality (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes; no one even knew--knew him at that time--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I happen to have been also chairperson of the Department of Sociology [at Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], which positioned me in a special place for that divine moment because what ended up happening is that Jackson agreed to travel with us.  The students and I were to pick him up in New York [New York], and we got to New York--it was the day of the blackout, and as a result of that, he was living in public housing and could not get down the elevator, and so he was not able to meet us at the airport.  His student, John [Henrik] Clarke, however, found this out, took it upon himself to go make sure that he had his passport and his visa, went to the travel agent; it turned out that the travel agent had been a student of John Clarke's, and they worked it out so that John Jackson could travel the next day without penalty, and so John Jackson flew over and met us--flew over by himself, and we were able to pick him up at the airport.  That was such a powerful, powerful moment to see John Jackson come off of an airplane, walk down those steps onto African soil.  And by then, we were able to have found Cheikh Anta Diop, and I have the first videotape of Cheikh Anta Diop talking to John Jackson as a result of a conversation at a dining room table of, "Would you travel with us?"  As that story unfolded, and as we went from Senegal to Kenya and then up to Egypt, I became closer and closer to this mentor of one giant, John Clarke, this personality called John Jackson, to find out that he was living in almost abject poverty, and I couldn't believe it.  And so when we got back to the United States, after having shared some of the most powerful moments that I will ever have as a, as a historian, to have realized that, I went back to the university [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and as chairperson of the department, built a case to bring him to Chicago as a visiting professor, even though he had only finished high school.  And so I built the case that--and documented that Erik Erikson was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and had not a college degree, et cetera, et cetera.  And then John Jackson's contribution to our story was one that was worthy of him being given a distinguished lectureship appointment at the university, and the president went for it.  [Ronald] Ron Williams was the president at the time, and he was an African American who appreciated that, and John Jackson was appointed.  And so I invited him to live with us, and so John Jackson lived in our home, and our children got to grow up with that living giant sitting at the table--cantankerous as he might have been, even though he was atheist, as he allegedly was, with the stories of his love for Zora Neale Hurston and their affair, with his walk with Arthur Schomburg, with his recollections of [Willis Nathaniel] Huggins, and so forth and so on--bringing a kind of richness and diversity to a family that is immeasurable in terms of its outcome.  It was very clear to me, though, that--for me personally, all of this was a part of the divine plan that God had for my life in terms of putting me in situations where I could make a difference.  And so for me, it was always the coming together of what it meant to know who I was, but also to understand that who I was as an African American woman was largely grounded in the faith of a people that have survived the Mafia or the Holocaust of the slave trade based on a faith system of whose I was, which was a Christian, and who was somebody who had confessed in Jesus Christ, whose family had survived as a result of that deep abiding faith, and that that something that I could never abandon.  And so my life became one of being strengthened by this quest to bring in alignment, so-to-speak, my identity as an African with my identity as one of a woman of God, and what that meant in terms of my own faith story.
Story_ID: 192095
Speaker 1: So this, this is a true, a true example of Pan-Africanism in the sense of--John [G.] Jackson was the author of, 'Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth.'
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was a confessed atheist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atheist.
Speaker 1: --and joined American Atheist Association.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Author of, 'Man, God, and Civilization' [John G. Jackson], the study of religion.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Introduction to African Civilizations' [John G. Jackson].  You know, it's just--it's interesting that this, this story, like, almost makes religious difference irrelevant--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of the pursuit of, of a higher goal--I mean I don't know if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.  Well, I think that's a good point; in fact, when you, when you think about who I am and what I am doing now, I'm a founder and president of a foundation called Orita Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], which is a Yoruba word of where the paths come together.  And I can say that for me, in terms of my understanding of Christianity, and the reason I don't have any problems claiming myself as a Christian, is that it's very clear that the word speaks to both being a hearer of The Word and a doer of The Word.  In theological terms, we refer to that as praxis, the way in which what you articulate is evidence by how you behave, and so for me, Pan-Africanism was never a mere intellectual exercise, it was a, a manifestation of how we had to behave to be a liberated and free people, and so I had no discontinuity with my faith belief and my identity as an African person.  And my first trip to Africa was actually in 1972, and I'll never forget being in a village of Maasai, and being welcomed.  By a Maasai elder woman--and it was clear to me that we could not understand each other's language in terms of what we articulated, but that we understood each other's experiences of the heart.  And that interaction helped me to raise a very fundamental question which I pondered a long time, and I brought back to my pastor, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, and we had this discussion about it which was a question in my heart--did people have to know my Jesus in order to be connected to God?  And I came to the conclusion that this woman was as Godly as any person I had ever met in my life, and I knew she didn't know my Jesus, and yet I knew that she was divine and that she was a mother of divinity.  And so that helped me to crystalize the fact that there could be these differences, and yet God had created that diversity, and that we needed to figure out God's voice in that kind of diversity, and as a result of that then I, I was quite comfortable being who I was and whose I was, and so my Pan-Africanism was never, for me, a conflict with who I was in terms of my faith system.  I could very intellectually, analytically, and dispassionately look at the role of Christianity and Islam and any other ism in the perpetuation of white supremacy, and understood that that had nothing to do with the origins and the understanding of my faith and the foundations of that faith because Christianity, like all major religions, as John [G.] Jackson said, as [HistoryMaker Yosef] Ben-Jochannan said, grew out of African civilization in the first place.
Story_ID: 192096
Speaker 1: When Communiversity [at Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] was at its height--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and there were--I mean Chicago [Illinois] was an exciting place to live--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --if you were a black intellectual or, or a artist or a writer--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and some have argued that even that period of time, you know, is almost like a Chicago Renaissance or something because of the activity.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You had [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti's Institute for Positive Education [sic, Institute of Positive Education, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] goin' on.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: You had [HistoryMaker] Abena Joan [P.] Brown and [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward of Black Theatre (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.  Kumba and, and ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], yes.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and the other black theatre groups were doing this.  Hoyt [W.] Fuller's Black World was being published here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You had Communiversity with Dr. Anderson Thompson, Dr. Bobby [E.] Wright--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Dr. Harold Pates, and others, and yourself, and Jake [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], and other people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --involved; it just seemed like the higher level of activity--different centers of energy and power all around the city was doing things.  I mean can you--I mean, I don't wanna, I don't wanna talk (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, there, there was that, that energy, and that energy was manifested spiritually, it was manifested physically, it attracted and it incubated energies all over the country and indeed the world--you're absolutely right.  From the theatre where we had the Kumba Workshop and ETA to the manifestations of looking at early childhood education where we had the Institute for Positive Education starter a school [New Concept School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was a part of the starting of Blyden Center for Creative Development [Chicago, Illinois], which was an elementary school.  These schools were--precipitated the charter school movement quote-unquote; these were independent schools; we were members of the Council for Independent Black Institutions [CIBI].  A group of us--I went and bought a farm, literally, on a, on a spur of the moment because a, a black child said to me that, that she thought food grew in the grocery store, and I realized our children did not understand when they grew up in cement, what it meant to put their hand in the earth, and so Jake and I found a seventy-five acre farm, convened eight parents--eight couples, and started a cooperative where we took children to this farm in Bangor, Michigan and started a survival camp, and out of that camp experience would come a school, which later became Blyden; it's--the camp's name was Gianda [ph.], and it was in Bangor, Michigan, and we took children from public housing and they had two weeks of camping every summer.  And so there was that kind of movement in terms of education.  The Communiversity became a centerpiece for adults to come from different places in, in different walks of life to talk about the issues.  The DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] became a place to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. [HistoryMaker Margaret] Burroughs.
Speaker 2: There was Dr. Dr. Margaret Burroughs to, to--where the intersection of art and culture of the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois].  Then, we had here the, the, the evidence of the Nation of Islam headquarters [Mosque Maryam, Chicago, Illinois] juxtaposed against Joseph [H.] Jackson's National Baptist Convention [NBC]--a man who was in opposition to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] who, when they named the street after Martin Luther King, changed his address so that his church [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] would not face King Drive [Chicago, Illinois], and the giants of the intellectual world came here.  In my living room, actually--long before [HistoryMaker] Molefi [Kete] Asante, who's done a marvelous job crystalizing the concept of Afrocentricity for us as a people; but it was in my living room that the word Afrocentric was absolutely coined, the evidence for which is a magazine that we put together called the Afrocentric World Review, and Harold Cruse is the, the, the Negro--'The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual;' I mean we sat and we talked, Harold Cruse, Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan], Dr. John (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Cray Amah [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yes, Amah, exactly.  Hoyt Fuller--I remember the night bein' awakened in which Lu Palmer in Georgia were being told that Lu was being put off the radio, they would no longer publish his paper, et cetera, et cetera, and, and trying to help bring resources to bear to get their publication published.  When Hoyt Fuller issued the, the issue around blacks and Jews and it was not an issue that the white community wanted published, and John Jackson--John [H.] Johnson literally put Hoyt out of, of shop after eighteen years of service to that, to, to that publishing house--ended up breaking Hoyt's, Hoyt's heart, and a group of us helped to seed his vision for transforming the Black World into First World.  And Hoyt moved to Atlanta [Georgia], as you might remember, and actually died a, a broken-hearted man on a road, literally, as a result of probably a lot of stress as a rea--as a result of, of, of that disappointment.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--still don't have anything to take the place of Black World.
Speaker 2: We really don't; you're absolutely right.  But it was in all of that energy that the Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] became a bed in the Communiversity for a clarity around Pan-Africanism.  Stokely Carmichael, who would become Kwame Ture, coming in and out--the student movement that we nurtured there, beginning to take students to Africa--
Story_ID: 192097
Speaker 1: Jake [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] and I, on our first trip to West Africa--again, it's all about relationships.  I had been at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in a post-doc--doctoral program with--at the Adlai Stevenson Institute for International Affairs [the University of Chicago Center for International Studies, CIS, Chicago, Illinois]; there only three blacks there, [HistoryMaker] Sokoni Karanja, who is presently in Chicago [Illinois], and one of the persons who has given his life to the development of community-low-income communities, a McArthur Fellow, and Liberty Mhlanga, who was in exile at the time, from Zimbabwe, then called Rhodesia; there was also on faculty--I should footnote it--the Center--Dr. Thompsant Satolie [ph.], who became the godfather of expatriates from South Africa in this country, was also a part of our movement.
Speaker 2: He's a relative of Indominingae Satolie [ph.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes.  And Liberty Mhlanga and I, and Sokoni were at the University of Chicago together, and my first trip to, to Africa was, in part, to visit with his family because by then, his family had left, and he went to work for the UN [United Nations] in Senegal.  And it was in visiting with him that Jake and I, one afternoon, said we must go find this person that we heard about, Cheikh Anta Diop, and we went to the university and just started asking questions, and they kept saying, "Oh, he's probably downstairs in the basement; he's downstairs in the basement."  And we went downstairs in the basement, and there was this man all by himself.
Speaker 2: Now, can you spell his name for us so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C-H-E-I-K-H, A-N-T-I,-A-N-T-A, D-I-O-P, Cheikh Anta Diop.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a person who was--who was born in Senegal, you know, one of those barefoot children running around whose divine path would take him to the Sorbonne [Paris, France] to work on a Ph.D. in physics; was rejected three times in terms of his dissertation.  As an avocation and as a way to just pass time, became an anthropologist, a linguist, et cetera, et cetera, and began to reconstruct ancient African civilization, and later learned the ancient languages so that he became a multi-faceted scholar.  But it was really in his spare time that he started looking at mummies in the museums and a lot of the evidences of ancient Egypt in the European museums, and he went on what I call the razor blade campaign, and he actually took razor blades and took off the epidermis of some of the mummies.  And as a physicist, he was able to do two things; he was able to radiocarbon date them, and he was able to test for melanin, and that began his pathway to move beyond his Ph.D. in physics to really become the world's greatest Egyptologist I think that we can say that we have produced.  And we were looking for him, and we found him in the basement at the university [University of Dakar, later, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal] only to find out that, as a part of, of his agreement with the President [Leopold Sedar] Senghor, that he would never run against him for political office.  He was given a lifetime appointment at the university; however, there was a stipulation that he would never teach classes, per se, because teaching classes would give him an opportunity to organize students.  And so here you had this giant of a scholar in the basement of a university, walked in the room and there were all these books, and he was translating at the moment we saw him four or five different books of, of, of the, of the ancient text, and surrounded by evidences of his also being a physicist, in which he had actually built a nuclear reactor out of, out of, of disposable waste, so-to-speak.  And Jake and I were, first of all, you know, just absolutely overwhelmed that he was sitting there by himself, and I did, as I said, know a little French; he knew no English, and so he and I started talking in French and I was translating as best I could for he and Jake, and about a hour into this conversation, this short, absolute ebony-looking man walked in, sat down, and then just took over the conversation in terms of translation.  And after about the first fifteen minutes, he paused and he said, "This is the appropriate time to do introductions."
Story_ID: 192098
Speaker 1: And so after this break in conversation, this person was introduced by Cheikh Anta Diop to Jake [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] and I as Carlos Moore, and when he told Carlos Moore that we were Jake and Iva Carruthers, Carlos started jumping up and down because he had read articles that we had both written in a black--Epay's [ph.] book (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Black Books Bulletin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Black Books Bulletin, and so we had read Carlos' piece in Presence Africaine on the untold story of Cuba, and he had read pieces we had written in Black Books Bulletin, and so it was a--just a wonderful celebration; but indeed, he had spent fifteen minutes translating before anybody knew who was who in the room; he just came in, and with the authority of a Carlos Moore, took over the conversation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just to pause here a second--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: There's a particular kind of excitement, I think, that black people that are involved in ideas have when they find somebody else--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and it's just, it's--I mean it's dramatic.
Speaker 1: It is, it absolutely is; you're absolutely right.  And by now, we're talking probably nine or ten o'clock at night that we're still in the room, the four of us, talking, and Carlos said, "Iva and Jake, you've got to just go with me and meet Shawna [Moore]," and so we went to his home, woke Shawna up in the middle of the night, and we stayed up the whole night, the four of us, and we became life-long friends, and Shawna Moore and Shawna's work is a classic work.  'Malcolm, Lumumba and' ['Garvey, Lumumba, Malcolm: Black Nationalist Separatists,' by Shawna Maglangbayan]--
Speaker 2: Garvey--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Garvey--'Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm,' later to be published by IPE [Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois].  And so it was that meeting that really began to spearhead so many other things because then Jake and I were--well, we were on our way, later on, to meet with our students to Egypt, and Cheikh Anta Diop gave me specific information as to what tomb to go in and what pictures to take because he knew that there was excavation and there was an attempt to destroy some of the evidence of our presence and--in antiquity.  And when we got back to the states, it was that connection that then helped to bring together another level of relationship in terms of diaspora because here we had Carlos Moore who--and Shawna, who had been a part of the movement, met in France, had supported the movement in Algeria, who were now expatriate in Nigeria, ended up helping to plan FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977, Lagos, Nigeria] then moved to Senegal, who now had extended themselves with Wole Soyinka and, I mean it was just all beginning to connect and, at that time, Cheikh Anta Diop had nothing published in English; it would be John Henrik Clarke who would make the difference in terms of making sure that his works began to get published in English in ways that would enhance our understanding of our history.
Story_ID: 192099
Speaker 1: Now, just to try to put this in historical context, too, about--I mean to talk about who [Cheikh Anta] Diop was at that time, he had just--you were there in '75 [1975], right?  And he had just, the year before--'74 [1974], I think, participated in the UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization] conference--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --on the people in Ancient Egypt [UNESCO Symposium on the Peopling of Ancient Egypt and the Deciphering of the Meroitic Script] --in Cairo [Egypt], right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that, and what, you know, the significance of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, essentially, Cheikh Anta Diop and Theophile Obenga, who is a linguist from the Congo, had been participants in a gathering of the world's quote greatest Egyptologists, and the question on the table was the peopling of ancient civilizations.  And because of Obenga's absolute mastery of linguistics, and Cheikh's absolute mastery of the text and understanding of physics, they, together, made the quote world's European Egyptologist capitulate to the reality and the facts that Ancient Egypt was an African civilization; and not only was it an African civilization, but that civilization had gone from the south north, as opposed to the north to the south.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a civilization that is--Egypt is still in Africa, and yet at the time, we could say that Europeans heard the story of like Jean Vercoutter of Sorbonne [Paris, France]; they were saying that they were European-type people even though they were in Africa.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And, and it's still the case now; I mean many of our children go through schools and read Shakespeare and so forth, and don't have a clue that Egypt is in Africa.  I run into people--black and white, all the time, who still don't know that Egypt is in Africa.  But what Cheikh Anta Diop and Obenga were able to do was to prove beyond a question of a doubt that the European--Indo-European language tree was not the origin of the ancient text, but that it was the African languages that had the, the, the, the--akin to the ancient text, number one; and number two, based on--again, the issue of melanin and carbon dating, being able to bring the facts of the African nature of the peoples of the ancient world as well as when certain events occurred.  And it was a result of that that quite often what happens is that the scholarly community is willing to admit that in closed circles, but it doesn't get popularized, and so even though the King Tut [Tutankhamun] exhibit and the this exhibit and so forth comes to the United States and it comes to the people, most people still have not a clue as to the reality of, of, of the facts that we're talking about, which is why we have so much work still yet to be done.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think it--even sittin' here 2003, the events of 1974--I mean the situation is basically still the same; it's a unspoken--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --acknowledgement on some--on the part of European Egyptologist, and I think it was Jean Vercoutter; do you remember what he said at the end of the conference?
Speaker 2: Well, I do know that out of it came a great deal of, of, of attempts to suggest that the Egyptian pyramids were built by people from outer space, and there's been scientific dollars, millions of dollars, spent to prove that, for example.
Speaker 1: Vercoutter said, as--if I could paraphrase it--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) watching this in the future--he said, and it's quoted in the book that UNESCO published ['The Peopling of Ancient Egypt & the Deciphering of the Meroitic Script,' by Cheik Anta Diop, Jean Leclant, Theophile Obenga and Jean Vercoutter]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --he said, "The ancient Egyptians were probably dark and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --Egypt is in Africa, but they were still white," (laughter).
Speaker 2: They were still white, right, exactly, yeah, yeah.  And in fact, I have one of the original copies of that report, and I have Cheikh Anta Diop's signature on my book--of his book, African Origins of Western Civilization [sic, 'The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality,' By Cheikh Anta Diop, edited by Will Mercer Cook], which was one of the books that John Henrik Clarke helped to get published in English.  But it was those kinds of connections that, that really made the difference.
Story_ID: 192100
Speaker 1: Carlos Moore's insinuation in our lives, so-to-speak, later hooked us up with Aime Cesaire in Martinique, and we began to expand our world there.  Dr. Ben's [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] quest and Carlos' connection that took us to Papua New Guinea again began to open up the whole issue of African presence throughout the world, and so out of that came, I would say, centers of intellectual repositories of information and reconstruction and, and historical development and understanding that different one of us took ownership of to, to make the story come, come back full and, and reclaiming who we are.  My particular journey was just absolutely enriched by the personal relationship that I had with John Henrik Clarke, and the very day that--I guess I should, I should share that my father [William H. Johnson] was--made medical history as--in a similar way my mother [Lois Banks Johnson] did; she survived it, but my father made medical history in that he was the oldest living kidney transplant in the early days of, of transplantation, and he lived for five additional years after that transplant.  I witnessed him go through a eighteen, twenty-hour surgery, come up on a floor in which everybody there knew that only 20 percent of the people would make it, and so those very people on the floor became families, and I remember there was a Navajo man who was to have surgery right after my father, and he did not make it.  Again, because I was very interested in medical sociology, that experience helped me to get a real keen interest in the whole way in which technology and biotechnology was being used as a new umbrella for white supremacy and racism.  I sat in that waiting room in the hospital and I looked down, and the Journal of [the] American Medical Association had a lead article that said "Aging is a Disease."  And it occurred to me that as I saw nurses running around with body parts, and looking at the JAMA [The Journal of the American Medical Association]  magazine in which aging was defined as a disease, that this was a culture being driven by a certain core set of values that suggested that that which God had made in divine order was contrary to their need to control and to be God, and so I got interested in--as a sociologist, in what does it mean to confront a culture that seeks to be God through the control and the use of technology over nature versus wanting my father to live as a daughter, in relationship to using that technology.  And so for me, it became real clear that white supremacy and racism was moving to a new level around eugenics, and the ability to control through new understandings about racial ethnic identity as it related to not just phenotype, how you looked, and the questions about how people looked, but genotype, the underlying genetics that was undergirding this new, what I call this technocracy.  And so, as I sat there and watched my father come out of, out of a surgical situation in which, at that time, you could not even have a pain-killer because it would cause for tissue rejection; to see him survive that kinda pain and to live was a very powerful experience for me, both in terms of my spiritual development, obviously, as well as my intellectual development.  It was at that point then, that I began to take very seriously the whole issue of eugenics as it related to racism and white supremacy, and out of that was borne a area of study in which I began to track the Human Genome Project [HGP], which we now know to be the centerpiece of the kind of ways in which genetics is being used around DNA testing to hold hostage and to impact the kinds of disparities of haves and have-nots in this greater division between the world.  For example, people being denied--AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] for example, AIDS having been a part of medical experimentation, military experimentation, and so forth and so on--
Story_ID: 192101
Speaker 1: But I wanna get back to this point about the enriching experience of John Henrik Clarke in my life.  My father [William H. Johnson] had been in the hospital, for a short stint, on a day that we had planned this conference at the Communiversity [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, CCICS, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and I again was hosting my fa--my household was the center-place for what would happen afterwards, and we were in the living room, John Henrik Clarke was there, I had fixed lunch and dinner for about ten of us, and the phone rang and it was my brother [William Johnson], and he said, "Elaine," my family called me Elaine--and he didn't have to say anything else.  I said, "Daddy has died," and he said, "Yes."  And so I knew the way he called my name that my father had made his transition.  I went and excused myself from the group, I fondly kissed Dr. Clarke, who had really become a mentor and a, and a--and, and like a father to me, and excused myself.  And one of the persons with me at the time was--at my house, was [Samuel A.] Sam Patch, who had worked very closely with my father and who was very instrumental in the election of Harold Washington as the mayor of City of Chicago [Illinois].  And Sam was a good friend of my father's and Sam and I went over to my father's house, and Sam never left my side from that moment on, until I buried my father.  But it was ironic for me that the day that my father died was also a day that I had shared with John Henrik Clarke, and John Henrik Clarke just became my other father.  And as a result of that, my life has been very, very enriched.  We have walked together in Africa, he has awakened me in the middle of the night in Africa and summoned me to take instructions on his Will, he has given me the mandate to do certain things, some of which I've had the capacity to do, and others I have not; I have been entrusted with his papers with his legacy, to make sure that his library was delivered where he wanted it, which was to the Atlanta University complex [Atlanta University Center (AUC) Robert W. Woodruff Library, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and so forth and so on.  And so to have been in the basement with a John Henrik Clarke, to have shared conversations with him that ranged from arguing over who was gonna pay for the meal, and coming to a truce that we would just do every other because we got tired of arguing with each other.  To knowing that you should never walk with a John Henrik Clarke without a tape recorder because what you think may be a casual conversation will invariably turn into one of the most profound experiences that you will ever have, to being able to share moments in which he would make you pledge that you will never speak what he just told you to anyone else as long as you live; those kinds of moments are the moments that I have had the pleasure of, of, of sharing.  To be able to see the joy that he had by my willingness to, to take in his mentor, John [G.] Jackson, and to, and to share my life with John Jackson--all of those moments are, are very, very special moments, and so John Clarke was my father, and he and my father share now a special bond in heaven.  To be able to take responsibility for the planning of his funeral, and while I was doing it on this side, to know that some of the people he had put in his Will that he wanted to help plan were in Africa at the time, and to, and to know that as we were carrying out our instructions over here, that there were people like Wade Nobles and [HistoryMaker] Na'im Akbar, and Marimba Ani, who were in Ghana, carrying forth the ceremony, and to be able to see the tree or the seedling that they planted in memory of John now grow to be a tree in John's spirit has, has just been a phenomenal journey for me.
Story_ID: 192102
Speaker 1: Now, can you maybe give people an idea, or whoever listens at this in the future, an idea of the significance of John [Henrik] Clarke?  I think you have, in a sense, but--I mean I guess I want you to--there's a--he was more than a historian; I mean he was a--there's something different about John Clarke.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  John was born during a period of what we would probably call certainly the post-Reconstruction period and a period in the South that was characterized by vigilantes, by pure unadulterated, unapologetic racism and, and white supremacy; he was born during a period in which it was a time of great many lynchings, and on the tail-end of that, he was born during a period in which the only way that he could go to a public library and get a book was to fake using the card of a white man he used to work for and say that he was getting books on behalf of this white person.  He was born in a period in which, as a young child, he had to survive the trauma of a mother who he called a divine human being dying, and his father remarrying a woman who did not like that set of children, and who defiled one or two of the few articles he had of his mother's, including a sewing machine; who left that situation with a great deal of pain, and who lived as a young man from various places but including, at one point as a, as a very young man in a, a house of ill-repute, but where the prostitutes there accepted him as a son and as a savior who they would never diminish but rather contribute to the purchase of a set of encyclopedias for him because they knew that he had a special call on his life.  John Clarke was a young man who wrote a story innocently because as a Sunday School teacher, and as one who grew up in the church, knew that there was no reason that Christ could not be considered, and should not be considered black, and so he wrote a, a, a story about the boy who painted Christ black, and this was first a, a painting that was done as a part of a contest, and when the white superintendent came to find out who painted this picture, and the principal was admonished for letting John submit this picture, John was literally expelled from school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--This is a true story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--This is a very true story.  And he ended up then penning the story of that, and the impact it had on him as a child, in a high school newspaper, and when he got absolutely fed up and hoboed, and quit school, and hoboed to New York [New York], and sought out these two giants he had heard of, Arthur Schomburg, and he went looking for Arthur Schomburg and discovered John [G.] Jackson as well.  One of his early short stories was 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black,' and that story has been told and re-told in multiple languages around the world, and it is a story that has won an Emmy Award for--I'm blocking the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Wesley Snipes?
Speaker 2: No, not Wesley Snipes, no; it was--it'll come to me, but it wasn't Wesley Snipes; he teaches at Howard now--a film--videographer--film producer--director who won an Emmy award for having put that on TV on HBO [Home Box Office, Inc.].  But John's life was one in which, first of all, his absolute integrity was never in question; he always knew who he was, he always had a sense of divine calling, and he would talk about his life as a historian as a divine calling, and as a result of that, his ministry for him was to always be measured by how he treated other people and how he adhered to the voice of truth, and how he refused to compromise his integrity along this walk, in which he was oftentimes sought-after to, to compromise the nature and the quality and the commitments of our struggle as a people.  John was a person who had taken in and supported students who ended up being presidents, and heads of states, and ambassadors, and he was a person who had influenced generations of students as a, as a historian; he was a person who never came across as somebody who thought he was above anyone else.  One of my most special moments with John that I will remember is our walking to go into a restaurant, and he was so beloved in the community of Harlem [New York, New York]; at this time, John had lost his vision by now and he was completely blind, but we got out of a taxi to go into a restaurant, and this homeless man started running toward him.  "Professor, professor, professor, I have a question to ask you about your latest book."  And he asked--this homeless man asked John a question and John said, "Turn to page twenty-two and you will see dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, and let me just explain this to you."  And he treated that man with the same dignity that he would have treated a Cheikh Anta Diop in discussion.  And that was the spirit--that was who John Clarke was, and so it was--he was to me a holy man, a holy man who knew clearly who he was, who had a mission, who had a purpose, and who evidenced that in every breath of his life.
Story_ID: 192103
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a similar mission [to John Henrik Clarke]?  I mean it seems to me that you have done a lot to preserve and to connect people--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --who, you know, about the reconstruction of and regeneration of history and culture in the African American community and in the African community, and the world.  Where does your sense of doing this come from?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it gets back, Larry [Crowe], to understanding as a child, and witnessing the injustices of my people, and witnessing the injustices that I suffered personally, to a call on my life to know that God has given me special gifts and special opportunities, and that I had an obligation to use those gifts and opportunities in ways that would make a difference.  And certainly, I would say that the experience as a woman in her early twenties with an eleven month-old son waking up one morning happy, happily-married, buying into the notion of the American dream, you know, saving for a house, to a widow; understanding what it means to know what's real in life and what's not, what's important and what's not, certainly strengthened my resolve, that I needed to always stay focused on what was important and not the, the, the, the frivolity of life and those things which, you know, will wither with time.  And for me it's very clear; it is about human relationships, it is about building institutions, it is about making a difference and being a voice for justice that will speak for you when you're gone.  And so, as my divine path has taken me from opportunities to work with a [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones to a walk with a John Henrik Clarke, to a woman in the Maasai village, to a community where I can return and have ten mothers at a funeral, to students and generations of students and people who call me even today on Mother's Day, of students who just say to me things that I have forgotten I have done for them, or colleagues, et cetera, et cetera, I know that somehow I've made a difference in the lives of people.  And, yes, I do think that I have an obligation, and I am resolved to continue to make those connections and linkages.  When I started my consulting business in 1979, it started--my business started only because I had a sabbatical from the university [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and the work that I was doing as a historian and as a consultant, I wanted to make sure that my sabbatical life was distinct from that life and there would be no questions, and so I incorporated--it was just that simple; it was not about becoming a business person.  My development of educational software was to address the issue of our children need to know more about who they are, and I was gonna begin with a hand-held toy to teach black history and my brother [William Johnson], who worked for IBM, said, "Why don't you create a software package?"  And I said, "What's software?"  And he told me what software was, and so I immediately changed gears and created a software package to teach African and African American History, and it was in the context of addressing that issue that out of that would be borne not only a consulting business, but later emerge as a computer company in which I sold computers which we integrated computer software, et cetera, et cetera, and I became the first IBM dealer that was owned by an African American woman.  But it was to--not to be an entrepreneur that that happened, but to really be a voice for justice, to be a voice for my people, et cetera, that that emerged.  And so bringing together technology and bringing together history, I was able to use those in some creative ways that has made a difference, and at the time, I didn't realize that I was doing what I was doing for my own purposes, but later, some ten years later, I would find out that I was one of the first three people to ever use the word "multimedia," and that my company was developing multimedia software long before the Internet.  I then became one of the persons asked to help advise the U.S. Department, and I served on the White House Panel for the Development of the National Infrastructure, which we now refer to as the Internet, in terms of advising them how this new thing called the Internet could have implications for enhancing educational delivery for kindergarten through high school.
Story_ID: 192104
Speaker 1: So, my company--when I had to struggle with how, how and what to name it, became a name that speaks to your very question because I decided to name it Nexus Unlimited, and nexus is a word that means connections, and when I thought about what one of my gifts was, it--my gift, in part, is to make connections.  And so I named it Nexus and I asked my oldest son [Christopher Wells] at the time, who was about ten or eleven, to design a logo for me, and he designed a logo in which he connected two pyramids and the connection piece of the pyramids was an X, and so the big X became the Nexus, and so forth.  And so, to your point, yes, a lot of what my life has represented has not been so much being out there in the front, but rather being a conduit and a facilitator and a, a point of connecting people that has made a difference in terms of the larger vision and the larger picture.  I would go on to have this company grow, and to be an entrepreneur; at one point, I had maybe gross revenues of four million dollars, and I had forty people working for me in various projects.  But, indeed, my passion was never to be an entrepreneur; although I was a businessperson, it was, it was growing out of making a difference in terms of what I was doing--using technology for very, very strategic and important purposes, and believing that that could be the case.  One of the projects I did much later on, after this ComputerWorld Smithsonian Award--as well was, for which I got award, it was to develop and implement the educational program that allowed 30,000 school children connect to [HistoryMaker Capt. William] Bill Pinkney as he did his solo circumnavigation around the world.  Bill Pinkney was a black sailor--one of the--only the twenty-seventh person, I believe, to have successfully sailed around the world by himself, solo, and I had school children following him using the technology.  As the computer industry changed, became more competitive; in fact, it became to the point of diminishing returns, it was clear to me that that was not how I wanted to spend the rest of my life chasing contracts around computers.  It turned out that in year 2000, I was awarded an Entrepreneur of the Year, and so in some sense, God said, "You've done that very well, and I'm about to close that door"--
Story_ID: 192105
Speaker 1: That same period, I got a lifetime achievement award at the university [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and it was a way for God to say, "You've done well as an academician and as a teacher, and that door, too, is, is going to be transformed."  I was in personal Bible study, and the voice of God told me that I was to use my talents and gifts and resources, and network to help build a major retreat center; there is no one space where we can have a meeting owned by--in a place that is owned by African Americans for a thousand people.  And so that's my vision--that became my call to ministry, and the voice was so clear because I thought it was the voice of God saying, "You should do this," and I was cool with that because it was like, you know, I can do this, it's a few phone calls; I don't have any money, but I know how to get to people.  It's--you know, probably a seven-year project to bring into fruition, but then this voice had a footnote and the footnote said, "You're not to do this as an educator and you're not to do this as an entrepreneur; I'm calling you into ministry."  And so with the fear of God also in my heart, I ended up coming back home [Evanston, Illinois] that weekend and going to Garrett [Evangelical] Theological Seminary [Evanston, Illinois] where I had a, a colleague on, on faculty, and sat and talked with him, and in a matter of fifteen minutes, he had the dean in the room and they told me that I was admitted to go complete a degree.  And so I ended up deciding that I would get a master's in theological studies, as opposed to a master's of divinity; I was not preparing myself for the pulpit, but rather for the work I felt God was calling me to in terms of social justice ministry.  And so I ended up going to school full-time, working at the university full-time, and running a business, and did a thesis on Pan-African theopraxis, and it essentially is a, a thesis which argues that basic common core values that is indigenous to African sense of God and ontology, what we call African ontology and African principles of religion, have undergirded Christianity, for example, and that those common core values become a ethic around which the world should be transformed, and around which issues of social justice can come to fruition in relationship to the values that we purport, that Jesus has called us to, and all major religions have called us to in terms of do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  That ethic is expressed most recently in the context of South African theology, and in the context of the South African sociology is the concept of Ubuntu, which essentially means that my divinity is only, and my humanity is only as real as is, is manifested through you, and so if I deny you your humanity, I have also denied my own humanity.  And so for me to have met with Bishop [Desmond] Tutu in the context of my work in reparations, to be able to sit and talk to him about reconciliation, and what it means to really have appreciation for this concept of Ubuntu, has been another just, just profound experience that I have had the opportunity to, to testify to.  And all in all, I guess what I'm saying is that through it all, I have been very committed to making these connections to my spiritual self and to my intellectual self, and so my work in the church has always been work that, as a lay person, has allowed me to do ministry as a call.  So I have helped to build ethnic day schools that were a part of church schools, I have been active in the African ministry at my church now, I have been entrusted with resources of the church to develop a computer and satellite technology school in a village in Ghana, I have served as executive director of the Black Theology Project, which was a organization that was founded when there were hardly any blacks at white seminarians, and so it gave birth to a voice for liberation theology in the context of outside the seminary, and now very powerfully in the seminary, it gave birth to womanist theology, which declares that the experiences of women of African ancestry is different than feminist experiences, and it is out of those experiences that connect the African woman spiritually to the African man spiritually, and I'm using African in the larger sense.  And the implications it has for us looking at Ubuntu as the prism in terms of how African men and women treat each other, and it just gave for me a, a broader and a more fuller understanding of who I was so that my call to ministry culminated in me graduating from the seminary with a clear vision that all of this connected--my technology experience, my experiences of sociology, and my commitment to social justice issues, connected to put me on a stage to have moral authority to say what needed to be said about Ubuntu, what it meant--what needed to be said about justice, what needed to be said about white supremacy and racism.  And so I have found a great deal of peace with having come to the point in my life where I consider myself not having any tension between my theology and my sociology, and the technology knowledge that I have to be able to use it for purposes of, of a call for justice.
Story_ID: 192106
Speaker 1: --It was out of all of that that I got engaged in the issue of reparations.  I was asked to, in fact, I just began to want to teach about reparations to my students [at Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] and I developed a lecture on reparations, and some of my colleagues asked me to turn that into information I could share with them, and then that matter of a few months ended up being a workshop for my church; my church took it to the state denomination and we're member of a white denomination in the United Church of Christ.  We are the largest church, and we are the largest black congregation within the denomination; and it ended up being a piece ['The Church and Reparations: An African American Perspective,' by Iva Carruthers] that was then presented at the national meeting, and the National Office on Justice decided they would underwrite the translation of that document into four languages, and it was presented at the United Nations meeting in 2001 against racism [2001 United Nations World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related Intolerance].  And so, again, that's just further affirmation for me and an example of the ways in which my commitment, my experiences as a sociologist, as a historian, and as a theologian, have come together to make a difference, and I, and I say that with a great deal of humility.  When I then had to answer the question for myself, "What do you do with all of this?"  It was clear that--the, the, the Bible talks about people with double consciousness, and you can only have one master and so forth, and so I knew that ultimately, I had to have the courage to shut the door and open new doors and walk through, by faith, to places where I had not been before, or did not know where I was going; and in a sense, I was comfortable with that because years ago, I decided to collect butterflies and so I always had at least one butterfly on, or maybe wearing two or three.  And so I metamorphed, and in that metamorphosis, I realized that my experience as a black theology project, leading delegations to Brazil, and sharing delegations throughout Europe, and my teaching experience in Africa, and so forth, would really position me to, to create this vision of a Orita Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], which is a place--a, a place for healing, a place for renaissance, a place for gathering, where we could talk about our differences and yet come away a more powerful people as a result of that--
Story_ID: 192107
Speaker 1: And what's the name of the foundation [Orita Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Orita, O-R-I-T-A, which is a Yoruba word--
Speaker 1: Okay, meaning--
Speaker 2: Meaning where the paths come together.  And so the vision became clear that what I would do is to shut down the business [Nexus Unlimited], to take early retirement from the university [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and create a sacred space which was a stepping stone to the experience of creating this retreat center.  And I ended up finding a, a distressed property, which is where we sit now, on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], North Kenwood, and I decided I would rehab it, dedicate, and name this, this facility after my mother [Lois Banks Johnson], called Lois House, and it would be a place for gathering--a renaissance, a retreat, a healing center, a place where scholars could come and do research, where they could spend the night with, with minimal cost, where we could have meetings, where we could have gatherings, where we could continue to press with the kind of integrity, with the kind of intellectual stimulation, with the kind of awareness and consciousness that, that we need in order to, to be the people God has called us to be.  And so Lois House is, is the first house that represents that vision.  And between seminary and the bringing to fruition the Orita Foundation, which I'm engaged in building--I, I served as president of Urban Outreach Foundation, which was a thirty-eight year old foundation, whose mission it was, was to provide educational and technical assistance to the African American church community.  And so in that capacity, I have had the opportunity to connect with and expand my world in the theology community, and in the community of churches, to understand how much wealth of, of capacity exist in our churches, and with a little more information which technology can help to use, would make us a different kind of people.
Story_ID: 192108
Speaker 1: It is my sense, when I think about Pan-African theopraxis, that there are a couple of core assumptions that, that I'm dealing with.  One is that praxis is very critical, and praxis means that theology cannot take place in the academy alone, but it must take place in the context of community.  And so the issue of how we respond or don't respond to the AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] pandemic is a theological issue for me; it is a sociological issue, but it is also a theological issue, and it is where those two meet, and particularly as African people, where those two meet, that speaks to Pan-African theopraxis.  In other words, if we are truly believers of Pan-Africanism, those of us, in particular, who sit and who have experienced the belly of the beast, is what I call it, we have survived in a situation where the, the, the, the, the center--the centerpiece of European--Euro-Western technology and control--power and wealth resides.  We have survived that; we have a special call on our lives to stand up and be a voice for justice, to see if we're true Pan-Africanists, to see that our people don't suffer in the ways they have suffered for example, with the AIDS pandemic, where the United States has even provided threats of sanction in order to protect the pharmaceutical interest in this country.  We're about to go to war with Iraq; it's not a war that we ought to be in--this is a war about oil, this is a war about giving continued benefits and entitlement to a few at the expense of the many.  And so I am called to be a voice to raise those kinds of issues and, again, I am, I am quite comfortable understanding that I don't have to choose between my identity as an African or as a Pan-Africanist and my theology as a Christian.
Story_ID: 192109
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes and concerns for the black community, first of all, reside in an extension of what I've just said, which is that we must first of all be hearers of the Word, but we must translate that into being doers of the Word.  My hopes are that we stand up and have the courage to stand up and be a voice against the injustice, and those of us who can afford to do it on behalf of those who can't or don't have access to the information, need to do that.  We have to share our story with our children; to have aborted that story in ways that our children don't even wanna talk about the Maafa, or the, the slavery, and the, the negative experiences that we have had, are going to take us down a path of, of self-destruction because our children don't know who they are.  And so my hopes are that we figure out how to take a generation and to give them what they need in terms of understanding who they are so that they can be committed to doing what they have to do.  Certainly, the AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] pandemic is at the top of the list in terms of the threat to our survival as a people.  When you look at the AIDS statics where entire generations and countries in Africa are being wiped out, where fifteen and twenty years are being taken off of the longevity of populations in Africa, where the fastest growing population of AIDS in this country is among our young people, where the men are, are having to spread the disease through heterosexual relationships and in situations in prisons, et cetera, et cetera.  We are at risk as a people of survival, and so the AIDS pandemic is--has got to be at the top of the list in terms of us speaking up and doing whatever we can.  Regardless of the issue of its cause, at this point, we have to deal with the consequences of it.
Story_ID: 192110
Speaker 1: At this point, you still got a lot of things you wanna do.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What would you consider your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I consider my legacy?  Well, obviously, one always wants to consider their, their family their legacy and, and the, and the future--and the next generation, and to some extent, I hope that I've been a good mother and a role model for my children [Christopher Wells and Darnell Carruthers] in ways that will empower them to move beyond who I am.  I think that a part of my legacy has been able to plant seeds of purpose, seeds of commitment, seeds of dedication, seeds of focus and direction in the lives of many young people so that I'm blessed to be able to--in a way that, that, that Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke is viewed to me to be a mentor to many, many people, and I hope to move forward to continue to do that.  There's a lot of writing in me that I need to do, there's a lot of telling the story that I need to do, and, and for this opportunity right here, I'm very grateful because it is forcing me to, to say and to affirm that I do have some stories to tell that need--needs to be told, so that they become a part of the repository of our story, and so I, I hope that, that my legacy will be a life in which people will see that because I was here, I have made a difference in the lives of other people so that they feel empowered to do that which is right; and because I was here, I will leave a legacy of, of places that have a breath, and become incubators where people can come in sacred and safe spaces and have honest dialogue and feel the spirit of God so that they can be healed, so that they can go back out and fight the fight that needs to be fought.
