Story_ID: 83143
Speaker 1: Good morning.  My name is Samuel Adams with The HistoryMakers.  And I will be your interviewer.  Behind me videoing is Scott Stearns and our founder and president is Ms. Julieanna Richardson.  If you can begin by telling us your name and spelling it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Newton Collier.  N-E-W-T-O-N, C-O-L-L-I-E-R, Junior.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question. It's the 18th of the third month, '02' [2002].
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We are at the Residence Inn.  It's 3900 Sheridan Drive in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Address?
Speaker 2: 3900 Sheridan.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation right now is cab driver.
Story_ID: 83144
Speaker 1: Okay, and we begin, we open up with five questions just to start.
Speaker 2: Go.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I had some grits this morning (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like green and blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Anytime there's a party going on in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I take what I want, and I'm a bad boy.  I go get it.
Story_ID: 83145
Speaker 1: We'd like to start, we always start the interviews by beginning to talk about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And if you can start with your mother, give her name.
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother, her name is Lucille Birdsong Veal.  Collier came in between the two.  And she's born in Macon, Georgia.  Her family comes from Eugene Birdsong and Belinda Birdsong.  They, originally, came from Sparta, Georgia.  They, and my mother came into Macon [Georgia], I would presume, 1914 or something like that.  They moved into the Tindall Heights area, which was called Tindall Field at the time.  And she was going to school at Georgia Baptist College here in Macon to be a teacher.  Somewhere along the line, she met my daddy, and my dad and her got married.  And I'm the end product of that union.  And this is about '45' [1945] I arrived--I guess I'm a War baby.  And things were happening sort of touchy there.  My daddy was a cook at the Dempsey Hotel here so my daddy's name is Newton Collier.  He was a, he was a cook.  And he worked--well, at one time, he did work on the ships.  But he ended up here in Macon, working with the hotel system, the Dempsey Hotel.  He was born actually in Fort Valley, Georgia.  I don't know too much about his side of the family, no more than my grandfather's name was Robert.  And I don't know too much more about that.  He had a sister whose name was Ocie [ph.] Clark, and she--I often wondered why did they have two different names.  But I never questioned it no further than that.  But I understand some things now that I'm older.  And they got married, so we moved into Tindall Heights, 41-B, Tindall Heights is where we stayed until about 1949.  And they moved onto Campbell Avenue, 1596 Campbell Avenue in the Tindall Field area which is outside of Tindall Heights.
Story_ID: 83146
Speaker 1: From there, I guess I lived a normal childhood.  I got into fights every day, I guess and went to B. S. Ingram School and I was about the sixth or seventh grade, I had been playing piano.  I was studying under a lady named Ms. Gladys Williams.  My mother and my aunt always wanted me to have a musical background, I think 'cause it's sort of like in the family.  And so I was studying piano lessons, and I would go every Saturday to Ms. Gladys Williams' house.  And I would just hang out there and listen to the different people and practice my music there.  And we saw the Glenda Good.  She was a jazz musician.  She actually was Macon's first female bandleader that I knew of.  And there would be coming through like Little Richard, Pearl Bailey, Sammy Davis, Jr., she knew.  And so, sure at the time, you stay there long enough, you'll see somebody.  So I was sort of impressed at seeing the different stars come through.  Her son was named Earl Jackson.  He was a actor.  And he used to play in "Porgy & Bess".  He was, in fact, he was in the first touring group that went to Russia.  And Earl used to bring all these fabulous people by and I'm, and I'm impressionable.  I'm taking all this in.  I'm seeing all these entertainers as I said, and I'm still a little kid.  And so I'm saying, gee, this is what I wanna do.  And when Sammy Davis, Jr. used to come through, he used to bring a trumpet with him.  And he'll practice every--he'll play things on a horn and piano.  And so I that's actually where I got the concept of actually wanting to play a trumpet.  I was listening to something he was doing, and it sort of hit me.  I said, wow, that's interesting.  So I told my mother, and they went down to B. F. Music and soaked, soaked something got the money to get me a trumpet.  And so I started practicing trumpet.  And I was studying under a man named Robert Scott.  He was a band director at Della Hudson High School at the time.  He was just new, and they were studying actually at the Booker T. Washington Assembly Hall in the after-school program.  And that's how I learned to actually play trumpet through that system.  It was also, another teacher there, name was Stroud, Wilbur Stroud.  He was one of my early teachers.  He, he's the one that sort of helped form me into jazz structure 'cause he played jazz.  And in the neighborhood, there was a guy named Roy Mathis and Clarence Mathis.  They were jazz musicians.  And so I switched going from one place to get my hair cut to another place 'cause I can go up there, and I could stay there, and I could hear them play 'cause they would actually--Clarence, in between haircuts, would set up and play his guitar.  And I would just listen to how his, he--how his playing was.  And he'll put on an album and tell me what they're doing and show me different chords on the guitar.  But I wasn't interested in that.  I was interested more in the trumpet, see.  But either way, I learned to hear.  I learned the good basics.  He was actually my theory teacher without me knowing he was teaching me theory.  And he taught me how to count music.  So when I went back to my regular class with Mr. Scott, I was sort of like elevated a little more.  He used to look at me and wonder (laughter) where did I learn that from so quick.  And I would tell him, Clarence and them--he said, oh, okay.  Then so he sort of pushed me a little more.  That's when he introduced me to--well, I knew his brother, Charles, who was a trumpet player.  So I started hanging around with Charles and watching Charles play.  And Robert was--the Scott boys, all of 'em are great musicians.  And Robert is actually the teaching part of the family, where Charles was the one that was actually the executioner.  He could actually play stuff.  Scott could--Robert could play too, but Charles was the one that actually pushed the playing.  Mr. Scott--and that's how you can tell--got my basis on that, that level.  I just kept practicing over a period of time, doing stuff like that.
Story_ID: 83147
Speaker 1: Going back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to childhood, your mother's mother was Eugene Birdsong.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you know her well or did she tell you any stories about her?
Speaker 2: I knew her as grandmother, and she passed when I was about fifteen or sixteen.  I remember we used to go to Sparta, Georgia, and we would go out to what was called the, their plantation, which was a little house in an area called Granite Hill.  I found out why Granite Hill was all rocks (laughter), like, it was really (laughter), really, you didn't have no green grass out there with the rocks.  It was a rock quarry down at the other end too.  And that's the first time I saw live animals for real, just like pigs and chickens and that was the works down there.  And they had their hogs and had a little house in the back with all the meat hanging up in it.  I had never seen that type stuff before.  I think I saw a possum or two, but I didn't know what--there were things hanging back there, I didn't wanna know what they were (laughter).  They just didn't look like they was supposed to be eaten (laughter).  But I remember we always brought meat back and vegetables and everything and went down with empty bags and brought back a whole lot of stuff.  And I got to know a lot of people in the area, being a little kid 'cause they sort of like introduced me around to a lot of my cousins and things down in that area.
Speaker 1: So what kind of woman was your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Sort of hard, easy going--she was mean to a lot of people, but it wasn't mean to me.  She was just stern and she kept me sort of focused quite a bit.
Speaker 1: And your father's grand--mother, did you know her?
Speaker 2: No, I--I think her name actually, was actually Flora Nelson.  But that's what was on the death certificate.  Now, where these other names came from, I don't know.  But I didn't know her too well.  I didn't get--she lived in Perry, and I didn't know too much about her.  I just knew that early in life I did see her a couple of times.  And I was always really glad to see her.  But to spend time to know her, I never did get to know that side of the family.
Story_ID: 83148
Speaker 1: What type of relationship did you have with your mom [Lucille Birdsong Veal]?
Speaker 2: Oh, real tight, really good, very good.  And my mother was very supportive of me being a musician.  In fact, she would take me to the gigs.  And I didn't want her to take me.  I'm getting to be a, you know, I might wanna talk to a girl, and I don't want them to see that I'm getting in the car with my mama, you know.  But that's the way it was.  I had to bite the bullet or not go.  So I bought the, bought the bullet and went on.  She always behind me and when I went off to school, she's one of the ones that sort of pushed me into--her and her sister, which is my aunt now, they were right behind me all the way.
Speaker 1: How did that relationship grow so close, you and your mother?
Speaker 2: How did it grow closer?
Speaker 1: How'd you two become so close?
Speaker 2: I really don't, just, just by being there, I guess, and we just, just real close.  And even, like she was a school teacher and I remember days when she would teach at Bessick Hale [ph.] which is out near the airport.   And there'd be days, I'd be out of school.  And I likes to go to school and hang out with my mama at the school.  And she, when she wasn't doing that, she would just--we were just--we just grew like--she wasn't, to me she wasn't really a mother.  She was like a big sister and my aunt was more my mother.  It sort of--I know it sounds a little backwards, but that's the way the relationship sort of went around that.
Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: My aunt's name is Carrie Birdsong.
Story_ID: 83149
Speaker 1: And what type of relationship did you have with your father [Newton Collier, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Okay, I really didn't know--up until about six or seven years old, I can't remember too much about him being around.  You--he sort of moved around from what I can gather.  And when I tried to get to know him, he was out of the place.  I couldn't keep up with him, and I only saw him maybe every two or three years.  And it was up until maybe two years before he died that I really started, got a good, close relationship with him.
Speaker 1: Your siblings?
Speaker 2: Okay, my brothers and sisters.  Maurice Veal is a couple years old--younger than me.  William Veal just passed away, and then Linda Veal are my brothers and sisters.  Okay, we all got along good.  There's a lot of stories about the rug rats following me to gigs.  Well, there's about four or five years difference between me and them.  And their friends became my friends.  My friends became their friends.  And it would be like if a, like in high school, I remember they used to follow me to the games and you have to understand, three little kids, what 10, well, 11, 12, 13 years old, two boys and one girl.  They would come to the football game and had to find their way in.  And they were always--I didn't want them hanging on me, but every time I turned around, there they were.  And so we were actually all close.
Speaker 1: And that is, they are the children of your stepfather?
Speaker 2: No, these are the children--that's my mother and stepfather.
Speaker 1: What was your stepfather, his name?
Speaker 2: His name was W. C. Veal, and I was actually raised as a Veal, and I was accepted off the bat.  I mean I was, it was no problem.  I just fit right in with the whole--in fact, a lot of times now, a lot of the Veal's probably don't, probably erased the Collier part out my name 'cause they just always say hey, "Big Veal" or something like that.  And that's just like, there's a lot of closeness there.
Speaker 1: So was he a father figure to you?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  He was a father figure to me.
Speaker 1: And how was that relationship?
Speaker 2: It was good.  He worked in the coal mines in--well, the chalk mine system and Dry Branch (unclear).  And he, he's the one that taught me how to drive and when I did get up old enough, he let me drive his car.  Now, if he was there, he sort of like hung out with me, and I could hang out with him.  Then he introduced me to all his brothers and all their kids.  And I had a whole family, which I could draw on as a supportive unit in doing my little thing.  And when I used to go to the gigs, I used to love to see all my cousins and all of 'em.  They'd be hanging out with me, and that, you know, it's just a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Did that make you, kind of replace the relationship you didn't have with your father?
Speaker 2: Right, that's what it really did.  It was a replacement for everything.
Speaker 1: And could you spell the name of your stepdad, the first and middle name?
Speaker 2: His name was William Codus Veal, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, C-O-D-U-S, V-E-A-L.
Story_ID: 83150
Speaker 1: And what was the community of Macon [Georgia] like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's interesting, segregated time.  We lived in a upscale, downscale.  We lived in what was probably the first condos in Macon (laughter).  In '45' [1945], they were projects really.  And we didn't know no better.  They were built in '44 [1944], '43 [1943], somewhere along in there, and we moved in--they were still brand new.  We had a lot of--our area of town, like across the street from us lived a doctor, school teachers and people that had little businesses.  We had Elizabeth Street which was restaurants and little rooming house type situations up there.  There was a barbershop, two or three eating joints, a pool room.  All this was on Elizabeth Street in Tindall Heights.  So it was a community within a community.  We had a couple of outside reach, outreach stores on the different corners as they say.  And like, one of 'em was Bell Store and the other one was Genell (ph.) Store.  Then we had Saul's Meat Market and, you know, typical little outlets and stores like that.  They had a bakery that wasn't too far, so we had fresh bread.  And you could smell it early in the morning.  And we'd get the milk from about three miles away.  A guy would come by every day, so we had fresh (unclear).  Interesting, had our own little city within a city right there in the Tindall Height area.
Speaker 1: What was your first--what's your earliest childhood memory of Macon?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Oh, Christmas, going downtown, seeing the lights in the buildings and seeing how pretty they were and listening to the Christmas music.  And something that stuck in my mind through the years was they would, every year they would play "Bugler's Holiday" by Leroy Anderson which is an upscale, it's a very fast-paced trumpet, trumpeting thing.  And every year, they would play this.  It's written by a man named Leroy Anderson.  And I would--being a trumpet player, I just specially stand in front of Davidson's and watch the little thing go around and just listening to this song being played.  And I just, that's what I remember most, and then go to Neal's which was basically across the street, down the street on Cherry Street, and watching the life-size mannequins move around and you--and I still had my mind on this song that I had heard.  Years later I learned to play the song, but it was just one of those, one of those things I just remembered that type of thing.
Speaker 1: The area of Macon, what were the strong community ties in Macon [Georgia, the schools, the churches, what were the--
Speaker 2: Okay, Macon is a bible-belt type city.  It have over 300-and some odd churches in there, in here now and probably a hundred thousand population.  So any given Sunday, there's nobody on the streets 'cause they all go to church.  And the church is a very vocal and strong point of the city.  It's the pillar of the city, strong points.  Strong point when we had some nice ministers and strong civic leaders, and we had a couple, a couple of them really stepped out over others like Neal Randall and I remember Reverend Renier (ph.), Reverend Bussy who was my pastor.  They were very supportive in educating young kids and keeping 'em focused, and they had a system where a lot of the older people knew each other.  And if you got out of line going down--if you were three blocks away and got out of line, before you got back home, they knew something, they knew what had--what you had done.  So I remember a couple times, we, we had been out of line and get back home.  And we'll come on in, and sometimes my aunt would be showing one of them faces for (unclear).  They wouldn't us question us.  They would just see what our expression would be, I think.  And so they ease in and then all of a sudden they'll come up with, "What you doing?"  "What was this all about?"  And you get caught off guard and say, what you mean?  And she'd say, "Now, tell me what was happening?"  So I said, well, so I had to tell it.  Now, in my mind, I said, how did they know that (laughter), you know, that type thing?  Then I'd say, after a while, you hear the telephone ring.  Yeah, I got him.  What you mean?  No, I'm not gon' kill him, but I (laughter).  And so you knew--I said, oh, yeah, if I only could cut that line when I do something wrong, I'd be in good shape (laughter).  But we never tried that in reality though, but that's how they, they kept up.
Story_ID: 83151
Speaker 1: So what type of child were you would you say?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: For me?
Speaker 1: When you were a child?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, average, grew up normal, had spinal meningitis when I was a baby, so that limited me to doing a lot of, a lot of activities.  But I overcame that.  It was really, it was interesting.  I was about--I didn't walk till about four or five years old.  But when I got to be about nine or ten, it went away.  I mean it was--they had me on penicillin for a long time, used to have to take spinal taps and things like that.  Oh, that hurt.  But when I was about ten years old, I had a seizure, I think, somebody told me I had a seizure.  And they thought they were gonna lose me.  And after that, that was it.  I have, have no effects on it.  But now that I'm getting older, I just have arthritis (laughter), which I didn't know.  I don't know the difference between arthritis and having anything else and just old pain, and getting old.  That's all.
Speaker 1: So when you had spinal meningitis, how did they take you around places?  How did they, how were you transported?
Speaker 2: That might be the reason--well, my mother and them used to carry me around a little bit.  They actually physically carried me around.  There was a man in the neighborhood--and my stepdaddy did a lot of it.  He helped me out, he carried, helped carried me around.  And there was another man I always remember Mr. Simmons. He was a church member also.  And he used to, I used to ride on his back a lot of times, and get me around a lot like that.
Speaker 1: So your mother had to nurse you a great deal while you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --coming up?
Story_ID: 83152
Speaker 1: While you're in school, what type of student and what type of child were you then, like studious, mischievous?
Speaker 2: Both, I was both.  I, I can remember doing things to be part of the gang as they say.  It was just mischievous little things like, one was like, break the pencil off in the pencil sharpener and see if you can take, see who can break it out.  I knew how to get it out.  We gonna see if anybody else could do it.  That was just something to do.  And I'd get chastised for that, so I took my punishment and said, oh, well, let's take care of that, won't do that no more.  But, now, as far as the student's concerned, I think I was an average student.  I excelled in a few things, like in Arts and Music and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 83153
Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Lucille Birdsong Veal] was a musician and your father [Newton Collier, Sr.] was a musician?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How'd that--what type of influence did that have on you in the household?  What type of household was it?
Speaker 2: Okay, my stepfather wasn't actually a musician.  He, but my daddy was a musician.  And I think I took his genes as far as that's concerned.  I never knew too much about his musical, but I knew people that had told me about his stuff.  And they told me that I was growing up just like my daddy.  And my mother was, helped me out quite a bit with the music.  She would only show me so much, and then she'll make me figure it out for myself.  That was, that was good 'cause that made me wanna do it better.  And sometimes I'd be practicing the piano and she a be in the other room, she a holler out, "Remember your chords" (laughter).  And I'd go back and say, "Yes, ma'am" and go back and--she'd say, "Oh, that sound better" (laughter), you know, that type stuff.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first introduction to music, the first time you were aware of music and that you really liked this?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was listening to WIBB Radio.  I think it was WIBB.  They had just turned all-black radio station a couple years earlier.  And I was listening to some songs and by me playing the piano a little bit, I was forming an "E" upper chord structure.  And I wanted to--and I used to listen to it, and sit down at the piano and try to anticipate when the next notes were gonna be coming from.  And I was getting a lot of 'em right at the time.  And it was just interesting.  I just started, I would amuse myself and try to memorize where these different songs were, and trying to play these songs on piano.  And then about 1957, "What I say?" came out by Ray Charles.  And soon as I heard it, I knew the note, by me practicing, I could hear the notes.  And it was in a key that I could relate to, so I remember, I remember going over to my aunt's house, running to my aunt's house and sitting, and actually started to play the song from what I had heard on the radio.  And the next time I heard it, we had a--we had bought a record player and jukebox, I went--and I think that was my first album I ever bought too, is the live Atlanta session with Ray Charles, who was inducted--who was the first inductee in the Georgia Music Hall of Fame.  And that was done in Herndon Stadium in 1957.  I went to school with Morris Brown, (unclear) Herndon Stadium.  So I, it's just coincidence all this stuff happened to relate to each other.  And I sat there, and I sat there, and I practiced that song so well that basically, no other song in my mind outside of "Bugler's Holiday" at the time, I knew (laughter).  I just knew that one song.  So I was, every time somebody come by my house, I'll play that one song for them and get up and say "that's it" (laughter) and don't ask me to do anything else (laughter).  And so eventually, I just start picking up other songs.  Then I found out how--well, Mr. Scott helped me out too.  He showed me how I actually figure the song out, and he told me that was good.  And then he started, started giving me some advanced courses in structures of songs and that's when I got into studying like the different idioms of music, like the different scales, the Dorian scales, the Alex scale, the Rating scales, all these different type patterns of scales.  That's good for ear training.  And also, if you--after I got on the road, if you're standing up there playing, and someone's playing in another key, it's important to know all this kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 83154
Speaker 1: So, in your school, in your elementary school, were there any teachers that had an influence on you while you were there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay, one teacher I remember most is Ms. Johnnie Riggins.  She was my fifth grade teacher.  She, she pushed all the kids as far as grammar school things, but she also sort of focused on us--she was the first one that sort of branched us out into the Arts.  And I remember the, remember her doing that.  She was the one that really pushed me into the Arts.
Speaker 1: And in any other area of school?
Speaker 2: In high school, I still had Mr. Scott as my band director.  He was probably most influential.  And Ms. Delores Cook was my--and a man named Robert Washington, who was my history teacher.  He was very influential in helping me.  Mr. Kellem (ph.), A. C. Kellem, he (unclear) in a lot of things.
Speaker 1: And what did these teachers do for you, as like, either as a mentor or influence?  How did they work with you--(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Mr. Kellem had a way of just--he had a down-to-earth way of just getting the people, and we could just talk, one-on-one.  He was like a big brother to all of us, really.  If you had a problem or something, you could just catch him and just go walking and--well, you hash out what it is.  And everybody respected his authority.  The same with Mr. Washington.  They were those type people.
Story_ID: 83155
Speaker 1: You had spinal meningitis as a child.  How did that affect you in, not only with your music, but actually seeing other kids outside playing and not being able to go out and interact and things like that?
Speaker 2: Mentally, I imagine it worried me quite a bit, not being able to play.  But with my, the support I had in the family, they had--I had Erector sets, Log Cabin sets and you name it.  In fact, I still have some of those toys now, the childhood toys.  And I had the old Howdy Doody doll, you know, he just sat around, and--had a lot of stuff to--and sometimes, there were kids who actually came to the house, and I'd be able to play like that.
Speaker 1: And how it affected you musically?
Speaker 2: Okay, musically, it was no music, I don't think because I didn't, I just couldn't do certain things.  I probably could sit there and play on the piano, but it was not, it was nothing effective.
Speaker 1: And this made--this had to have made you and your mother closer.  She pretty much had to have just been there with you--
Speaker 2: I had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --24 hours a day with you.  Explain--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, she had to work, but she was there.  She had to work, but she was there with me.  And that's where my stepfather stepped in when she was at--had supported me (unclear).
Speaker 1: And were there quality treatments at that time for you or--
Speaker 2: As far as I know, I was taking penicillin, and they were doing spinal taps, and there were therapy exercises on my legs and different parts of my body, that type thing.
Speaker 1: And as you're getting older, your childhood friends, tell us who your childhood friends are as a little--as a young man?
Speaker 2: Right, okay, one of my friends I always refer back to is Timothy Flemming, the minister and his brother, Hiawatha Flemming.  So Hiawatha had the dubious notion of being my Indian man.  He was my Indian boy.  And we used to play little Indian games, and it would be like, I would be on the front, and he'll do the running around for me.  And I would direct them at what to do and little games like that.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other friends as you were like a child there?
Speaker 2: Right, I remember Sidney, a guy named Sidney.  And there was another guy named Frank Middlebrooks, and Arthur Boyd.  We all were, we grew up together, and they remember me from Day One and the Evans family, Willie Allen Evans, Billie Evans and all them.  We all grew up as a little unit, a close, little knit unit right around the Tindall Height area.
Story_ID: 83156
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Scott, Robert Scott--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're in high school.  And Mr. Robert Scott throughout the years has had a really--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --great influence upon your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --musical career.  Talk about Mr. Scott.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was--musically, Mr. Scott was right there my whole music career as far as coming through grammar school and high school.  And he was, he--especially, with the after-school program over at Booker T. Washington Center.  That's where he would really get down and teach us a lot of different formations of, actual formations of music.  And I learned a lot of theory under him also.
Story_ID: 83157
Speaker 1: Now, he and Gladys Williams--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were the ones--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They're the ones that got me started.
Speaker 1: Start with your trumpet.  Talk about that.
Speaker 2: Okay, starting with my trumpet, you talking about how did I start playing trumpet?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, starting playing trumpet was interesting.  I asked Mr. [Robert] Scott, told him I wanted to play in the high school band, and I wanted to play trumpet.  So he started me out with the basic trumpets, and I would practice and do the regular thing.  So about the 10th grade, beside--I was in the band.  We had started going to the Air Force Base to do band clinics.  I met this trumpet player out there.  His name was Sammy Coleman.  He was from Texas, I think Lubbock, Texas.  And he was, he was--to me he was great.  And he could play.  And plus, he was close to my age.  And I was looking at this.  I'm saying, now how in the heck did he get the lips to do this.  I, I had lips too, but he had great lips (laughter) and, and so, one day, I just saw--I saw him coming through Tindall Heights.  I didn't know he lived that close to me.  He was married to a lady that lived two blocks from me, and I didn't know this.  I had never approached him before.  So I walked up to him and told him, and he said he remembered me.  And so he sort of adopted me and I saw the, start--he was playing in a local club called the "Two Slide" which was owned by an old man named Clint Brantley, who was James Brown and Little Richard's manager.  And I started going down to the club.  I'm still in high school, so I started hanging out in the club.  How far is this video going?  Will my aunt see this (laughter) (unclear).  And so, it was like, I was in no man's land.  And you have to understand I grew up in the church, so I had some problems going in there anyway.  So I'd sneak out and get in there.  And so they--I think my mother and my aunt knew what time of day it was.  They just, they monitored me to see what, was I gonna be drinking or not.  And I found out Clint was calling them (laughter) to tell them about--I didn't know that, but Clint was telling them, "No, he's not drinking.  I'm making sure of that."  So here I am there.  Now, I'm with the--I see like James Brown's musicians, Little Richard's musicians.  And I remember the "Midnighters" would come through.  The Motown Review came through one time.  That was an experience for me.  It came through--Dick Scott was a man from Macon.  He worked and was managing the "Supremes" at the time.  He was a band director at Della Hudson High School, and also before Robert Scott.  I don't they're any relation.  If so, it might be a cousin.  And it was interesting.  I was there when the Motown Review played the City Auditorium.  They tore it up.  And then afterwards, they all came to see Clint at the club.  Of course, I was in.  So I had seen Toby Campbell and all those guys playing.  So I sat there patiently on the bar.  And I watched those guys perform, and I was just--that made me wanna go on the road.  That made me wanna do what they wanted to do.  I wanted, I wanted in, but I knew it wasn't time for me to be in.  So I had told Clint, you know, and Coleman told me also, you know, to "Keep playing, man.  You got to, you can't do that, man.  You're not ready for that."  Well, heck, I thought I was until I heard those guys.  And I say, I understand I can't, (laughter) I can't really--oh, I can't play like that (laughter).  Those guys had been playing five or six hours on trumpet, and, you know, they played that regular show 8:00 to 12:00 or whatever time it was.  And then they was at the club.  At 1:00 o'clock, they were still going strong.  My lips would have been rubber.  I'd a been somewhere trying to get my, get my breath and my lips back.  And there they was going strong like nothing was happening.  So I, that sort of taught the message.  And not quite time.  Maybe I need to put more time into this.  And so I did.  So I stuck with, stuck with Coleman like white on rice then.  And he got me back into the theory, bugging me, and Mr. Scott had also given me all (unclear) Arban's Conservatory Method Book.  That's what we were studying under, and so Coleman knew the book by heart.  He (unclear), basic practice book for trumpet players.  So we would--my time out from high school band, I was sitting with Coleman.  And he'll teach me what he was doing in the night clubs.  So eventually, I had this repertoire of songs that was building up over a period of time, that I was learning.
Story_ID: 83158
Speaker 1: And I was learning the way the guys in the band were so that became a--I don't remember exactly when, but there came a time where I started playing in Clint's band.  Clint [Brantley] told me, go on up there and play.  So I just went on up there--'cause, you know, for a long time, I'd take my horn and never got a chance to use it.  Hey, man, it's getting to be embarrassing.  So I just, I wouldn't take my horn a lot of times because, you know, I wasn't gon' play, just sit there and listen.  So I eventually got a chance to play.  And it was with [Sammy] Coleman.  I was standing next to him playing and Shang-A-Lang was another guy that was--his name is Harold Smith.  He had played with Little Richard and Otis [Redding] and a lot of the bands in the old days.  So they let me.  I don't know whether I goofed up or not 'cause I mentally focused out.  I remember the first solo that they had--it was "Watermelon Man", and Shane walked over and said, "You gotta take the solo after the next four bars."  Out the clear blue sky, he just told me that.  And I said, "solo".  I think I might have missed two notes coming down 'cause I was trying to say "uh-oh" (laughter), what I'm gonna do?  (Laughter).  And the first solo I ever took, it always sticks in my mind.  If Coleman hadn't told me, he said, "Play half tones until you feel the key and then play 8th and 16 notes when you feel the other part."  So I think the song was going in four-four time, and I was in some elongated time.  It sounded like a drone going on.  And Mr. Shane looked at me and saw the smile and Coleman was just--they just burst out and started laughing.  And, well, that--I think that's the beginning of the time I really learned how to sweat on stage.  I was sweating.  I sweated that whole solo out.  But I got through.  And I got through with the song, and Shane said, "Well, you gon' take the next solo.  Coleman wanna help you at home (unclear).  I looked at him (laughter), I looked, "What you mean, going home? You gon' leave me--in my mind, I said, you gon' leave me out here to swim now?"  (Laughter) But that's what they did.  They left me out there. Coleman went over to the bar, and here I'm standing up there.  And in reality, I just wanted to just walk on behind him, but I said, nah, let me stay here.  And I stayed there, and that's when I found out I was ready.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the club?
Speaker 1: It's called the "Two Spot."
Story_ID: 83159
Speaker 1: Now, you named another person who's, played a vital role in your musical career.  It was Gladys Williams when you were a child or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Talk about that.
Speaker 2: Okay, Ms. Gladys Williams probably was Macon's [Georgia] serious, female bandleader.  And she played--well, years before, she came from, she graduated from Hampton Institute in Music and music major.  She knew her stuff.  She was a boogie woogie piano player by weekends, and the church organist by Sunday.  And she would play exclusively fraternities and sororities and parties like that.  And I remember one time, I went over, I went on a gig with her, and it was like a supper club type setting.  They were sitting, and they were eating.  I'm expecting to see people up dancing.  I didn't know no better.  So they wasn't dancing or anything.  I'm just saying to myself, we not getting over.  They're not enjoying, eating and talking and everything.  I didn't know this what they supposed to do.  And so I told Ms. Gladys, I said, why they not dancing?  She said something to the effect like, wait a minute.  You'll see.  Then she turned around and said, "Roll Out the Barrel".  "Roll Out the Barrel"?  Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, [humming the tune], and that's the song she's talking about.  So she stopped playing all this beautiful evening music and started to play "Roll Out the Barrow".  Everybody in the place dropped their forks and spoons, got up and started dancing.  I'm standing there looking.  She said, "See, they dance".  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: How old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: About 16, 15, 16 years old.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you met her?
Speaker 2: Ooh, I must have been--I mean she's a family friend.  So she knew me before I knew her.
Speaker 1: So she started tutoring you in music, her giving you, your first lessons, like how old were you?
Speaker 2: Ooh, nine, 10, 11 years old, something along in there.
Speaker 1: And talk about those early childhood lessons she gave you.
Speaker 2: Okay, I can't remember too much about 'em.  I just know they were boring (laughter).  I was just sitting there, dah, dah, dah [imitating musical notes]--I mean those are not the good times in learning to play music.  And getting the coord--I had problems, even today I still have problems in coordinating my left hand with my right hand.  I can read it, but I can't coordinate it as fast as I should.  That might have to do with the meningitis and all that.  But she would take time and work with me to get the coordination.  She knew all about that.  She used to make me do a lot of finger exercises back and forth, and that little trick.  See, like that.  I'm supposed to be able to do that naturally.  But I can't, and as our little thing, she used to have me doing like squeezing the rubber ball so many times this way, squeeze it that way.  Now, just do that, she said, just (unclear) just hit the table sound like a drummer.  She would have me doing all that kind of stuff.  So eventually, I was able to make chords and pass, pass with left hand and actually do things with my right hand.  But she's the one that actually got me going doing that.  And my mother and my aunt helped me out at home.  They would see what she was doing, and I guess they were talking over the telephone how he'd do that (unclear).  And they go that Internet system is a free Internet.  They was telling me, and she would--I'd come back the next week or so, and she'd say, "Oh, yeah, you been practicing.  You've been doing what I told you."  I said, "Yes, ma'am".
Story_ID: 83160
Speaker 1: So thinking back to your childhood at that age--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what are the sights, sounds and smells that remind you of that Tindall Heights?
Speaker 2: Okay, they had a box factory that was not far from there.  And it emitted some of the stinkiness odors (laughter) in the world.   And down below us was a swamp.  It wasn't really a swamp.  It was a branch.  It was a run-off of Mercy University, and you'd see the largest mosquitoes in the world during the summer.  And you could actually catch 'em, just like grabbing.  And at night, you had these white nets, and those are some of things that--and you take rags and take 'em out in the yard and just burn 'em.  And they keep the smoke--the smoke would keep the gnats away.  It was just, ooh, it was, it was beautiful times though 'cause really as kids, you can experiment with  playing around--we would create a lot of little games and sit around.  And that's during the time, Johnny Jenkins and the Pinetoppers had just started getting into music.  Now, I imagine this is about '55' [1955], '56' [1956].  And they were practicing across the street from my aunt's house.  And I could hear them practicing.  But I couldn't go over there 'cause I was a little kid down (unclear).  There were grown folk over there (unclear).  So I used to sit on the porch and listen to 'em and wishful thinking.  And sometimes I'd go and I could hear them playing, and I'd go into the piano in the room.  And I'll be picking around, trying to see where were they.  And I'd stumble on a couple of notes here and there, (unclear).  What's that they doing?  I'd run back out on the front porch.  And I'd run back in, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.  You know, that's what they did.  And I remember this stuff.  I mean, a guy told me I had a steel trap up that I could remember a lot of things.  I said, well, I'm glad because when it came to--a lot of stuff wasn't written they were doing.  It was stuff they had heard on the radio.  And you can get the records at the time too.  So I would go and get the records and I'd practice.  So I ended up in the house, building my repertoire of what they were playing by buying the records.  So I could play what they played over a period of time.
Speaker 1: So you could play by ear and read music?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 83161
Speaker 1: So, tell us about your, the first time you picked up the trumpet, and whose trumpet that was?
Speaker 2: The first trumpet I ever pick up was Sammy Davis, Jr.'s trumpet.  He was over at Ms. Gladys Williams' house, and I had come in for my little weekly hour of music.  And he was there.  And I was impressed to seem him, you know, hey, big time.  So he had his trumpet there.  He was, him and Ms. Gladys was doing something, and they were just scatting around, playing around.  He was just playing with her--they were playing some music.  And I asked him, how to do it?  And he looked at me.  I guess he said, who was this?  So he just showed me a couple of notes and I blew into the horn a couple of times.  And I made some sounds.  And he said, that's good.  You ought to get you one.  And that's what I went and begged my mother for.
Speaker 1: So that's what made you interested in playing the trumpet?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 83162
Speaker 1: And your other childhood friend, Mr. Redding?
Speaker 2: Okay, Otis Redding, okay, Otis was older than me.  He grew up in the same Tindall Heights projects.  I didn't get to know Otis, to meet Otis, the singer--well, I knew of him.  And it was, and he was passing through Ms. Gladys Williams, and I--he must have been, we must have been--he was a teenager, about fifteen or sixteen.  I remember seeing him, and I remember his name being Otis Redding, and he was--he always said, I'm gonna be a singer.  And I remember that he used to say, "Well, I'm going down to the Douglas theater or the Wright's Theater, one of the two, and be on a talent show.  But even before that, in Tindall Heights, they have what was called, "Trash can stations".  And they were cemented in.  They would be about 10 feet, maybe eight, ten feet.  And you'd put maybe five or six trash cans in the dumps just where you would pick 'em up from.  They were just like cement forms in a "L" shape.  And a lot of the older guys a set down on that, and they'll do doo whop and sing.  And by me being young, I couldn't hang with the older boys too much, but I can recall coming by and seeing Otis [Redding] and a couple more of the guys out on those trash can things, doing that, you know, that type singing.  And I used to slow down.  They'll let me stand there a while, and then they sort of look at me real hard, and I'd say, oh, I think I'm wearing out welcome (laughter), get my little butt on home or something like that.  And I would leave and they'll look at me walking.  And I remember a guy named Leon Sinofsky (ph.) (unclear).  He always, every time I leave, he always sort of lean to the side and look down there and see where I was going.  And I wave back to him, and he'll let me know.  He'll wave back.  He just, shake his head and then laugh 'cause they knew I had to go home.
Story_ID: 83163
Speaker 1: So, but when you're about to graduate [from] Ballard High School--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what decision did you have to make about music and college?
Speaker 2: Okay, when I came out of high school, one of the things, one of the decision I had to make, I wanted to go to college.  So I went to Morris Brown [College], but before I got to Morris Brown, that same year, I was asked to join and hang out, more or less be an indirect roadie for Otis Redding's band.  So, oh, man, this is a, this is something--I'm getting ready to, have a chance to go to school.  And I have a chance to do something I always wanted to do.  So I went to school.  And all during the time, I had my mind set on just being with Otis Redding type thing, and when they would come up to Atlanta [Georgia] or anything like that, I would be the first one down with my horn, might get a chance to play with 'em or stuff like that.  And I went a year at Morris Brown, and I decided I would go on and fulfill my music career.  That's what I did.  I went and came back, around Macon [Georgia]--I came back and started playing with a band called "Oscar Black and the Pinetoppers", who I had been playing with earlier through Clint and them, started traveling around like Vidalia and down in South Georgia, and played Lyons, Georgia, Savannah, Albany.  We'd go down to Florida, over to Alabama, different colleges doing the chittling circuit, really.  And I really start developing my horn chops really then.  I had been to college.  I had heard some things, and I really started developing very, very, very serious stuff.
Story_ID: 83164
Speaker 1: And we were playing at the National Armory here in Macon [Georgia], National Guard Armory.  And Oscar Black and Johnny Jenkins was the star of the show. But there was another band from Augusta called (unclear) Leroy Lloyd and the Swinging Dukes.  And this is the beginning of Phil Waldon and them, but I think Phil Waldon had booked--it was fraternity-type thing.  And I think Phil Waldon (unclear) booked the show.  I played, and I'm the only trumpet player.  They brought a nine or 10-piece band (laughter) from Augusta.  I don't recall us, our playing them.  I think the crowd was with us because we were home.  But they played jazz and R and B.  I mean they were a full-rounded band.  We only played one style, and afterwards we were getting ready to leave, one of the guys--I think it was a guy Marion Sanders, Tim.  We called him Tim Sanders, I think him and Leroy sort of approached and asked me if I wanna come to Augusta to play with them.  And after hearing what they were doing, yes.  They said, this is not all the band.  We have a couple more band members.  I'm saying to myself, I just saw an army.  You know, how many more could it be?  He said, it--then he started explaining, a lot of the guys were in the military.  They couldn't come on this particular gig.  He just brought a skeleton crew.  And he wanted me to meet a couple of the saxophone players.  I didn't know who he was talking about, anything like that.  So I went to Augusta.  I got the royal treatment.  It was nice, and we were working behind Lagenia (ph.) Brooks, and a guy named Mickey Murray.  And we were playing at a club called the Amvets Club, five or six nights a week.  And on the weekends they'd go out of town to play different gigs.  That's how they ended up in Macon, doing that.
Story_ID: 83165
Speaker 1: And so I'm waiting on this rival, this one guy one night.  I'd been there about a week or so.  And they said, he's back.  They said, he's back.  He kept saying, Tim said, Tim kept telling me, George Cook was the drummer.  And so George kept telling me also, "Man, this guy is fabulous.  You got to hear this guy."  So they--I'm saying, they're building this guy up (unclear).  I'm waiting to see Arnette Coleman or somebody come in.  So we on stage, and he comes in 'cause he's in the military, so he gets off late.  So we on stage, and (unclear).  It's a nice crowd, they kept a crowd because (unclear).  So they kept the crowd, and I looked and I see the guy come in.  And I see all these--it's like a superstar coming in.  People are shaking his hand and I'm saying to myself, "He must be somebody".  So we used to do a little dance steps and everything.  So as soon as he hit the bandstand, he takes his horn out.  He looks up, and everybody's (unclear), and he says, "Hey, I'm Maceo".  I said, Maceo, and my mind said, Maceo, never heard of anybody named that.  I never heard that name before.  And so, shake hands and he comes up on stage.  And Tim had been directing the band.  So Tim steps back into the band, and now we have like one, two, three, four trumpets-no, three trumpets, a trombone.  Now, we have four saxophones on the lines.  Man, I'm looking at this.  I'm look at it down this line (unclear)  And Leroy is just as cool, sitting over there playing his guitar.  No problem, he's just kicking it.  So he said, Maceo said, "Where are you?"  And Tim said, "We haven't gone into your show yet" or something like that.  He said, "Good, go right into it."  They upped it a notch.  So they went right straight into a James Brown set.  Oh, man.  I had been practicing this.  I knew it.  So I played.  He turned around and looked and did like that.  He shook his head, and then I saw him take off and start dancing, playing saxophone.  I missed a couple of notes then 'cause I'm looking at him.  He's doing the James Brown steps and playing the horn.  I said, he is what they say he is.  He's somebody.  Afterwards, I told him, I said, you're good.  He said, I'm just trying to be a saxophone player or something--he was very modest, trying to be a saxophone player.  And he went on played a little.  I said, what's your real name?  He said, Maceo Parker.  And I said, Maceo Parker, Maceo Parker.  And it stuck.  That's, this is before James [Brown] knew anything about Maceo.  And so Clint [Brantley] had Maceo, had James under contract.  So I came back to Macon on one of my little breaks, and I'm telling Clint, "Man, you need to see this saxophone player (laughter).  This man's crazy.  This guy, man, he can do this, he can do that.  And Clint--Clint had a way of saying, "Yeah, I've seen a lot of horn players, yeah, you know--I'm imitating, "Yeah, you know, but can he really hang in there?"  I said, Mr. Brandon, this man is great (laughter).  I'm sounding like the world's greatest salesman, I think.  He said, well, I'll tell yah, one of these days, I'm gonna get to see this, whoever this boy is you're talking about.  And so luck proceeds, and he, I think he followed up and found out who Maceo was.  James [Brown] found out too, didn't he?  (Laughter)
Story_ID: 83166
Speaker 1: So was Clint [Brantley]--was he black or white?
Speaker 2: Clint was black.  Clint was in the '50s [1950s].  Okay, Clint came from Settlersville, Georgia, I believe, him and Elijah Poole which turned out to be Elijah Muhammad and all them sort of grew into Macon [Georgia] at the same time.  Clint came here as a bass-playing barber looking for work.  And he set himself up to be a great bass player, and he won a lot of respect.  And then he went--then he eventually started promoting other musicians and still doing the barbering thing.  And then as he got older, he stopped doing the barbering and the bass playing and start promoting night club.  He got into the night club business and got into the management stage of it.  That's when he picked up Little Richard and James [Brown] came here to replace Little Richard after Little Richard went on his troupe.  He went to California.  So he had these open dates he needed someone to fill, so he went and got James.  Bobby Byrd--he set Bobby Byrd up to get James to bring him back down to fill the dates that Little Richard had.  That's how James got to be pulled into the Little Richard system.  And Hank Ballard just got pushed to the wayside during that time.  And he would just do things to promote the local music scene, like give shows and let his place be open on Sundays where the young musicians like me could come in and see the big boys.  They would give a show at the City Auditorium, but being a musician like me, I knew--I didn't have to necessarily see them there.  I could hang out at Clint's club and see 'em close up and talk to them, that type of thing.
Story_ID: 83167
Speaker 1: Now, one thing I do wanna bring up and talk to you about, you talked about earlier when you would go and sneak into the club when you were a teenager, how your mother and your aunt worried because of the scene that goes on at clubs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, you're older, and you're working in the music world.  How different and what's going on there and the atmosphere that's going on there, and things that are happening, the things are directly what your parents, your mother and aunt were worried about?  And how did you avoid the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: How did I avoid a lot of that?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: One thing, I didn't drink and I wasn't allowed to.  And going to Clint [Brantley] was safe haven because Clint knew my parents.  And most of the clubs I went to, they knew my parents.  So if I had taken a drink, the word would a got back before I got back home.  I forgot, remember that Internet thing I was telling you about?  It worked then too.  (Laughter)  You cannot beat it.  So that was sort of a safe haven for me.  That's, I have to admit now, I did slip a couple of beers and, but they were disguised, and I always went outside and there was a couple of guys in the band that were always brown bags.  That was, that was known.  Someone gon' have a half a pint stashed away somewhere.  So you just go outside on your break and get you a couple of swallows and come back in.  Nothing happened and hopefully, no one catch your breath while you're doing it.  But what I see today, I don't know whether--not, without whipping kids or something because see, if we got, we got in trouble like that, we gonna get beat on both sides, mama and daddy, and then again, auntie might have jumped in it and whoever else was there, grandmamma.  She'd throw a couple of licks in and so, you basically got beat (laughter), for doing wrong.
Story_ID: 83168
Speaker 1: Now, it seems that Clint [Brantley] is the pillar of stability--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Clint is where all the action revolves around.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Explain his role in the music world here in Macon [Georgia] and how he ran things?
Speaker 2: Clint was one of the shrewdest businessmen in the music world I ever seen.  He would bring the Gospel acts in, the R&B acts in.  He had his fingers into all of the shows that came into the City Auditorium.  And he had this white suit he'll put on, and he would book James Brown.  I never forgot, I saw him book James one time.  I actually saw Clint beat the system.  It was a man named Ben Bottles (ph.), president of King Records.  So Ben Bottles was gonna come to Macon in say, about another couple of weeks from now.  Old Clint would get on the telephone, "Hey, who is this?  Oh, okay, okay, yeah, yeah.  Well, I'll tell you, this is Clint.  Yeah, yeah, hey, man, oh, yeah, this is Clint.  I tell ya, I got an important deal for you, and I think you might work with me on this.  You see those big shots from Cincinnati [Ohio] wanna come down here and see James.  Yeah, yeah, that's him, yeah.  Yeah, my man, James, yeah, yeah.  Forget Little Richard.  I'm talking about James.  Yeah, yeah, what you mean, you don't have nothing--what about the next two or three weeks?  Okay, that sounds good.  Don't worry about it.  I'll have your deposit and don't worry--and we'll work the same schedule, the same deal, and I swear I'll be out of there by 1:00. Okay, okay.  I got that written down.  I'll stop by and see you in the next couple of days."  Click.
Story_ID: 83169
Speaker 1: So Clint come back in and he said, well, I got--go get the posters made up.  Here, Speedo--the same one that went out on the road for Otis Redding as a vanity--Speedo--he's working for Clint.  "Speedo, go have these made up.  Hurry back.  We gotta get these things out."  He called up Birdsong.  Birdsong, hang loose.  Go put up the--go (unclear).  Gotta think about something.  He'll write out a piece of paper, just take a blank piece of paper and just write out, "James Brown coming".  He said, go tell that girl to make about seventy-five of these and maybe a hundred of these.  Go up on Broadway and hand these out, "James Brown is coming, see Clint".  This is (unclear) free selling.  I didn't know what we was doing.  So James coming, but he doesn't have the date so for it evidently.  James Brown is coming.  So I go to the barbershop, and (unclear) pass 'em out and do my thing on the (unclear).  And all of a sudden, he gets a date.  Two weeks before time, maybe a month before time.  The Coasters are here.  Now, we--I go back to the same barbershop and tear down that piece of paper with "James Brown Coming", now put posters with dates on 'em that say "Come to see Clint".  Clint goes to the show, the place is packed.  He stands up by, on the corner by the auditorium and has this white suit on.  And he says, "Boy, we're gonna do good".  Clint stands on the door.  He have a brown paper bag in his back pocket.  He got two or three of 'em.  You know the deal.  Clint ready to make some real money.  The tickets might be one color.  Clint got another set of tickets in his pocket, another color.  Clint short cuts the system by going to the side door and standing with the white suit on and with the cigar in his mouth.  When he take the cigar out of his mouth, we he send four or five people his way.  Clint collects cash money right there, put the cigar back in his mouth and close the door.  Policeman come by and say, "You know what?  I was watching this door, and I want you to stand here a few minutes.  I got to make a run to the, you know, up front and take care of some things.  Clint goes to the front and does something and come back.  Now he got the brown bag in his hand, and he tells Speedo, take that one to the shop.  (Laughter) And Speedo run down to the shop.  (Laughter) He does this two or three times a night.  We get back to the shop, later on that night.  Clint's unfolding money, just money running out of bags.  He said, "Great Day."  I mean it's only little bundles, maybe about like that, little small bundles, but it's nothing but tens and twenties in there.  Clint had hit the front door and was clipping the money off the tickets on the front door at the same time.  And they came up short at the auditorium with the money, and they said--and Clint said, I don't know what happened.  See, I was back here with your policemen's, and ya'lll supposed to had a policeman up there watching the money.  You mean to tell me you let somebody run off with the money?  Now, the only thing I can tell you is what the contract says here.  Clint get back and he say, "Well, I guess I'll go get me another suit."  (Laughter)  And I said to myself, now, if that isn't sharp.  He would, I mean he was slick, but he would only do it when he really needed money.  He let--and he'll, he'll sit down and tell all of us that worked directly in that--he'll tell all of us how he did it and why he did it.  He said, they were gonna beat me, so I might--I got them before they got me.  And that's going true, as to music today.  That's the reason you see young guys in the music business doing independent stuff 'cause they know they gonna beat by the system.  They have to get theirs first.  When Speedo and them went out on the road, as road managers for Otis Redding, and all this, then when the shysters came, Clint had already taught 'em.  They already been to school.  They had a Ph.D.  And you see it coming a mile away.  Otis never missed a dollar.
Story_ID: 83170
Speaker 1: So, now you're starting to get into the music world--
Speaker 2: Again.
Speaker 1: --your own horn, again.  And who do you begin playing with?
Speaker 2: Who did I begin playing with?
Speaker 1: Yeah, after Bedford (unclear).  Now, is the--who do you start to play with now?
Speaker 2: Now, I'm working with myself, and my teachers Mike Matheny and Pat Matheny and I did more--worked mostly with Mike and he--he plays an EVI, which is an electric horn.  I had one also.
Speaker 1: After your, after you meet Maceo Parker in the '60's [1960s], you start playing with Mr. Redding?
Speaker 2: Right, okay, after meeting with Maceo and them, I got a call-back from Macon [Georgia] that they had a group that they wanted me to play with called "Sam and Dave".  So Otis Redding and Phil Walls was on the production company.  So I came back, and I was like the second horn, the second or third horn player to join the "Sam and Dave" band.  We started playing the chittling circuits again.  Here we go, back on that road again, playing local gigs right here.  Then all of a sudden, Sam and Dave now are getting more popular, more popular.  They developed up to a 10-piece band.  So I was still with the band with the 10-piece band, getting bigger and better gigs.  Now, the song hit, a couple of songs, they had a couple of hits, like, "You Don't Know Like I Know" was the first one that really made a difference.  So that brought them to a certain level financially and then after that they had, run two more hits in between.  Then "Soul Man" hit.  That took 'em all the way.  That, that, as I said, the cannon exploded on 'em then.  I mean we, we had more work than we could actually do.  I mean it was no such thing as a day off, and at one time, we were just going from one gig to the other.  We, we--"Soul Man" went to the top of charts, and it went faster than wildfire.  And it put Stax Records on the map, big time.  Motown, which was its competition, if you wanna call it that, they had to step back. And we played--I'll never forget, we played the "Twenty Grand" in Detroit [Michigan].  We went right into the mouth, right into the mouth of the lion.  We played their own theater, and we wore 'em out.  We wore them out.  We had all the Temptations, all the Motown executives, all of 'em standing there, and "Sam and Dave" put on a show--we were booked there for seven, no, ten nights.  We wore the city out.  The local musicians, they would come in and say, "We didn't know it was like that down there."  They even met some of their old band members I had seen on the road earlier.  "Bohannon" came to the show, Bohannon--you see 'em sitting in the audience with their mouth hanging open.  We wore 'em out.
Story_ID: 83171
Speaker 1: So what type of life was going on off the stage?
Speaker 2: Off stage?  "Sam and Dave" were having a lot of personal problems between them and--we were focusing on keeping a 10 to 15-piece band together.  And like we were riding around on the bus everywhere we went.  You didn't really have a--I wouldn't recommend it for no one, and it's not stable enough to just hang in there.  But it was rough 'cause the gigs were basically five [500] and 600 miles apart.  And we were being booked out of--they had left Macon [Georgia], being booked.  They were being booked out of (unclear) up in New York.  And they would send us everywhere.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of drug use?
Speaker 2: There was a lot of drugs involved.  Drugs was like candy.  You could get it and didn't have to pay for it.  But it destroyed you at the same time.  And a lot of it affected the band and to stay strong, you had to have will power, even, even the will powers you had, you had to have more will power to come out of everything 'cause any given day, you were gonna be up all night and all day.  You had to go from one spot to the other, and people think it's all on stage.  It's not all on stage.  It's a lot of intermingling with the public.  We had to be at press conferences, like when we did the "Ed Sullivan Show".  We was in the middle of doing the "Apollo" [Theater] at the same time.  At Apollo, it's called the sweat house.  We did seventy shows, seventy, two-hour shows in ten days.  That wear your body down when you're dancing all the time and playing behind other acts.  So when you get through, you get back to the hotel.  It's 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning.  You can forget partying 'cause 11:00 o'clock, the show starts again.  You got to get some rest in order to go back to the show.  So, yes, you could lose some weight.
Speaker 1: So were they using the drugs to keep themselves up or--
Speaker 2: Right, that's what it was about.
Speaker 1: So how would your mother and aunt and even Clint [Brantley], protect you from--were you able to stay out of it or--
Speaker 2: I stayed out of it.
Speaker 1: So how difficult was it for you to see them into it and see the band eroding?  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) One thing Clint put, has already--had laid such a foundation in my head, that I knew what the outcome was gonna be.  Yes, I drank, did a lot of drinking, but as far as taking pills and anything else, uh-uh.  I wouldn't do--I'd be around it, but I just didn't do it.
Speaker 1: And was it everywhere?
Speaker 2: It's all over.  It's rampant, it's just--it's everywhere.  Think of the '60s [1960s], think of the hip, young generation, free drugs, sex and rock and roll.
Speaker 1: And now the Civil Rights Movement and the war in Vietnam was all tied--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All tied in there with it.
Speaker 1: And how did the band (unclear) all this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --fit into--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --during the civil rights, well, during that time, we played--we would play University of Alabama, University of Mississippi the same date.  They would have a riot basically.  We were entertainers.  That was quote special.  We could go in--we'd go like--we couldn't stay in the places.  We had to find somewhere to stay.  But we'd go like University of Alabama immediately after a game and play for a fraternity over there.  Now, our ticket out of town was how many of the police we could get on our side to get us out of there.  That's our ticket out of town, and in some of the cases, we couldn't get food or anything.  So sometimes Aldo Waldon [ph.] would go out on the road or something like that.  We'd be thankful--some of the fraternity houses, we'd tell 'em what time of day--they knew what time of day it is.  They'd have guys go out and get the food and bring it back in to us.  So when we leave the gig, we get on the bus, we have food on the bus.  And the hotel would be the next city.
Story_ID: 83172
Speaker 1: And while you're doing this, you're producing and arranging for "Sam and Dave" now?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You're not just playing the horn anymore.  Now, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Okay, the trick to that, when we started going to the--like the Howard Theater and the Apollo Theater and places like that, and being able to read music, they would have a house band.  And sometimes we, by us--by "Sam and Dave" performing like that, we would come out and we'll use some of their musicians from the house band.  But we had music, but a lot of our music wasn't really written down.  After we wrote it down, we'd, we memorized it, we memorized everything.  We had to, part of the system.  And if someone was going to play with us it was, "Oh, my God".  They had to now--till here I came in and several, and a couple other guys.  Except, until we went in, mostly we sat down and we'd write the charts out, 'cause we'll get 'em straight out of Memphis [Tennessee] with the connections in Memphis.  Sometimes we'd go to Memphis, (unclear) where the sessions are, get a chance to be on (unclear) sessions here and there and stuff like that.  And then we'll come back and we'll actually write the music down, write the lead charts and maybe write maybe one or two lines.  And while we heading back, coming back to the band on a plane, bus or whatever, we'll (unclear) and really write four or five different scores out.  And the musicians we had basically came from Florida A and M [University] or from a school with marching bands.  So that's what we were specializing in, the dance band.  And they could read music.  Most of 'em could read music.  And basically everybody read music in the band.  So once we'd get the chart back, I would tell 'em the key, and the way I would write the charts out, it would--I would probably-- at this time, I would playing trumpet.  I would write out a lead sheet and I'll tell 'em the key of "G", and I'd just say, "I'm a write from a third perspective".  Everybody knew, whoever take the fifth, take the fifth, whoever take the tonic, take the tonic.  That way, time you saw the music, you just transpose it up or down, three notes up, three notes down.  And that way, if you're on stage and someone passed out a piece of music, you take one sheet and set it up in front of you, and say, "three, five, one".
Speaker 1: So everybody in the band reading?
Speaker 2: Right, that was very important.  Mostly, maybe one or two guys couldn't read, but for the ones that, one or two who couldn't read, they had certain parts they could play to compensate for that.
Story_ID: 83173
Speaker 1: Now, you're still with "Sam and Dave" when you hear the tragedy of Otis Redding's plane crash?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm with "Sam and Dave", but I'm indirectly not with 'em.  I'm in Augusta, Georgia on a vacation break.  That came to--yes, there were vacation times.  And I was playing with Leroy Lloyd again, and now the--we were playing in Thompson, Georgia.  That's Millie Jackson's hometown.  And we're playing there, and had arrived.  All the way down, no one was listening to the radio.  Leroy sometimes never listened to the radio 'cause he's usually talking to us and so the radio would be a distraction.  So we get to the, get to Thompson, and we get to the club, and it was some people there.  They were just milling--and the TV was on.  And they kept, everybody, you know, everybody just glued to the TV, mumbling, and I walked in.  And one of the guys looked at me.  I remember him looking at me.  So heck, I figured, checking to see what's going on, is the zipper band and stuff opened.  So he said, man ya'll hear what's going on?  And then, someone said--I heard somebody say, something like what's going on?  He said, you know, Otis Redding's plane went down.  And it caught my attention immediately.  And I stopped and went over to the bar.  And I just stood there, and the guy said, "you (unclear) with Otis Redding".  I said, yeah, I think I told him to shut up (laughter) or something.  I was just intent--and all this time, my mother and my aunt are calling to Augusta trying to find out where I'm at.  So Leroy, I--Leroy said, I'm calling back home to see what's going on.  So he called back. And, yes, my mother had called Leroy's house, and they said, yeah, Newton is with them.  So they knew that I wasn't, (unclear) speed away.  At any given time, I'll do that.  I'll, I'll go play (unclear), I'll go play with (unclear) a couple of weeks, here and there.  I did that with Percy Sledge, seven day run.  I was basically with "Sam and Dave", but I'd be hired out a couple of months with Arthur Connelly, go with Joe Simon a couple of weeks, Joe Tex, yeah, anybody, just, I might fill in or something like that.
Speaker 1: So when you heard that he passed, did you reflect upon--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that whole night.
Speaker 1: Your friendship (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That whole night, that whole night was--I couldn't wait to get off that stage to get home, back to Macon.  I think I caught the first thing smoking that morning, that next morning, coming to Macon.  And I got here--it was Monday, I got here, and I went down by the office on Cotton Avenue, and people just milling around and milling around.  And I don't think they had found Otis' body (unclear), but Ben had been pulled out the water, and I kept telling people that, you know, Otis can swim real good, and I say, he used to dig wells.  If anything happened, if he's under water, and if he can get free, he'll get to the top, and he'll get--Otis will make it or something like that.  Then I didn't realize that the conditions were like they were in that water, but I kept saying that.  And so I left.  I basically do not recall what I did for about a couple of days.  And they, they said they had found Otis' body.  I don't even know, I--I have no recollection of what went through my mind or where I was or what.  I just, everything on that level went blank for me.
Story_ID: 83174
Speaker 1: But I do remember seeing a lot of musicians just start pouring into Macon [Georgia] for the funeral, after they set the funeral.  And I remember I went down by the City Auditorium, and I viewed the body early.  And I just didn't, I just couldn't stay at the funeral.  I just--I went back down Poplar Street, and I think I just walked around downtown Macon.  So I don't recall--I remember talking with Sam there about the, to get some of the guys came to the Key Club and a club called Peyton Place they came.  So I stayed at Peyton Place for a few minutes and I just went walking.
Speaker 2: Do you remember being at the funeral?
Speaker 1: I remember being at the funeral, but I can't exactly tell you what direction I went.  I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Did that make you reflect on the friendship you had since childhood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it really hit me hard, and I've had other friends that passed, but not like that.
Speaker 2: What made your friendship with him so special?  Tell me?
Speaker 1: With Otis?  (Unclear) we could kick it around, you know, like it was, he was like an addition to the family to me.  Jimmy Coleman sort of pushed me.  Otis pushed me hard.  After he figured I was gonna be a musician, he just, he just laid into me.  They was on my back.  I mean they were hard on me, and he used to see me playing and then he'll be doing things like that [both hands movement].  I couldn't figure out what he was doing, when he first, like that.  He was telling me to play louder.  (Laughter) I was playing loud as I could, and he'd [hand movement], he'd look at me.  And, you know, he just, he was a big encouragement.  He always pushed, and did a lot of things for me like that, just kept me pushing.
Speaker 2: Were you close to his family?
Speaker 1: Well, I knew, I knew his parents.  I was closer to his brother, Roger Redding.  We were classmates in school, and one of his sisters, Doll, we were close.  But I knew his parents.
Speaker 2: And the last time you spoke to him before--
Speaker 1: As far as I remember, he had had throat surgery, and he was in Tindall Heights, and I was on Elizabeth Street.  I was crossing, coming out the Twelve Building.  I had been to see a girl in the Twelve Building, and I came around the corner and was going to Mr. Dell's Store, and he was, he pulled up behind me and took--and said something like, "I need a trumpet player".  (Laughter) I turned around and there Otis was (laughter).  And so we just, we just shot the jive a few minutes.  I told him--he said, "When you going--he asked me something like when you going back out?  I told him, I'm going back out with "Sam and Dave" in a couple of weeks.  He said, "Have fun, man.  I'll see you later" or something like that.
Speaker 2: How did his passing change your life?
Speaker 1: I sort of--for a while, I didn't wanna hear no Otis music 'cause it just brought back a lot of problems mentally.  And the way it changed me was, I decided I would just get out the business.  And I went to Boston [Massachusetts], and I got married.
Story_ID: 83175
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: In 1970, no, in '69 [1969] I actually--
Speaker 1: Got out of the business.
Speaker 2: Right, I basically got out of the business, and then in 1970, got married.  And my wife and I went out one night--this is after that long thing of not wanting to go out.  So the first place I go was down to the "Sugar Shack" to see Joe Tex band.  So I see some of the guys that I knew, that I had played with Otis' band too.  First thing they said, "Hey, man, you wanna ride?"  I said, man, I can't go nowhere.  I'm married.  He said, come on, man--(unclear) Delwood Wright was his name, said, come on, man, Leroy Hadley.  And then there Coleman was, my buddy from a long ways back.  And I told my wife, I need to go to--she said, she was looking at me, and I'm saying, I know if I go out there, I'll break up my marriage.  So I turned them down.  And I started playing around Boston with a couple little, local bands then.  And that was, that was satisfying.  And about '72' [1972],'73' [1973], "Sam and Dave" actually broke up.  And some of the guys from the band started coming up in the Boston area.  We had been to Japan back in '67' [1967], '68' [1968], somewhere along in there.  And we had met this guy named Al Fisher.  He was a D.J. in Tokyo, at (unclear) Tachikawa Air Base.  His home is Providence, Rhode Island.  So we put together a band and went to Providence and played a club called--it'll come to me.  It was on Fisherman's Wharf, and it had a funny name to it.  The Fisherman's Club, in Indian Pointe is where it was.  Okay.
Story_ID: 83611
Speaker 1: Being around the Doo Wop guys and, well, and him singing solo too.  He worked with the Oscar Mack, James Duncan, Percy Wilts (ph.) and different guys like that around locally.  They were all like singing together.  It's another guy named Bill Jones who taught Otis [Redding] how to sing that style, and the way I fit in was I used to come up and hang out with Bill Jones' brother.  And now, I'm sort of, I'm sort of like a little kid hanging around.  I was a insider that way.  And I guess my mother and my aunt felt okay 'cause it was Otis [Redding], and Otis' dad was a preacher, and Otis wasn't doing nothing, they thought (laughter).  They didn't know, because he--that secret was kept very well.  And so I got a chance to be a insider and to be an outsider at the same time.  So when they started going to the Douglas and things, I would tag along, and Johnny Jenkins who lived indirectly across the street from my aunt, on the same street, about four houses down and across the street.  And Otis and them would come down and rehearse with Johnny and them.  Ray Satellite Papa Brown, who was one of the legendary D.J.'s, just coincidentally lived further on down the street.  He was about eight houses from where we lived, on the same side.  So I could walk straight down to his house, but I knew not to go across--I wasn't allowed over there 'cause they were drinking liquor over there.  So I stayed on my side and went on down.  And they would see me.  I would stand out there, and a couple of times I was actually taking my horn and walked all the way down to the branch.  And they'll be playing music, and I'd stand there in the branch and shoot my horn back their way and try and play with 'em.  And so I think they paid attention to all of that too, (unclear).  Johnny told me one time, he said, they used to watch me do--see what I would be doing next.  And then, and I asked him, did (unclear) I ever play a thing.  He said, yeah, man, we did, a couple of times we played some songs to see what you gonna do.  And say, okay, and then Patty T-Cake--his name was Charles Abrams, he came to bury his sister.  He was a drummer and the leader of the band, and he used to--and I asked him the same thing.  He said, oh, buddy, you know we were watching you (laughter), just like that.  And so I said, hum, I'm glad someone was paying attention in those days.  And so eventually, as I was getting older, I'm, I can actually hang out with these guys a little bit more.  I'm getting older and now they see that I'm gonna be in the clubs with them, so I'm a shoe-in wherever they start hanging out.  That's how our relationship started growing and got closer.  And that's just about the time Phil Walden stepped in and start booking Otis and the band.  And they formed a partnership, Phil Walden, Allen Walden and Otis Redding.  And it was called "Red Wald Music".  Red Wald Music now is a production company and talent booking agency and they grew to be one of the largest agencies in the nation.  They had all the soul acts booked out of Macon, Georgia.  And that's where I fit in and I came in--I was a trumpet player, and they needed bands.  They needed musicians.  And I knew how to play all the different, different types of music.  Boom, there I was.
Story_ID: 83612
Speaker 1: Was Otis [Redding] like an older brother for you?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Explain like how that relationship worked?
Speaker 2: He was, he was like a distant older brother.  He would, he would sort of tell you--tell me different things and sort of push me a little bit, you know, guide me and then [Sammy]Coleman was playing in his band at this time.  This the same guy that taught.  He was playing lead trumpet.  And there was a bad they had from Newport News, Virginia called the "Rocking Cabanas".  And they brought them down, and when the Rocking Cabanas came down, not knowing what was going on, I accidently got put into the situation of being their mascot (laughter).  Don't ask me how I fell into that role, but everywhere they went, Roy Hines and Gloria Stevens (ph.) were the singers and the "Night Riders" was the bass player.  By me knowing Macon, they started asking me to take them this place, take them that place.  So after I looked back at it, I said, how in the heck I get this job?  I wanted to--so they would go out and rehearse at Club Fifteen, the Otis Redding show.  Guess who would be there?  I'd tag right along with 'em.  And they wanted to go--wanted somebody to go get food, I'd go get the food and come right back.  And I'd bring my horn, and I'll sit out there and play with them.  So it was a fellow in the band, his name is Robert Pittman.  We got to be pretty good friends.  He was from Baltimore [Maryland].  He passed away last year.  And now we got to be good friends.  Bobby and I formed a partnership, and then the rest of the band, we sort of formed a partnership that's how, I guess Otis saw us all, I guess he said, darn, I get him to do one thing, and there he go off (laughter) for his self (laughter) (unclear).  So I guess Clint [Brantley] taught me well.  I, you know, I made a job for myself no matter where I went.  And I would blend in, and another--that makes me think of something else too.  Another incident happened when I got back on the road with that situation too, is I was actually, tell 'em, I'd go (unclear), I'd do anything, just take me with you.  I'm ready to go.  And Mack, the bass player, he was the band leader.  He'll say, okay, but the way you see, it was, you know, not yet.  And they a couple of nice trumpet players, but I always figured I could cut them up.  My head was bigger than my lips (laughter) so (unclear).  In my mind, I'd tear the world up, but nah, I had some limitations in reality, pulling it off.  So back to the Key Club and back to Leroy Lloyd and I was doing things like that.  And I eventually built my lips up to where I tore 'em apart, and then the interesting thing about it was a lot of people would see me playing trombone a lot.  I say, I often wonder how did I get to do that.  This happened in Boston.
Story_ID: 83613
Speaker 1: One thing we wanna definitely backtrack and get to is when you would come to "Sam and Dave" and the other groups and tell them that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I'm out the business, how did they accept that when you came to them and said, "I am out the business, and I'm moving on" because of the death of your friend, Otis Redding?
Speaker 2: They knew, they know.  Sam and Dave, I consider brothers too.  They took it and said, I understand, man.  Sam, Sam had sort of a nice demeanor about him.  I understand, man.  I understand.  You have to take care of yourself, man.  That's the way--he's very humble and like that.  I miss you, man.  I--you know you can come back.  You, you get it together, man.  We'll be--you know where to find us, sort of stumble around words like that.  And then he said, "Baby, you gon' be all right."  That's what he called me, "baby" 'cause true enough, I was the baby around there (laughter).  Think about it, Sam is sixty-eight and Dave would have been sixty-six, and I'm fifty-eight.  So who is the kid in this outfit, right?  I, I (unclear), I sort of gravitated to older musicians all my life like that.
Speaker 1: So now, you get married and move to Boston [Massachusetts]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and you start a new life and music comes calling again.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, now, I met my wife in Boston through a friend of mine.  We were gonna go see a girl up there and ran into some complications so this girl didn't marry the guy.  She was going to marry, and eventually get married.  And I'd stayed clean from music, I mean I was clean, man.  No, music whatsoever  I'm working.  Eventually, I go to the Sugar Shack.  The disease hit me (laughter).  I had to have it.  So I sort of wiggled my way in and out of it.  I would go out and play weekend jobs and "Sam and Dave" came through, and I was, especially play with them.  And they came through--one time, Ben was the bandleader, still the bandleader.  And he said, well, we knew you were here.  And he said, well, we were holding a spot for a trumpet player, but we hired another trumpet player 'cause we didn't know whether you would--we heard you was not playing now.  I said, and my mind said, news travel too fast maybe (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Internet.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And so they said, well, you know, we've been looking for a trombone player.  If you know a trombone player?  And I told Ben exactly this, I said, I know a guy play trombone.  I'll be back in a little while; went home and got my trombone (laughter) and came back.  He had came--Ben said he saw me walk in with the trombone, and he said, "Nah, he didn't" (laughter).
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is sixty--no '73 [1973], '72 [1972], '73 [1973], somewhere along in there, yep, 'cause my baby was being born that year, '73 [1973]--'73 [1973], yeah, '73 [1973].  So I come back and I played a week, finished the week out with them on trombone.  And Ben turned around and said, well, Newton, we gon' be leaving town or something like that he said.  This'll be the sixth time you've been in and out the band.  What you wanna do?  I said, Ben--usually, I'd say, yes, I'm ready to go.  I think I said, Ben, I'm gon' stay with my wife.  And they--I think everybody in the band mouth dropped to the floor (laughter), or something like that.  Benny Blaylock, the guy I came up to Boston originally, he was still in the band, (unclear) man, a year later, Sam and Dave broke up.  And those same guys came back to Boston.  I was still playing around in Boston.  Now, I'm working--that's what got me a full-time job in the Sugar Shack, as a side musician 'cause they had never seen me play trombone at the Sugar Shack.  They--the only thing they seen me do at Sugar Shack was come in and talk about music, and just be around it, but they'd never seen me really get into it.  So I think Rudy and them called me, they called me in the back room, and I felt privileged to go back there and talk to them in their private office.  And they asked if I wanted to, you know, be a side man to the groups that they brought in.  So I said, yes.  So my marriage went downhill from there.  And it took me exactly, well, it took me exactly two years and (unclear) we broke up.  And it was because of the music so I said, well, well, since she's gone, I know what to do.
Story_ID: 83614
Speaker 1: So when Sam and Dave broke up, I didn't even call her to tell her that, you know, what I'm gonna do.  I just kept it low keyed.  They came up to Boston [Massachusetts].  It was Onion, his name was Abraham Miller, James Tatum, Robert Pittman and they told me they were gonna go to Providence [Rhode Island] to play.  So I knew the Boston market.  I had worked my way into a lot of stuff in Boston, musically, so I sort of promoted them all through, every--booked the club, the Al Casey's club.  So we went to Al Casey with ten people and told him that we had a band, that we needed to get at least $5,000 to play.  Al Casey looked at us like we were crazy.  He said, I don't even pay my big acts for that kind of money.  And we said--he said, well, you know what we can do?  He said, well, tell you what.  I'll take the bar, ya'll take the door.  That's no problem.  We went for it, knowing we didn't have a singer.  Sam and Dave gone, so we had "Sam and Dave" band in certain type letters.  "Sam and Dave" band in small letters, featuring Jeffrey Osborne.  Now, relate back to Clint [Brantley].  I remembered how the post--how to make up a poster.  It sounded like "Sam and Dave" band.  It didn't say "Sam and Dave" was there, did it?  It said, "Sam and Dave" band, featuring Jeffrey Osborne.  Jeffrey Osborne was a local guy from Providence [Rhode Island] that could sing pretty good.  That was the reason for that.  We didn't know nobody in the city (laughter).  You got to get the best singer in the city, so Sam and Dave band gonna be backing up Jeffrey Osborne.  But, now, there're ways of making placards and posters.  So we took this to every--I was, see I was at MIT working at the time.  And I was working with a guy named Sidney Burton who was the chief engineer at the station.  And we had a show called "After Hours", sort of like an after-hours jazz show, "Early in the Morning Sunrise" was the name of the show.  It went on Saturday nights at 3:00 o'clock and came off about 7:00 o'clock in the morning.  So I could get promos in very easy 'cause I'm at the station, working at the radio station.  So I get the promos in the station, get the address of every college station in New England, send them a flyer and tell them to advertise it and promote this show.  And they did exactly that.  We got to the club.  There were 5,000 people at the club.  We got there around 6:30 to set up.  We couldn't get in the--people were every which way.  I called a friend of mine that lived in the Harper.  I sent some posters down there to her and flyers, and made little small handbills and told her to pass 'em out to all her friends and make sure you come.  It's only $10.00 and enjoy a beautiful evening.  They were from everywhere.  We got to the club.  Al Casey say he had ran out of beer (laughter).  It wasn't no more wine in the cooler.  They said what in the hell ya'll do (laughter)?  He said, he just (unclear)--for the last hour we was at the club, there was no liquor in the club.  He just completely ran out--this is going into Sunday.  He completely ran out.  He say he had never seen anything like that.  He said the club stayed packed all night.  And Jeffrey Osborne come out of a project-type situation.  We ate that project alive with flyers.  I mean (laughter), we marketed, and we marketed all over New England, and that's when they wanted me to work with them on the promotion for a new band.  So we had to figure out what we--the "Sam and Dave band", this ain't gon' last, but we got to come up with a name.  So LTD, love, tenderness and togetherness is what it really was.  And we had a young lady named Marie [Celeste] Cole, and she was, she was one of the backup singers at one time.  And that's the girl you hear on their first couple of albums.  And we knew Bobby Martin, we knew Bobby Martin.  He was a recording engineer.  He owed, he owed a couple of guys a favor, and that's how the record label and the A and T label, and Brenda Andrews was at Stax Records.  She's now with A and M Records.  So we sweet talked, sweet Brenda into working with the little upstarting band called LTD and how about getting signed over on your label and we got signed.
Story_ID: 83615
Speaker 1: So, now, you're moving into your promotion area--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and not playing horn anymore--
Speaker 2: I'm not playing horn.  I'm, I'm talking about, I'm promoting and I'm marketing (unclear), talking the band up.
Speaker 1: So is that, was that more profitable than playing--
Speaker 2: Right, it was more profitable.
Speaker 1: But you're staying in practice?
Speaker 2: I'm staying in practice on the sideline, but that was more profitable, and I still had a chance to stay with my wife.
Speaker 1: And how did it come out, how did that come out?
Speaker 2: And she left me anyway.  (Laughter) It was the music, man, I'll tell you.  She couldn't deal with it.  And a couple of pictures I'm gonna show you some of the guys in the band.  They'd come along, they'd be holding the baby and she just felt all alone.  She said, well, you have all these musical friends and I don't have nothing.  I said, well, baby, I'm trying to keep you tied in with me, you know, you got swing.  It's fast.  I mean these days come.  They come in one day and gone the next.  Another set come in the next day, and it's a fast-paced thing.
Speaker 1: So now what year is this that you were beginning to be LTD's promotion?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], '75 [1975], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: And then you start working as a promoter totally.  What other groups did you start working with?
Speaker 2: Okay, I start, I start working directly in promotions with like "Tavares" and anything that came in the Sugar Shack, I was--I got to be the front man for Rudy and them.  Whenever they came in, if they needed a horn player, they needed a horn player.  It was a guy named Davenport that ran the agency, Davenport Booking Agency out of Boston.  He was the main contact.  And he would, I would be like his assistant, run man.  Let's say like you get ahead, and two or three weeks ahead, we know what's coming in, and we'll start running the promotions.  And I'll start going to the radio stations and talking to the D.J.'s and pushing the people's music up.  And just about that time, I ran into a guy named Cosmo.  He called himself "Cosmo".  He was a D.J.  And he kept seeing me do all this.  And he kept seeing--every week I'd be down there with something new.  I'd be pumping something different every week.  And I start booking--and I was getting pretty--I'm getting like 20, 30 percent off the deals sometimes, which was pretty good, you know, considering I wasn't doing nothing, and about talking and running and making phone calls to different people.  And all of a sudden, people started calling me wanting to know could they get bands for this and bands for that?  So I was telling Cosmo and another guy named Jay Michaels that worked at WILD, that these people are calling me for D.J.'s and everything else.  And I don't have that access.  Cosmo and them deejayed, so I would turn the gigs over to them.  And I'd tell them, I'd say, give me a couple of dollars for (unclear).  He'd say, yeah--book the job for a hundred and twenty five dollars [$125].  I'd take 15, $20.00 (unclear).  And so, hey, after a while, I start looking, I said, now, this is an income.  This isn't bad.  Now that my old lady now has completely left, man, I went wild, and I called it NC Productions.  And I thought about, now, when I was doing that, one day I was looking at something, I was looking--I was still working at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], and I was looking at something on TV.  And I saw where they was doing cross promotions, and I got the idea, why not go to Cortese (ph.) who is from Memphis, have him to book Carla Thomas in Boston.  Have Carla come to WILD, and I interview her with Jay Michaels on the Time Tuttle (unclear) show the day of the show.  Cortese went, gon' do it?  I said, yeah.  He said, let's (unclear).  And did it.  And that's when I had a couple of pictures of me playing with Carla Thomas.  That was a dual role.  So I booked the show, and then turned around and played in the band (laughter).
Story_ID: 83616
Speaker 1: How did you get to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  Tell me about what you did at MIT?
Speaker 2: Okay, how did I get to MIT?
Speaker 1: And what did you do while you were there?
Speaker 2: Okay, MIT is interesting.  Okay, I'm getting ready to get married, so I need a job.  Music is good, but if I'm gonna be married, I can't be traveling all over the place.  And there was a guy that I had met when I was overseas that was from Boston, turned out to be a cousin of mine.  I didn't know it (unclear), name of Phillip Knight.  And he was working at MIT.  So we would--I was over to his house one evening, and we're talking.  I told him, I gotta get me a job.  And he said, why don't you try this program--'cause at the time, I could fix radios and I dabbled in electronics.  I was sort of like self-taught, myself some stuff in electronics so he said, man, you ought to go over to MIT and try to get you a job.  I said, oh, I was just kicking around.   I said, man, that place is for smart folks, no way in the heck I can get over there 'cause you have to have--I said, probably the janitor probably have a Ph.D. (laughter), you know, something like that.  So I went over, and I met, I met with one of the guys and Phillip was in personnel.  And he introduced me to one of the guys in the engineering lab, and I was just cutting it up with him.  And he said, well, you looking for a job?  I said, yeah.  He said, well, what's your background in electronics?  And I said to myself, oh, my God and just--I said to myself, that threw it right out the ballgame now 'cause there is no background in real electronics.  So I told him I had, you know, played around with, playing with sound systems and learning a little of this and that.  So he said, well, I'll tell what or something like that.   He said, we'll put you on as a starting technician in the power system there.  I didn't know what I was getting into.  The power system, high voltage power systems, here I am from Macon, Georgia.  So I'm working in the lab and they working on a experiment that uses something like 60, 60KB, 60 kilovolts and you have this big pole, you hit it, and it sound like a cannon going off when you shut the system off.  Wow, (unclear) this is not gonna be good on my nerves (laughter).  Plus, I had heard that this could kill you.  You see these, you see these braces they--these guys wearing these arm bands and touching things, and he said, now, take everything metal and paper out your pocket.  After a couple of weeks on the job, I said, they know what they doing, and they doing all this protection.  I don't, and I better get some education.  So there was a class called "601", and it was taught at Lowell Institute.  It was like a introductory class to electronics.  I got there just in time to enroll in the second semester of the class.  What a course.  It was all kinds of algebra and stuff that I had to read--I mean I had to buckle down.  I, I was glad I was living by myself--well, those were the last days of my wife too, but that, that took a toll.  I had to actually sit there and just work.  I mean hours and hours, and I had to start going to the library 'cause two thirds of the stuff, I didn't know what the heck was going on.  But I managed to, I managed to pass the course.
Story_ID: 83617
Speaker 1: And so--the professor's name was Gerald Wilson, Professor Wilson came in and they saw that we got--a lot of the guys, it was graduate, mostly graduate students.  They'd come in, and they'll help me out and, you know, they said, you have a aptitude for this stuff, you can--we can catch it.  And so I started building little experiments for them.  They were mostly doing power experiments.  I started building experiments with them, and I started, just like building all kinds of little boxes and little trinkets and things they used, and after a while they just--after about a year or so they elevated me to another level.  And I felt so uncomfortable because I was saying to myself, hum--then I saw that big box back there where all that heavy stuff was going on, and they got me back there with the heavy stuff and running the generators and motors and stuff.  I learned how to build motors and generators and tons of voltage (unclear).  We could take a circuit and break it down to the, to one volt and bring it back up to a hundred volts all through resistance and capacities and all that kind of stuff, red boarding. And about, right after my wife left, I'm still working so I said, then a job opened up in the Space Center.  And I applied for the job, and I got it.  So I'm now over to--I'm a technician now in the NASA program at the Space Center.  And they were working on something called "MJS", Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.  And I got a chance to work on the prototype and they shut, they shut that off on San Marco in '75 [1975], '76 [1976] on one of the things.  And that's your, and said that that was in Africa.  And so got a chance to hear the actual launch.  That's exciting.  I'm not talking about what you hear here.  I'm talking about everything, Houston [Texas], around the world and hear the different listening stations coming in, intercepting.  We had all that set up at MIT at the Space Center on top.  And that was the end of that program.  So that faded right on out.
Story_ID: 83618
Speaker 1: All during the time, it was a guy working there named Ron [Ronald] McNair.  He was a physicist.  He was working on molecules, instruction and all that kind of stuff.  I got to know him.  It ended up, we went to the same church, and he was at the Space Center.  But he left on the Apollo Missions originally, and he played saxophone.
Speaker 2: Did you ever play with him?
Speaker 1: We played together (laughter).  We would--I took him over to the club and his wife didn't want him to go 'cause he--she saw that, she knew the deterioration of what I was doing.  And she used to sort of get on me a little bit.  And I said, well, we're just going down for a while and play, and we played a couple of gigs.  And I had to teach him how to--then, it was interesting 'cause when he left Boston, he left some things that I--he left some things instilled in me about work ethics.  And I always remember he was on a mission.  He was doing something at Johnson, or somewhere like that.  And he had promised some kids in Hartford, Connecticut that he would speak to them.  The plane got--he couldn't get into Hartford 'cause of the snow.  He came into Boston and drove through the snow five hours to do a one-hour speech for those kids.  And then he had to come back to Boston to get on the plane, which was delayed hours because it couldn't get in out the runway to go back to where he was.  They charged them zero.
Story_ID: 83725
Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're mid-'70s [1970s], mid to late '70s [1970s], and why don't you describe to us the evening in 1976 that, about the evening that affected your life (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay, me getting shot.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I had been, now, I decide--now that my wife is out the way, I said I can go full time playing.  So I am full time playing.  I'm working with the band.  We worked on, up at a club called "Sandies", up in north, up on the North shore up in Dandridge [Massachusetts].  The Sandies name is Sam Salatino (ph.) or something like that, a nice little club.  And--he's dead now.  I come out the club, and I come home.  And there's a lot of racial tension going on in Boston [Massachusetts], so I'm actually--my main goal is to get good enough to, I'm good enough so I can get back out there.  I'm going, I'm going back to LTD.  That's, I'm going--that's my goal.  So I'm building up this, I'm building up my chops playing trombone, and Jake Riley was a trombone player then.  So Jake and I were good friends.  Jake replaced me, and now I'm thinking about cutting him (laughter).  So it was a little joke we had between us through the years.  And so here I, I come in, and I decided I get off at a safe haven in Roxbury 'cause it's mostly black down there, 'cause you get off in South Boston, they get really rough down there.  And so I came in, and I set it up, and I came off the expressway, and I saw this car coming up behind me.  And it's about 2:00 o'clock in the morning.  So I didn't pay no attention.  And I was in the left lane, so I switched over to the right lane.  And the car switched over to the right lane too.  So I figured they were gonna make a turn, so I got ready to turn and go up Humboldt, and just as I got ready to turn to go up Humboldt, I switched back into the left lane 'cause that car started speeding up all of a sudden.  And I just cleared it, I just cleared it.  I just went back over left right quick.  As soon as they get right beside me and they shot and hit me right there.  That's 2:00 in the morning.  It's quiet as a doornail out there in some areas.  And I remember seeing a car, but I don't remember exactly what I saw.  And I was out like a light.  Just, the impact just knocked me right on out.  And I woke a couple of days later in the hospital, twenty-four hours, in fact, I was out twenty-four hours.  But knowing where I was, it was a couple of days before I knew what was going on.   And the guy that took me to the hospital lived in the area.  And he happened to be, he happened to be up.  He was doing something in his house, and he heard the shot, and he looked out and he saw what had happened, and he didn't even call the police or nothing.  Well, he called the police when he grabbed me and saw the condition I was in and threw me into his truck and shot me down to the hospital which was about three blocks away and got me there.  And they worked on me there and saved my life.  The interesting thing about it was after I got well, I went back, and I found out who this guy was.  He had given a phony address, a phony name.  I saw him only once afterwards.  I went back to his house the second time to see him, he had disappeared.
Story_ID: 83726
Speaker 1: So what types of effects did that have on you, physically and emotionally?
Speaker 2: Emotionally, I know I can't play a trumpet, and that's when, physically, it's a steel bar in my face.  So I know that if you get too cold, I know that's gonna hurt, and if you get too hot, certain things just--and then that kicks in the arthritis and other ailments around my body.  So in my mind, I know I have to just do certain things.  But emotionally, it hurts, emotionally.  But I do a lot of things to compensate for it.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: Getting involved, seeing--getting back into being involved in music on different levels, like what I did when I was in Boston, after all that happened, went back to my friend Cosmo Ryan and have him start writing a news, a newsletter, which is called "Progressive Platter Newsletter".  And I fall back into the promotion end of it, and I did a little writing too.  And I relied on some of my old buddies that are musicians, and I write little stories on them, and we got into the club scene.  And we start doing promotions in clubs, and got back with Rudy and whoever came into town.  Now, we have magazines so come on, give us some money for advertisement.  And (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now, how long were--did you get into promotions after this?  After this, I mean you're totally in promotions and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that--did that have any effect, I mean, your condition, physically, you were, for how long, you were rehabbing or whatever?
Speaker 2: Yeah, rehabbing for, oh, maybe a year or two.
Speaker 1: So what type of thoughts were you have while you were rehabbing?  What's going through your mind about, what can I do next?
Speaker 2: That's really what was going, what can I do next?  I knew I couldn't play, and I had heard about this instrument called the EVI, but I never knew--and the guy that helped invent it, he was at MIT at one time.  He was right up under my nose and I wasn't paying attention to what was happening.  So he developed this horn that you blow into, but you play it like a trumpet.  It's an electric ground instrument.  It was an experimental instrument.  So I ended up getting one of those, and I had to adapt to, had it adapted for me, and I played that, got to blow on that for a while.  And this was--during the time I was doing that, after me coming home from one of my medical--I was still working and doing one of my medical appointments, I saw them doing a, filming of something.  And being nosy me, I stopped and parked my car and sat on the hood of the car watching these guys carry all this equipment around and stuff like that.  And I ended up asking one of the guys, where'd you learn to do that?  And so he told me about some classes, and I looked into it, and I found the guy I needed, and that was Don Calucci (ph.).  It's something about these Italians, I don't know (laughter).  He had a school, so he taught classes in theatrical performance and he had produced a couple of movies.  And so I went and took the classes and ended up working in the Cable Vision system up there with Boston Access.  And still that kept me--music and the magazine work hand-in-hand 'cause now I have an outlet to take it to the club.  I can bring a camera crew into the club where we bring the artists in and film it and then talk about it in the magazine.  So all these things just sort of, just sort of tied in.  So we kept the magazine going for about ten years, and about '84' [1984], '85' [1985], the magazine started going down, so we broke down with that.  And I start making movies and come back to Macon [Georgia].
Story_ID: 83727
Speaker 1: And then you opened "Collier's Corner"?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, "Collier's Corner", Collier's Corner was a brainchild of mine.  In order to do that, I wanted to expose some of the records and tapes I had collected.  I've always collected records and tapes, and especially soul music, and I wanted to start selling it off as my income, my retirement income, I thought.  I'm gonna sell all this stuff off and push a magazine called "Collier's Corner" and have it parallel with the record store and try and get other cities like Memphis [Tennessee], Boston [Massachusetts], Atlanta [Georgia] to send me no-end magazines where I can promote their music from a local end into other cities.  That was the goal of "Collier's Corner" and promote local artists.  It lasted about ten years.  The magazine lasted about a year (laughter).  There was no support, and I just kept physically running out, I kept seeing--I'd ask people about the magazine, and they said, what magazine?  And I saw one lady take it and use it for toilet paper almost, and she started wrapping up something in the house with it.  And that really--I wanted to say something, but I mean, that's my hard work that she's using it to wrap up her glasses with.  I said, oh, well, this is, this is going nowhere.  So I cut the magazine out and just concentrated on the record shop.
Story_ID: 83728
Speaker 1: So during that same period, another friend of yours that you met during your career passes, Mr.--an individual you meet at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  Tell us about that day when you find out he's passed?
Speaker 2: Ron [Ronald McNair]?  Yeah, Ron, I was coming out of work.  It was around 3:30 in the afternoon.  I got in the car--I knew the Space Shuttle [Challenger] was gonna go up.  So I was gonna go over to MIT, go over there and hang out with the guys at the Space Center and listen to everything from over there 'cause I had, I still had carte blanche over there, even though I wasn't there.  So I get in, and listening to one of the radio stations.  They were talking about the tragedy that just happened.  The tragedy just happened?  So I'm thinking it's a car wreck somewhere on the (unclear) or something.  Then they said, this is sad, something about a sad day in aviation history.  And I really rushed on over to MIT.  And I got over there, I got to the Space Center, and people were just milling around.  It was, you could hear a pin in that place.  They were just standing around, everybody just glued to the TV.  And they had the, the scanner thing on with the Telestar thing going, and you could hear 'em talking back and forth with Houston [Texas].  And they was talking about recovering units and you could hear 'em talking about all the planes are up, everything and the divers are in.  They was talking about things like, well, we have six divers in.  They're going down now.  And the, you could hear something like, well, we can't go no further.  We need robots.  We need robots to go deeper.  So you just know then, whatever they was trying to get, they couldn't get to.
Speaker 1: Did you know, did you like compare this to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I sort of, I sort of mentally, it sort of hit me back when Otis [Redding], you know, sort of, I think a flashback type thing.  So I, I withstood the pain of that.  And I worked with, I was doing the video thing, so I called, called guys at the station and told them I want every piece of footage you have on Ron McNair, and I got it.  And I made a little fifteen or twenty minute tape of him.  And I got a chance to meet his brother who I had met before.  We met at one of Jack-the-Rapper's Conventions in Atlanta [Georgia], and we set up a display in Atlanta on Ron McNair, just so that people would know who he was and everything at Jack the Rappers' Convention.  It's not--I felt honored to be able to pull that off and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Did you go to his funeral?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  I didn't go.  They had a big memorial in Boston [Massachusetts] and MIT just poured their heart out on that one.  Everybody from MIT was basically there, but I didn't go.
Story_ID: 83729
Speaker 1: Talk about your mom [Lucille Birdsong Veal]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the later years.
Speaker 2: Her later years in life?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She was--by this time, my mother had passed.  No, let me see.  She had passed about now.  My mother passed in '74 [1974].  In her later years, she, she taught school basically all her life, and she would come up to Boston [Massachusetts] sometimes and hang out with me and, you know, she--especially when the baby was born, she came up and stayed with us for a couple of weeks.  And interesting thing, she--the interesting--there was a story.  We were in Boston.  She had telephone numbers of people that she was gonna look up.  It was her first time in Boston.  And so she's on the phone.  She's talking and talking, and she said, well, your mother and I was good friends, and that type thing.  And she said, then they would say, well, I remember you.  She said, yes, I'm here in Boston with my son.  She said, well, where your son live?  She said on Rich Street.  She said, well, that's where I live on Rich Street.  And my mama turned around to me.  She said something like is there another Rich Street here, Buddy?  I said--she called me Buddy.  I said, not that I know of.  What's going on?  And she says, this lady's daughter say she lives on this street, and she's at her house.  And I said well, this is it.  It's only about fifteen houses on the street.  It's a short street.  And so I'm saying, I'm wondering who the heck that could be.  And so I told her to come up the street, come out 'cause I had to--my house was in the middle of the block.  And it's a brown Audi Fox sitting out front.  And she said, you at Newton Collier's house?  I could hear her on the phone saying that.  I said, who you talking to?  She said her name is Lennell (ph.).  I said, Lennell Rainey, right down the street who I just saw yesterday.  She said, yeah.  Then her, Lennell and her mother are walking down the street.  My mama's best friend.  I had met Lennell in Boston.  We had became best friends (laughter).  I just laughed at that.  That was one of my, that was one of my laughing points over a long time, and I said, ump.  And she had other addresses and telephone numbers of people that I had, had dealings with in Boston that I knew nothing about.
Speaker 1: So how difficult was it for you when she passed?
Speaker 2: It was, it was difficult.  I, when she came up, she had told me that she had cancer, and it was getting bad.  So I knew that time was getting bad, and then she suffered a little bit before she passed, but she was a lovely and sweet lady to me, and all, all my brothers and sisters.  And we came back.  We gave her a good going away, and it was a lot of people there, and it worked out okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 83730
Speaker 1: And (unclear) your dad, your father [Newton Collier, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Okay, my daddy.  Okay, I got to know my daddy in the last three years of my life--of his life.  And he was living in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  He had something to do with the Indian reservation down there.  I could never put it together, but he kept telling me I need to come down to see him.  So I never did get there.  And, 'cause I figured he'll be around, and I was gonna get there.  And he died on a Saturday evening.  I had talked to him that Wednesday.  And the nurse called and told me that it's best for me to hurry up and get on down here now.  And I asked her what was wrong.  She said he had had a massive stroke, and they didn't think he was gonna make it.  My daddy was very outgoing and he, he'd get sick but really nothing that I figured would knock him down, and he was, he dealt with something.  Whatever that is on the Indian reservation, it was real serious to him 'cause he would, he'll spend, he spent hours out there doing whatever it was.  And so when I got to Fort Lauderdale, I didn't know nobody.  And I went straight to the funeral home from the hotel.  I didn't even go by the mother's--the mother-in-law's house or anything like that.  And then when I got there, he told me, he's a friend of my daddy's, so he told me to go see Pearl, and then go to the reservation.  And so I went to see Pearl first, and when I was there, she said, she told me what had happened.  He was up, moving around fine and boom, just like that, and he just, and maybe within an hour, he was gone.  And I found out he had gout, whew, end up saying to myself, ump, and so she was nice to me.  She, you know, she was grieving and everything.  So I told her, I asked her if she wanted--she said, nah, she'd rather stay at the house.  And she stayed there.
Story_ID: 83731
Speaker 1: So I found my way to the reservation, and I took his car.  She wanted me to take--she didn't want me to drive the rental car.  And as I drove up, as you come off the highway and turn, there's a big thing where you sell tobacco.  It's a little, a little gift shop.  So I stopped in there, and I parked the car.  And I just saw all these people looking down the road.  They was looking, the Indian kids was looking.  Then they started running over toward the car, and then they stopped.  And they backed up. Then I went into the reservation and the guy that I spoke to at the Indian thing, she was just staring at me.  I'm the spitting image of my daddy really, but I'm shorter and I'm not quite as thick as he was.  And they just knew that I was the son, and I--as soon as I walked in--and I remember the lady's name was Ms. Betty Jumper.  And there was a--I met the secretary--you have to check in, if you're going to the reservation, you have to check in at the gate at the registration.  So we (unclear) to the Interior Department at the registration.  And I stood there and they just looking at me, just shaking their heads, you know, going side to side.  It's like they just looking at me.  She looked me up and down, and I'm just looking back at her.  And so Ms. Jumper walked out, Ah, I saw Newton's car pull up.  I said, well, I'm Newton Collier, Jr.  She said, "I gathered that".  She said I never--he talked about you, but I never met you.  And they (unclear) come on in.  And so she said, how is Newton doing?  We heard he wasn't feeling too good a couple of days ago.  I said, well, my daddy passed.  We'll be burying him in a couple of days from now.  She said, [expressing a look of shock] we didn't know this out here, just like that.  And she said, you hold on a minute.  She started calling different people.  And she said, Newton is dead.  I'm at the office, come over.  Cousins.
Speaker 2: Native American--
Speaker 1: (No audible response) (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 2: --were your cousins?  That's why he was visiting the reservation.
Speaker 1: (No audible response) (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 2: Have you built a--you have a relationship with them now?
Speaker 1: I have, I have.
Speaker 2: What nation?
Speaker 1: They are Seminole Indians, and they are descendants of the Osceola deal.
Speaker 2: So, do you go back often and visit?
Speaker 1: Well, I can't--I'm in communication with a couple of 'em.
Speaker 2: Now, that is amazing.
Speaker 1: And it shocked me.  And that explained some of the things--and I told my aunt here in Macon [Georgia], she didn't know.  She said, that explained, she told me, she said when--she said that explains some of the things your mother had issues with, why he wanted to go down to Florida all the time and didn't want her to go.
Speaker 2: Do you think he was ashamed of his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I think so, um-hum, ashamed of his background and family.  And my nieces and them used to tell me, "Your daddy have pretty hair.  What he do?  Process his hair?  And I said, I haven't seen my daddy in years, and I don't even know what you talking about.  His hair all the way down here.  His beard look like that too.  He's a old man, and he process his hair.  I--and after I saw him and in the coffin I looked, and I said, oh, I see what they talking about.  He had full Indian hair.  And I, when I met my, one of my aunts, and she had her hair split down the middle into the braids and hair hanging down, I said, great day (laughter).  I mean the genes were thick, man.  I was looking at all the, all these, especially their facial things.  They were just--that was an awakening for me.  So I stayed in touch with them all the, even up to now.
Story_ID: 83732
Speaker 1: The first one is, the day you were nominated or nominated to go into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame?
Speaker 2: Okay, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Tell me how you felt and everything?
Speaker 2: That is not exactly a nomination that everybody--I wasn't actually nominated.  What happened, it was like they called, well, they sent me a letter.  It was like a letter they send out.  And they told me that I eventually would be inducted and stuff like that.  So I'm still, I'm mentally--I don't even know what I thought.  And they would--I wasn't--it's not an induction.  I will be a member of the inductees over a period of time into the Hall of Fame, and after everybody just wait their time.  But that's just something, you know, it's just--
Speaker 1: Proud moment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the chittlin circuit (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Pride because of that memory that you are remembered, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 83733
Speaker 1: And my final question is--well, before my final question, music's done for your life, what do you see how the role of music can play in the lives of other young African Americans, seeing what you created?
Speaker 2: What I see now is, a lot of 'em are out there.  They need to learn the business of music.  Music is music, but there's a business end that's basically 90 percent.  The performing side of it become natural if it's there.  You can't take someone that has only a year experience, that doesn't know how to read music, doesn't know the laws of music, especially with the copyright system going on like it is, trying to bootleg somebody's material, and then get out there.  You end up like Milli-Vanilli.  And they need to get more education.  They need to go to a school like Berklee School of Music, Indiana University or somewhere that has a foundation that teaches music theory, the bookkeeping of it, and the business end of it.  The performance will come if it's there.
Story_ID: 83734
Speaker 1: And final question, what do you want your legacy to be?  What do you want to be most remembered for?
Speaker 2: Hmm, being Newton, someone who tried to help other musicians along and I guess till the day I die, I'll try and keep the music that I know of, and I try to open up avenues for other people and little small bands.  I sort of mentor a couple of bands around Macon [Georgia] now, and whatever they can do--whatever, like I get 'em to a certain point, and I tell 'em, "You got it, go".  I like to do that type of stuff, and I would just want people to remember me as that type of person.
Story_ID: 83735
Speaker 1: What was the chittlin circuit?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what did it mean at that time, I mean to you?  But also, what is it?  Any time.
Speaker 1: Okay, the chittlin circuit.  The chittlin circuit is a string of night clubs, predominantly black, that are around the Southern, and the Northern--well, they're around the United States.  The average chittlin circuit club will be able to seat, any number of clubs.  It's gonna be a low-end, dive, ghettos type club.  And the top of the chittlin circuit is always the Apollo [Theater in New York].  When you play the Apollo, you have reached the top of the chittlin circuit.  Then you can into your better clubs like the Sahara, the Vegas clubs, your predominantly, good, upscale white clubs.  Chittlin circuit pay is gonna be one third of whatever you think you're gonna make on the road.  A lot of times it's just like it is, to get a bowl of chittlins and you get a chance to circle around till the next bowl come back.  That's the next club.  Some places you can get maybe $500 for your services.  Some you work for the door.  That's basically what it is.  So you're back to eating chittlins again.  And that's where that complete concept came from.  And I think it might have came out of the old film system too 'cause there was a chittlin circuit in the films, with the TOBA system.  And that was--you want me to talk about that too?  TOBA?  Okay, TOBA was--it was actually called the Theaters Owners Broadcasting Association.  But it also had another name to it too.  And it was just a basic system where they had 20-something--at one time, there were 42 TOBA clubs.  I mean they was actually clubs, but they were actually theaters.  And at that time, the blacks couldn't get a movie shown or seen or go to any other type clubs or theaters, but these type theaters.  So TOBA would bring the artists into the theaters.  That's how you got Ma' Rainey to be at all these theaters all over the South, and they promoted the TOBA and the music industry at the same time.  You would come into a movie and see a show also.  That's how the International Sweetheart of Rhythms worked.  Ma Rainey worked that way.  Suzie and Butter Beans, they worked that way.  And it was just a low end in the black community, Saturday preferably, way of entertainment.  They'd run sometimes two or three movies, maybe a good movie in the daytime and then as the evening come, they'd have boom, some famous movie.  And that's, it's a parallel between TOBA and the chittlin circuits.
Story_ID: 83195
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  One of the other things, Sam, I was going to ask about is, I know that you had said that, as musicians and artists, you guys were kind of apolitical, but I just wondered if you had experienced or seen any, you know, any incidents of discrimination, as you were traveling,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --things that stuck out?  How, from that perspective, what's the political--(unclear) (simultaneous) and define the political aspects--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We've been discriminated against many times.
Speaker 1: We're about to get rolling (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We're rolling.
Speaker 1: Rolling?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, back in the '60's [1960s], we were riding up and down these roads at night and discrimination was big time.  A lot of places, we couldn't go into, and a lot of cities, we were actually, deliberately didn't wanna go through at night 'cause it'd be bad news.  It would be real bad news at night.  And you could be killed mostly on these backroads and nobody know anything had happened to you.  And especially down in--like we would play, we'd play like Alabama, University of Alabama and then have to go to Oxford, Mississippi.  So going--we would stop over at Florence and stay in Florence or Sheffield or (unclear)  They're all one city to me 'cause one (unclear) just (unclear).  So you would find somewhere to stay right up in there.  And then we would wait for daylight and travel in daylight and try not to travel too much at night, if possible.  That didn't always work out.  So we had to do a lot of traveling.  And the safe haven was when we get closer to Memphis [Tennessee].  The closer you get to it, the safer we felt.  I know one night we went down through Baton Rouge [Louisiana], somewhere down, going down the highway, going towards New Orleans [Louisiana].  And for miles and miles, we couldn't see nothing, no kind of lights.  And someone said something about he saw a spotlight.  Everybody on that bus woke up to see where was that spotlight coming from.  We never saw it but one time.  We don't know whether that was a signal to somebody or what.  But we did run into some pretty interesting situations where the state troopers in Alabama would see us.  They would lead us through.  They could tell us to "follow us" and go this way instead of going that way.  So we make sure that bus stayed gassed up, and all of that food we had on it, we just didn't worry about.  We just slept on that bus until we got to safe havens.  And it was rough.  And there was no back up.  We didn't have no portable telephone (laughter).  Hey, send the troops in (laughter).
Story_ID: 83196
Speaker 1: What's the difference between the Memphis [Tennessee], Macon [Georgia] and Detroit [Michigan] sounds, specifically that Motown (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, Memphis, I mean, okay, start with Motown.  Motown is sophisticated.  It's slick.  It has vio--yeah, violins and having upscale.  It's not raunchy.  It's for an open market.  And Memphis is Bluesy.  A lot of (unclear) row organ, hornish, very little in the way of polished diction.  The words are slanted, deliberately sometimes to fit the scene.  Macon sound, Macon is a unique sound.  It has--well, Otis Redding, it could be said, it's basically the fundamental sound of Macon.  It's a deep roots sound with a lot of overlay of gospel, even your R and B and your Jazz.  That's basically what I think it is.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Was Otis Redding a romantic?  What did his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is interesting.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Where is his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  A lot of his songs are romantic love songs.  And he was.  He was classified as a--he would have been classified as a romantic-type singer.
Speaker 1: And how did you learn to write charts?
Speaker 2: Learn to write charts?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Through Sammy Coleman and Robert Scott.  And then when I went to hanging around (unclear) and Berkelee School of Music and all that, I really learned to write some slick stuff, and studying on my own.  I used to take a lot of Quincy, Quincy Jones' music that he had written for Ray Charles and break it down and see how he had the horns arranged for different things and all of the patterns and doing that kind of stuff, copying somebody else style.
Speaker 1: "LTD"?
Speaker 2: "LTD".
Speaker 1: (Unclear) stands for?
Speaker 2: "Love, Tenderness and Devotion".
Story_ID: 83197
Speaker 1: Okay, this is me playing the EVI, and I was playing at Cortese Lounge in Boston around '85' [1985].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Did you get the guy in the white suit?
Speaker 2: I don't know his name.  All I know is it's Muhammed something.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the left-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Exactly, let's start with the left.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me in my tuxedo.  I was married at the time.  I could tell 'cause my wife's dress hanging out the side.  We're getting ready to go to a party that I was playing at in my tuxedo.  That's basically what that is.  And I would say that's '71' [1971], '72' [1972].
Speaker 2: And on the other side is one of those fraternity parties I was telling you all about earlier.  That's me playing trumpet.  This is with the Pinetoppers band, and that's a guy named Arthur Bo Ponda doing the singing.  And this is probably around '65' [1965].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Could you spell Bo Ponder for us?
Speaker 2: Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Bo, B-O, Ponder, P-O-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, the next one up.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So how did--what was that song you were talking about that influenced you when you were really young?  The "Bugle--
Speaker 2: "Bugler's Holiday"?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, man. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I don't know if I've heard that.  It's a holiday--
Speaker 1: I've never heard that one either, yeah.  I was wondering.  Okay, there's the first one there.  I do it that way because it can all fit in that way.  (Unclear)  Is that off?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, it's just in the black.  But what we need to do is move the rubber band.  See, I think when they're different widths, Sam, it doesn't work too well 'cause the rubber band has to be more--(unclear), like on that one, the top rubber band (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Humming, demonstrating "Bugler's Holiday".  It's a very, very fast, up tempo.  The song is three minutes long.  It's full of 16th and eighth notes.  And it works the trumpet player to death.  The last part is the killer 'cause it goes and takes all three trumpet players into the high register.
Speaker 1: But you can play it?
Speaker 2: Yes, you have to hold it.
Speaker 1: Who's the greatest trumpet player of all time?
Speaker 2: Of all times?
Speaker 1: All times.
Speaker 2: I would say, I started to say Louie [Louis Armstrong], but--
Speaker 1: Miles [Miles Davis] or Louie, one of those two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of--yeah, somebody like Miles, Louie or somebody like that.  I would say Miles.
Speaker 1: I've heard people say Louis Armstrong played so loudly.  They used to put him in another room when they were making a tape--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause he could play so forcefully.
Speaker 2: That's who I wanted to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) He couldn't be with the rest of the band.
Speaker 2: Right. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, let's do this one.
Speaker 1: Okay, yours truly.  What am I?  Four, five years old?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I guess that's pretty good.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And where was this taken?
Speaker 1: Right here in Macon [Georgia].  I still ain't figure out--see, I smoked pipes in my later years.  I didn't know whether that was a pipe I was holding then or not (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Not if you mama was--
Speaker 1: There you go (laughter).  That definitely wasn't (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, what we have here, just a young Newton.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, this would have been--tell me if you can guess the age and if this was a school photo?
Speaker 2: School photo.  Age, I can't even think.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What school would that have been at that time?
Speaker 2: Bella Hudson.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  We're doing 'em so fast--
Speaker 2: See my ears?  I was working on trying to fly (laughter).  I can tell that was during the, I was just starting to play trumpet 'cause I see the little gimps (ph.) getting in my lips, getting (unclear)--yeah, lips getting cut up.
Speaker 1: Okay, this was at the Georgia Music Hall of Fame.  This was at the Awards Banquet for the radio station.  And we have A. C. Habersham (ph.) and Taylor Dennard.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  From left to right.
Speaker 1: Okay, A.C. Habersham-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And spell the names.
Speaker 1: Hamerham, H-A-M-B-R- Hamber--sham, S-H-A-M-E, I believe is correct.
Speaker 2: I know how to spell Habersham.  He used to be a famous guy.  H-A-B-E-R-S-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.  That's the way he spells his then.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is Tina Dennard (ph.).  She's the co-publisher.  They have what is called the "Macon Black Pages", and in the background is what it used to look like at the Hall of Fame on the wall of the Macon Room.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's the third floor.  And picture you see me holding is an award for the Black Deejays.  These are all the black deejays at the station at one time, through the history of the station.  And that's what that award is.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next, Sam.
Speaker 1: Okay, during my "LTD" days-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  "LTD" days, what, in the '80's [1980s]?
Speaker 2: No, this is in the '70's [1970s].  I imagine this is '74' [1974], '75' [1975].  This is before I got shot.  This is me working on getting back with the band.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Now, you've got the trombone there.  What made you switch to trombone from trumpet?  Or I mean you didn't really give up one--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't really give up.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You did both of them?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is, after a period of time, they started getting trumpet players that I couldn't compete with after a while.  I mean I, I wanted to be the best.  I mean I'm not gonna play unless I'm the lead trumpet player.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And to be honest with you, they kept getting younger guys, and they were scorching me so I had to--okay, ya'll, take this.  I take (laughter), I think I'm gone.  Follow me (laughter).  Got game for you, huh.  That's the reality of things like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the reason you see old saxophone players playing flute (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Got you.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is "Sam and Dave".  We're making a movie called "Takin' Care of Business" and that's Carla Thomas in the middle.  And if you notice, the white guy in the band is Steve Carpel from the "Blues Brothers".
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --who was the actual guitar player on all of "Sam and Dave's" material most of the time.  And just an aside, you can see the guy there--you can't see him too good, but that's the guy, looks like Fred (unclear) Westin, playing trombone?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's his cousin, Ben.  And Danny Blaylock, the guy on the end got me mixed up with my wife, wherever that son-of-a-gun is.  (Laughter) He should a never followed me (laughter).  They told me he was bad news (laughter).  And I guess you see, Tiny in the band, the big guy playing saxophone.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: But Tiny and Sam had a show all by themselves.  It was a bump and grind show.  Tiny could dance very well, but Sam would accidently bumping into him, and he'll be pushing Sam all across the--it's part of the act, you know.  They'd be pushing each other around and be getting mad at each other.  And we'd be trying to break 'em up, and, you know, just to keep the audience roaring.  That's what was happening.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  So from the left, this one is--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's Sam-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and then Carla Thomas--
Speaker 2: Carla Thompson and Dave Frasier.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And where are you in that photo?
Speaker 2: Behind Carla, playing the trombone.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, right there.
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  And this was--did we say the year on this, about the year?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, okay, next one.
Speaker 2: This looks like the Apollo Theater.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Let's start upper left and go clockwise.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's myself and Pete Carter.  You can barely see Bobby Pittman's saxophone in the middle, and then that's when we was doing our stand up--that's about as solid as you gonna ever see "Sam and Dave's" band members stand.  That had to be a slow song.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and moving over to the upper right?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's just a collage of me and Pete.  Then that same picture's in the center, and then at the bottom, you see me stretching--that's the reason I have arthritis, clicking my legs out like that all night long.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which one is that?  The--
Speaker 2: Down on both sides like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: You're Karate kicks and stuff.  When we were young, we could do 'em, but, you know, after 30 years, you do good to get your shoe on or to even tie 'em up, and get down there to tie 'em up.  That's what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And this was all from "Sam and Dave"?
Speaker 2: Right, "Sam and Dave".
Speaker 1: How did their residuals (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Their royalties, residuals?
Speaker 2: What money?  What you talking about?
Speaker 1: Royalties from the songs they made?
Speaker 2: What's that?  [Facetious]
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  They were very little and thin (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready for the next.
Speaker 2: You got this one from the video, right?
Speaker 1: Right, I was wondering about that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's gonna be what it is.  It's gonna be a little blurry, but go ahead and tell us about--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me on the left, Emil Hall, next to me, Danny Blaylock, looking at my feet.  You better stay in step, and his name is Robert--I can't think of his last name now.  And the drummer in the back is Clarence Riley.  He's from Macon, Georgia also.  And that was the "Ed Sullivan" video, and that's just the horn section or the trumpet section, minus Ben, the bandleader.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Any time you're ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Carla Thomas Show--sorry about all the blurredness and the little spots everywhere.  Life in the picture business.  That's me playing my EVI.  Behind it is Lannie (ph.) McMillian up front.  I think that's Lannie.  I'm not sure.  I think his name is Lannie McMillian.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's Carla Thomas singing and the guy in the back playing bass is named Idula (ph.), can't think of his last name.  This is in Boston, '85' [1985].  This was at the celebration of Cortese's (ph.) one-year anniversary at his night club.  And I brought Carla in and played the show too; trying to make all the money.  Yeah, you're right (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: Okay, you see Otis Redding standing out, you just barely see a trumpet player over in the corner.  And I wonder who?  And the trombone player is a guy named Norman Sellers.  This is their first band, "The Rocking Cabanas".
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and when would this have been taken?
Speaker 1: This is, this has to be '64' [1964] or '65' [1965] or maybe--whoa, no, '63' [1963], '64' [1964], '63' [1963], late in the year, '63' [1963], 'cause the "Rocking Cabanas" left just a wee bit after that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please?
Speaker 1: Oh, one of my awards from the Music Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead, please?
Speaker 1: This is one of the awards I received from the, the certificate from the Georgia Music Hall of Fame as a volunteer, the year 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we got that one, Sam.  Whenever you're ready.
Speaker 1: Going to, going to Asia.
Speaker 2: The view-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'm sorry.  Start one more time.  I had--(unclear), but go ahead.  I'm rolling now.
Speaker 2: This double dynamite, Sam and Dave.  This is when we had the Soul Men band which was a 15-piece band under the direction of Jimmy Norris.  And this is what we took to Japan.  We were the first group to go over to Japan to Operation Entertainment for the soldiers at Tachikawa Air Base.  This is one of the programs they used.  We played a club called the "Blue Gen Club" where the Shinseki dora (ph.) area across from the Sony toy factory where I spent a lot of time, I'm sorry to say.  I'm still a kid.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's "Sam and Dave" in action.  This shot actually was taken at the Apollo Theater, I believe.  And it just gives some of the names of some of the people that were involved in the group.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: And that's the thundering beef, 15-amp with the 18-inch Leslie in the back.  That's the only bass amplifier we used with the big band.  That was the monster of the day; tubes got hot.  We preferred to have a fan near the tubes too 'cause we raised a whole lot of dust back there.  And this had to be '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, whenever you're ready, Sam.
Speaker 2: These are the Sharmelle's (ph.).  They were a back-up group.  I go ahead--can I name 'em all in a row?  No, I can't.  I just know that's Barbara Bass, and that's (laughter) and that's Addie Jean.  Doggone it.  Let's see, I think her name was Sherrie.  But the names are down here.  I can't tell who's who.  I mean you're talking years ago.  I was drinking then (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were you drinking, Kool-Aid?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was (laughter), spirited Kool-Aid.  If you notice, my name is not on that program?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Really?  Oh.
Speaker 2: Now, that's one of those gigs I took (unclear).  And that's before they put those braces on me too.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: But they didn't let the braces stay on me long.
Speaker 1: Any of your daughter or mom?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Your parents, daughter or parents?  Do you have any pictures of your daughter or parents?  Your mom or dad?
Speaker 2: Of my daughter?
Speaker 1: Yes, do you have any-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's approximately '86' [1986], '87' [1987] when I came back to Macon.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Collier's Corner days.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We do have one more, sorry.  The last one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: I assume that is you in the middle?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It's my first time playing the Apollo.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was the Otis Redding show at the Apollo [Theater].  That had to be '65' [1965].  Up in the left corner, that's "Sam and Dave".  The guy in the middle, I can't think of his name now.  We called him "Cadillac".
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: But I can't remember his real name.  That's Otis in the top.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Then going clockwise--
Speaker 1: Okay, at 2:00  [position], we have Johnny Taylor.  At 3:00 o'clock, we have a picture of me, another shot and at about 5:00 o'clock, we have, there's Sam with a guy named Jim Connelly.  He was a up and coming singer at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: At the bottom, we "Rock G" as a young girl that came up to be on the talent show.  She was the winner of the Wednesday Night Talent Show which they still keep going.  And then we have a group called "The Mad Lads" out of Memphis and Carla and Rufus Thomas, then a shot of the immediate band, the three--well, we had five pieces at that time.  But that's three of us there, Jimmy Norris, myself and James Tatum on saxophone and me in the middle. With a full head of hair. I wasn't thinking about no Rogaine then.
Speaker 2: You can always wear a wig (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  Oh, okay, I see what you're gonna do.
