Story_ID: 5774
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: William Cousins Jr.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M C-O-U-S-I-N-S, junior.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: October 6, 1927, Swiftown Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired as of December 1st of last year.  Today is January 15, 203 [2003], and I'm a retired Appellate Court Justice, where I served on the Illinois Appellate Court.
Speaker 1: All right.  And can you give us today's date once again.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The date of retirement?
Speaker 1: No, today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 15th--16th rather.  I'm sorry, it's January 16, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 5775
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food happens to be (pauses) I would say fish.  And the fish that I probably prefer most often is salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color insofar as I would have one would be blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is fall, the months of September and October.
Speaker 1: Sir what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination although I've only been there on one occasion I would say it's Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "Be prepared."
Story_ID: 5776
Speaker 1: Sir could you tell us what you know about the origin of your family?  About your family tree.  Where does your family come from and how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: Actually my family name is derived from England but that's the most I can say pertaining to that.  My grandfather's name was William Cousins.  I'm really William III, although I have never used William III.  My dad [William Cousins]  never even used junior and my grandfather was deceased when I was born.  My grandmother was named Lula and she was a person with some Indian lineage.
Speaker 1: Do you know what Indian group?
Speaker 2: No I do not know what Indian group it was.
Speaker 1: Do you think it might have been Choctaw?
Speaker 2: I have no--.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother Lula was the matriarch of the family and she had eleven children.  She had six girls and five boys.  All of whom I knew well as I grew up and all of whom are now passed.  My parents actually had two children and I was the oldest.  I had a sister but my sister Beatrice [Cousins] was--died as a result of fire in our home in Swiftown, Mississippi when I was oh--about four or five years old.  I recall the incident, but that's all because I was present in the fire.  And I grew up as an only child not too long after that fire at our home in Memphis [Tennessee].  I don't recall too much about the situation except that the house we lived in was near water.
Speaker 1: Now sir--.
Speaker 2: Yes?
Speaker 1: What I was trying to get at with this first question was the origin of your family as far as any memories you have, any stories you've heard about your family's origin?  What were they doing during the slavery days in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, no, I have no knowledge--.
Speaker 1: --before the Civil War or--.
Speaker 2: --what they were doing during the slavery days except that it's fair to say that my family tree goes back to a time when members of my family were slaves.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So now even--you know, is there a story about when people first heard about freedom and when they first, you know, found out they were free to--.
Speaker 2: No, I have no--.
Speaker 1: Did you hear talk about that?
Speaker 2: --no, I have no information about that relative to my family tree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they talk about trying to acquire property or trying to do anything after the Civil War or being a part of the development of any educational institutions or churches or that sort of thing?  That's what I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: No.  Actually I did not know any of the members of my family tree before my grandmother and she was born during the time shortly after slavery.
Story_ID: 5777
Speaker 1: Well can you give us the name of your mother and spell it for us please and her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's name is Drusilla [Cousins], D-R-U-S-I-L-L-A.  She was born to Marie Lyons and Marie--she was born in El Dorado, Arkansas.  But my mother was really raised by one of her aunts whom she called Lovey in Mississippi.  My father--her date of birth is July 28th and she was born in 1908.  My dad was born in Jackson, Mississippi.  He was born July 8, 1903, one of five sons of Lula Cousins.  His dad was named William Cousins. He might have been named William Junior, but never Willie.  He used the name Junior.
Speaker 1: So tell us about your--I'll ask you first about your mother and then your father.  But can you tell us something about your mother in terms of what did she like to do?  And what did she do for a living and what her educational background may have been?  Or anything that you--any memories that you have of her?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Neither of my parents went beyond grade school.  They were, of course, workers and my father was a laborer.  And my mother during her life was a domestic except for during the war time when she worked in factories here in Chicago [Illinois].  My dad worked at various places as a longshoreman, as a dockworker and when he came to Chicago in 1939, he worked for the stockyards.  He worked with stockyards, Chicago stockyards and the stockyards closed and he worked as a longshoreman.  So neither of my parents had any higher education; however, they had a lot of common sense.  My mother, I understand helped to teach at the school, grade school, even though she didn't have anything more than a grade school education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have a story that they passed on to you about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, they never discussed how they met except that I know that my mother considered my dad to be a handsome man (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they met in Swiftown?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They, of course, met in Swiftown, Mississippi and then became joined in marriage there.  And as I've indicated earlier, had two children who--I was the oldest and I was born October 6, 1927.  Swiftown by the way is a place which is in the Delta in Mississippi.  It's--there were then and there still are no more than a couple of hundred people in Swiftown.  It's named after a man named Swift who virtually owned the town as a cotton gin.  That was the biggest thing in the town.  So the people there in large part worked in the fields.
Story_ID: 5778
Speaker 1: So the family moved from Swiftown [Mississippi] to Memphis [Tennessee] right?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And why did you--did you ever--I know that you were just a boy, but did you ever find out why the family moved?
Speaker 2: Well I'm sur--I'm sure that my dad [William Cousins] was seeking to make a better life for himself and his family.  And not only did he move with my mother [Drusilla Cousins] and me, but other members of our larger family.  My grandmother [Lula Cousins] who was the matriarch and the leader of the family had already moved to Memphis with a number of his brothers and sisters had moved then or later moved there.  But I'm also of the view that the death of my sister [Beatrice Cousins] probably had something to do with their wanting to, to locate elsewhere.
Speaker 1: So your sister died in a fire?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And  I mean are you--do you remember the details of what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I do know that we had--we had a stove in the place and that's how you heated those places, a potbelly stove and the door was open.  I don't know how the door came open but a blast of fire leaped out and engulfed my sister.  That's how she happened to be fatally burned.
Speaker 1: How old was she then?
Speaker 2: I would  say she was between three and four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Since I was under five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did the house itself burn?
Speaker 2: No, the house didn't burn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Indeed my mother happened at that time to have been outside of the house not too far away.  And a neighbor came by and came in and helped to get the burning under control.  But it was too late.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when your family moved to Memphis you were about how old?
Speaker 2: I was just about five years old.
Story_ID: 5779
Speaker 1: All right and sir, can you reflect back and give us a sense of what it was like to grow up--growing up in--well in Swiftown [Mississippi]  and in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know too much about growing up in Swiftown and I  have some--just some fleeting memories that's all.  But Memphis I know well.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I knew Memphis from top to bottom in a sense when I was there because I moved around Memphis and went to various places.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Did the family move around?
Speaker 2: Not so much by virtue of moving from house to house.  Although we lived in about three different locations as I recall and in one location my parents had a little store and a restaurant, one of the earlier places where we lived.  And the last place was a--the third place was a place across the street from a church; it's on South Willard Avenue.  But--but I traveled around the city myself as a boy going downtown and to the movies on Beale Street, which was a regular sojourn for me on the weekends to go to the movies early.  W. C. Handy Park or the Daisy Theater for that matter.  Beale Street then was a place where they said black folks met.  They didn't--any blacks to me.  And then I had newspaper route I had with a newspaper called the Memphis World.  The [Chicago] Defender was in circulation at that time.  This maybe--is the mid 30s [1930s] we're talking about this time.  And I developed the largest circulation that the Memphis World had in the city.  I rode around the city to where maids worked in the houses, you see.  I did on my bike.  I had a bike and I otherwise traveled.  I knew the city well and was acquainted to some extent with what was happening in the city.  In those days they had Boss running Memphis--in Memphis.  His name was [Edward Hull] Crump, Boss Crump, everything revolved around Boss Crump.  The city of Chicago [Illinois] here in Chicago you know, they talk about the [Daley] Machine, Crump.  I knew that, you see, that matter.  So I attended, you know, grade school there.  Three--two different schools and later Greenwood [Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] and reached the sixth grade there before my family moved finally to Chicago.  One thing I might say about there you know, your neighborhoods were such that blacks and whites lived in a sense in an interstitial situation, blacks on one street and whites on another street.  And when you might cross, you know, it wasn't, you know, such as all--it was in some areas, you see?  So when I went to school, grade school I passed from my area through white areas to get to the black school that I attended, Greenwood, you see?  So--and I recall the circumstances really and can even picture the buildings, you know, we had.  Which, of course, they didn't have integration there in their schools but we received a tremendous education in those segregated schools that I--the teachers, some of them I still recall them and how they taught us.  And we became acquainted with the Black National Anthem [Lift Every Voice and Sing].  That's one of the songs we sang, you see, at that time.  We were familiar with people like Marian Anderson.  We were.  When I came to Chicago I found less awareness of certain things than I was aware of as a student in Memphis--.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: --in grade school.
Speaker 1: So the teachers made a special attempt to make sure that you knew who you were culturally and--.
Speaker 2: I'd say yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.  At the school I was in attendance yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay now what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Well the last was Greenwood, it's no longer.  It's a frame school.  It was as things were segregated.  If I had remained in Memphis I would have attended Booker T. Washington [High] School 'cause Booker were--which is the school where most black--Negroes was the word then--attended.
Story_ID: 5780
Speaker 1: Well let me say this, segregation and discrimination was a way of life.  I was always mindful of the discrimination was taking place and I was keenly repelled by it.  People who talked used a--oh a word that was--I did not use.  I still don't use it, you see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And people didn't refer to me in that way.  Because I would rebel against it.  That was my make-up you see.  And it started with an N, you see?  And I was somewhat repelled when the white people referred to me in the terms they did.  And they did, you see?
Speaker 2: They didn--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] But it bothered me at that time.  Even though I was a boy, they referred to men as boys and they would never refer to me as anything but a boy.  See that's the way it was.  And the segregation--and it's something that I although went along with because I had no choice, I did not really accept without some rebellion inside of me.  Perhaps it's a good thing that my parents moved out of the South, you see, because I never really--I never really reconciled myself to the discrimination and prejudice that was manifest.
Speaker 2: Now did you see signs up that described like where you can drink?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh sure!
Speaker 2: I mean what did it look like?  I mean that's something that you--.
Speaker 1: Oh sure!  We--I attended movies.  There was a black movie.  There were two black movies on Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee].  And these were all black movies.  Whites didn't attend those movies.  There was another movie on Main Street where blacks could attend and sit upstairs, you see.  The blacks sat in the back, the whites sat in the front of the buses.  Interestingly enough you may have had some white acquaintances in the next block.  The children didn't manifest the same kind of oh--attitudes that their parents may have had, you know, in terms of their references and relations to blacks.  But it was--it was a circumstance where a person really who's keenly aware that he or she were not being treated as--fully as a person, in particularly young men as men would be unhappy about it.
Story_ID: 5781
Speaker 1: You were an entrepreneurial child, you know, in terms as a youth, you know, you were selling newspapers, riding--.
Speaker 2: I first--.
Speaker 1: --all over the city.
Speaker 2: I told my wife [Hiroko Cousins] after we were married I said--I told her--I'd say--I'd said, "You know, I was never broke until I got married."  And there was a certain amount of truth to that because I always found ways and means to earn some money.  Whether it was throwing circulars or whether it was selling newspapers or whatever.  I would--particularly when I--even when we came to Chicago [Illinois] I always had something to do to enable me to earn some money.  I'd--my family moved initially to 47--I think it was 35 South Langley, off 47th street.  And for the most part while I was in high school and through high school my family lived in the vicinity of 47th street--.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you--.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  But how old were you when--sir when your family moved to--.
Speaker 2: I was eleven years old.
Speaker 1: It would have been 1937?
Speaker 2: Actually I was born in 1927.  This was '38 [1938].  I was about eleven years old.  I spent two years in grade school here in Chicago.  I initially attended Forestville [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  Well the truth of the matter is my family came to Chicago--I was brought to Chicago initially a year before my family found--family moved here and only stayed for a couple of months and went to a school called Willard [High School, Chicago, Illinois] at that time, which was located around 49th and--48th and Forestville, went to--.  Then my family and I went back to Memphis [Tennessee] and finished the year in schooling there.  It was in fifth grade.  Then when I was in sixth grade my family moved to Chicago permanently.  But we were always around 47th Street and I would--and 47th Street was a busy street.  People who were familiar with Chicago, it was the heart of Bronzeville at that time with bustling business, most of which who were owned by Jewish persons, but some which were owned by black entrepreneurs, tailors and the like.  And South Center [Department Store] was at the corner of King Drive.  It was South Chi--it was South Park Avenue then and 47th Street.  And so I would go up on 47th Street and go in a store and ask, you know, if they needed someone to work there.  And they was, you know, they were surprised, but they would hire me.  And I'd be stock boy at grocery stores, at liquor stores or if I weren't doing that I was selling Fuller products.  Just, say that--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] The [Samuel B.] Fuller business was right there on 47th Street right?
Speaker 2: Well I was, but Fuller's main business was right around 39th Street but he later, you know, took and bought an interest in the South Center store.  Yeah, at one time.  What I'm saying though is that I found ways and means to earn money, even selling vegetables, going through alleys to make money, as a boy.
Story_ID: 5782
Speaker 1: So where did you get this sense of entrepreneurship?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: I always was a willing worker and thought that you could find ways and means to derive an income if you sought to do so.  And that accounts for my being proactive in seeking to do something or have something going on, rather than waiting for something to come to me.  That is--is and has been my make-up.  I would spend my time thinking about what I could do and should be doing to improve myself and my circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard from people who are Chicagoans who are from Mississippi that the reasons--one of the reasons why Chicago [Illinois] has such an aggressive black business community is because of the Mississippi connection. And that yeah--I think you know where I'm going with it cause it's valid.  But that there's so many--there's so much oppression in Mississippi, when people got here and had three things instead of ten, things just took off.  So, you know, they didn't have as many restrictions so they jumped at opportunities in a more aggressive ways than some others might.  Do you think that's true?
Speaker 2: I think there's some truth to that but another facet of that is that people who move from the South to the North are--were generally motivated in a--to a large extent, not all of them, but to a large extent in doing what they could to improve their circumstances.  And so this may account for some proactivity on the part of a good many.  I was talking about my early days in Chicago and you know, my going around as a boy, you know, finding jobs.  I have always felt that--and this is one of my guiding principles, is you shouldn't waste your time.  You should be doing something constructive and meaningful at all times that you can.  Whether in terms of what you're doing in your work or regarding your preparation to do what you're planning to do, you should do your best.  And so in school I always felt at every level whether in grade school, high school or law school that it was in incumbent upon me to do the very best that I could so that I could make the most that I could with what I had.  And with that approach, I was able really to do well.
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: --at every level.
Story_ID: 5783
Speaker 1: Now sir did you have any mentors or coaches or people that encouraged you, you know, at school or in the community to be proactive like this and to be more con--?
Speaker 2: I had some people who certainly encouraged me.  And my parents were always supportive of me.  There was nothing, absolutely nothing they wouldn't do to support me in what I was doing.  They wanted me to have everything that they had not been able to have and I felt that they--since they shared with me very considerably to compare it to the little that they had, that I'd be letting them down if I didn't do the most that I could in order to do the best that I could.  And so this manifested itself in my work habits in school in particular.  I didn't know what I would be doing when I became a man.  Certainly I didn't know that I would become a public official or a judge.  I didn't know that but I did know when I was in school that I would be able to make it.  I knew that and I was confident of that.  And I did have an attitude too--and a view that the world that I was living in would be a different world and a better world later on.  And I felt that I had an obligation to do all that I could to contribute to making things better for myself and also to have things better generally.  I felt that I was fortunate enough to be able to work and to learn and I should make the most of it and that was a driving force behind me doing what I did.  I didn't work all the time, no but I worked when I should be working.  And it develops it--although I hadn't--I had no personal acquaintanceship when I was, you know, in grade school with any professional people of any consequence who were black.  I didn't.  And really I never was in a circle even when I was in high school where you might say people of the bourgeois class were involved.  I did not know a lot of professional people.  Certainly I knew teachers but I hadn't met--and I met some lawyers when I was in high school.  And I had--I decided that I would become a lawyer when I was in high school.  But I had never met and didn't meet anyone who was in the judicial category until I was out of law school.  I met my first black judge after I graduated from law school.  Well we didn't have any black judges of any consequence.  We only had one while I was in college here in the state of Illinois.  So, my aspirations were when I finished high school were to become a lawyer.  I'd originally thought of become a mathematician because I--well I, I had--.
Speaker 1: Did you like math in school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes surely and I--excelled in math.
Speaker 1: Was math your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: It was my favorite subject in a sense when I was coming through law school.  It wasn't in a sense, that I--of course took math courses and related courses and various, you know, the algebra and the trigonometry and those sort of things in math.  But I reflected on what could I do with it.  I knew you could do something with it, but you have--you can't do as much with that as you can do with some other things I felt, you know,  for myself.  And then I thought about what I might do.  Where I might have my greatest potential and I decided that it was in the area of the law where you could--had vast opportunities.  And so when I left high school--and by the way I attended DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] and there I got my first taste of politics when I ran for president of my senior class and was elected.
Speaker 1: Now we ought to dwell on that for a minute, your time at DuSable--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we don't wanna jump over it.  But--so you sound like a very serious young man.  You're thinking about law school in high school, you know, a lot of people become a senior and have no idea what they're gonna do--.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: --but you're thinking about that at this point.
Speaker 2: Well--yes.  I, of course, matured early in terms of, you know, my thoughts and I would say--and I've said this a number of times.  I'm seventy-five at this time and certainly I'm different and have learned a lot.  And certainly I should be more wise and it's suggested I have a certain--but I am basically--I said, I am basically the same person now that I was when I was in high school.  The same philosophy and basically the same views.  Of course, issues have changed, but some of the issues are--still remained the same that I had then; that I have now, I had then.  I had then.  I had developed to that point and because of my study habits and work habits, reading habits and the like, after I finished high school, finished at DuSable and went on to college, my academic work in college exceeded my academic work in high school, because of my capacity for work and my level of development at that time.  Maybe, I hadn't kept pace so much in later years as to who I was at that time.  And by virtue of applying myself there I had a degree in political science with honors when I came out of college in three and a half years.  And then I also had a ROTC [Reserved Officers' Training Corps] commission, which I had obtained by virtue of getting credit for the time I was in ROTC in high school.  I was able to get through the requirements of the required courses in the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] for all their male students in ROTC in less time than two years.  And then when they had the advanced course for the first graduating group after the World War II, I was in that course.  And I was the outstanding graduate in the infantry mass course coming out of the University of Illinois at that time.
Story_ID: 5784
Speaker 1: I just wanna go back to high school for a minute.  You sound like you were so serious but did you engage in any recreations?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: I was on the track team.  I was on the track team.  I wasn't an outstanding runner, but I won a letter. And I had mixed emotions in becoming a member of the track team.  I won.  I wasn't as fast as some of my contemporaries.  Things were not as bad on the streets of Chicago [Illinois] as they later became.  But there were still encounters that you had at times, you know, when you traveled around in Chicago.  You traveled by foot and so forth.  They didn't, you know, kill people but I mean you ran into some people, you know, who were hooligans at times, you see. And in some of those circumstances you had to size up the situation and determine whether you should stand or move out.  And so I decided [laughs] I should be prepared to move out if [laughs] it came necessary and to put some distance between me and them.  And that was, you know, a secondary [laughs] consideration.  And I was on the track team and I was very much involved in the extracurricular activities in the school.
Speaker 2: Now what did you run in track?
Speaker 1: I ran the--the half mile was my, of course, particular race but I also ran the mile and the cross-country.  And in the relay teams I even moved down to the mile relay team.  And--but I was not an outstanding runner.  I was good enough to win a letter.  No I didn't spend--.
Speaker 2: --you did good, you know--.
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't spend all of my time studying but I studied when I had to study and I always had a routine, work when we should be working and play when you should be playing.  And I adhered to a kind of discipline.
Speaker 2: Now were your parents real strict about that?  Or just--.
Speaker 1: No, no my parents were not st--my parents sort of left me to figure out and do things myself.  I've always been an independent person.  As a child, after grade school my parents did not generally buy my clothes for me.  I bought my clothes.  I shopped for my clothes.  They endowed me, you know with funds and I supplemented it with what I had but they left me sort of as a--on my own.  And I, of course, did not violate that trust.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I sort--what were some of the other activities that you engaged in high school other than running track and--?
Speaker 1: Well I was president of my class.  I was also in competitions representing the school in various contests, you know, involved in mathematics, history and we had interchanges between the various schools.  So the students from DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] went outside of our community, even to some white schools on occasion and participated in city events, citywide events.  I was very much involved in what you call the student government kind of arrangement.  I was also affiliated with a group they call High Y.  It's a group affiliated with the Wabash YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] at 37th and--it's Wabash, yes.  And there was sort of a mecca there where people came together, not just for athletics, but for other things.  And this group of high school students came from around the city; they did from various schools and we did things together.  Some of us went down--my first visit to Champaign [Illinois]--I mean to Springfield [Illinois] for instance it was by virtue of being a member of that group and going down as representing the group.  And it's because I was a member of that group too that I was led to stay at the Kappa Alpha Psi house when I attended University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois].  I'd never set foot on the University of Illinois before I started school there but what happened is that a representative, a state representative by the name of Charles [M.] Skyles came to DuSable to address my graduating class and he gave a scholarship to the school, a general assembly scholarship and the school gave it to me.  And but for that I would not have gone to the University of Illinois.  Of course it didn't cost much but I had no plans to move outside of the city.  But when one of my teachers at DuSable found out that I was going to go to University of Illinois, he suggested, "Well why don't you see about going to the Kappa house."  And then he referred me to a person who, of course, was manning the Kappa house who happened--been the person who was advisor to the High Y group.  And so arrangement were made for me to, you know, go to the Kappa, that's how I ended there.  So yes, we got some sense of guidance and some direction and I was very much involved and active outside of my studies.  The fact is relative to my academics I was so involved in extracurricular activities until I went to summer school once at [Edward] Tilden [Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] to take a course while I was in high school so that I would have lesser load for classes and more time to do these other things while in high school.
Speaker 2: That's just the opposite of what our high school students do.  They take the time off while they're supposed to be going to class and then they have to go to summer school to make up for it.
Speaker 1: [laughs].
Speaker 2: So you went to summer school to get a jump and then you--.
Speaker 1: I went to summer school so I wouldn't have to take I think it was an English course.
Speaker 2: --course.
Speaker 1: --an English course that I took, so that I would have less to take and more time to do other things.
Speaker 2: This is interesting, you know, you're an unusual in that regard.
Speaker 1: [laughs].
Speaker 2: I suppose there weren't many like you, you know.  It doesn't sound like it.
Speaker 1: [laughs].  We had a lot of good solid students though who were my contemporaries.  They--a lot of my contemporaries went on really.  They were not straight A students which are--and the like.  Good solid students went on to become professionals particularly in the teaching area and even doctors and the like.  Yes, we--.
Speaker 2: There were quite a few musicians too I think at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Well they--yes.
Speaker 2: In the various grades we had one of the--we had a Dr. Walter Henry Dyett who directed DuSable choir--band and some outstanding musicians.  One person who should have been in class with me was Johnny Griffin.  Johnny was at the school and he was at Forestville [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  He was a very well known person.  And then when he was at Forestville--and--but he became wedded to his music.  But he was one of my contemporaries.
Story_ID: 5785
Speaker 1: Now at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] how were you treated?  I was surprised to see the large number of Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi] on campus--there on campus in 1942, I think it was.
Speaker 2: This was--I attended the University of Illinois between '45 [1945] and '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I [chuckle] I was a mid-year graduate, graduate of '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated in June of '48 [1948].  And--we had fraternities there and then sororities and that's how our social life really was daily conducted, through the fraternity and the sorority activities.  And it's a very good thing too because it enabled us as young men to bond together, to do things together.  And to this day a good many of the people I interact with are people who were in school with me at that time.  It's a bond that has remained.  And we lent support to each other at the school and afterwards.  Now it didn't have very many black students in the University of Illinois.  The percentage was small but most of us who were there knew each other cause it wasn't as many and it was because we had these fraternity and sorority events that we attended.  The housing at the University of Illinois was not integrated at that time.  The city discriminated in its places of public accommodation.  A half block from the house where I stayed was a Steak-n-Shake.  We could not sit in that Steak-n-Shake and eat.  I never went to a theater in the University of Illinois cause I didn't want to sit in the back.  I didn't attend a movie.  I knew where we were, you see.  I'm saying this was me.
Speaker 1: This was a lot different from Chicago [Illinois] at that time?  Or was--?
Speaker 2: We're talking about Champaign [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In Urbana [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah right.
Speaker 2: Urbana, you see?  It was a lot different from Chicago.  That's all.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In the sense--and surely in Chicago you could go to movies.  You weren't segregated in movies and the like.  So there was that distinct.  Champaign is the southern part--it's the middle sec--it's part of Illinois but in the southern part of Illinois you get down to Cairo [Illinois].  In those days it was like South, you see?  So they still had these patterns of activity at that time.  My activities at the University of Illinois were generally revolved around what was happening on campus and going to the barbershop out in town [chuckles] to get my hair cut, or going to church out in the community.
Story_ID: 5786
Speaker 1: Now you were a political science major?
Speaker 2: I was a political science major with minors in economics and philosophy.
Speaker 1: Were there any professors that you thought were outstanding there who--that you really appreciated there?
Speaker 2: Well I had some outstand--professors with whom I had very good relationships.  It so happens that during my first year I took a course called The Rhetoric of Aristotle.  I really got credit for a first year rhetoric course in my first semester and took a second year rhetoric course in my first semester.  And my second semester as a freshman I took The Rhetoric of Aristotle.  And it was a teacher, white teacher taught that course.  A lady by the name of [Ruth] Kelso. I remember her name.
Speaker 1: Would you kindly spell it.
Speaker 2: K-E-L-S-O.
Speaker 1: Kelso.
Speaker 2: Kelso.  And what we did during that course was a lot of reading and writing and so we had a theme to write on.  And she said to me, "I suggest you write on the subject prejudice."  So a whole--the whole semester I spent my time reading about prejudice.  And she felt I should know something about this.  And she was very insightful, 'cause she saw obviously in me a young man who, of course, maybe knew some things, but maybe I needed to know more.  And you'd be better off if you did.  And she's right.  I derived a great deal of benefit from her course.  And then I had another teacher who was a speech teacher named Hockmuth.  And she, of course, took an interest in me.  She was a white teacher and remained a reference for me, you know, the time I was there till the time I went to law school and after that.  And I had a relationship with several of the teachers.  Although things were very impersonal generally between students and teachers there.
Story_ID: 5787
Speaker 1: You were talking about your professors--.
Speaker 2: At the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois].  Yes I had some professors, several with whom I became very closely associated.  I'd--and with Hockmuth [NOT FOUND] even had communications with later after I left school.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name for us?
Speaker 2: It's H-O-C-H-M-U--.  H-O-C-K-M-U-T-H.  But by and large the relationship between students and professors at the University of Illinois was very impersonal because you had some classes that were lectures.  You went to a lecture hall.  You list--and lectures were held to a large group of students.  And then you, of course, you did not have too much interaction with the--with professor.  And even a good deal of the time even when you didn't have the lecture hall, the professor came, the hour went, the professor left.  You saw the professor the next time you came to class and that's the way things went.  You took exams.  You may have had a number, you see.  The professor posted the results by that number.  You got your grades that way. Of course, they were generally sent through the mail too but they--if you needed to be led by the hand, that's not a school to which you might been well advised to go.  You needed to have some discipline yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were a good student, an outstanding student from what you said.
Speaker 2: Right.  I graduated with honors in political science.  I had good grades.
Story_ID: 5788
Speaker 1: Now did you know--I think when you were there that [Claude] Buddy Young was an athlete from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Buddy Young is an interesting person, in terms of his career.  Buddy Young had gone to University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] the semester before I started.  I started in January of '45 [1945].  Buddy had started in University of Illinois in the fall of '44 [1944] and he was outstanding.  Then--that's one semester.  Then he went away to service and he came back in the fall, I think it was '47 [1947], and he played again.  He was outstanding again. The University of Illinois went to the Rose Bowl January 1, '48 [1948].  And that was Buddy's career at the University of Illinois.  I don't think a lot of people of mine know that, you see [laughs].  But he made a big impact in a short period of time and then went on to foo--.
Speaker 1: Did you win the--.
Speaker 2: But I knew--.
Speaker 1: --the Rose Bowl?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We crushed UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] I think in that.  I think--.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was forty-eight to nothing, right.  Now I never missed a football game at the University of Illinois.  I say some people may have the notion that I studied all the time.  I worked during the week, you know, and did--in terms of my studies and did other things that I--during the week too.  But I took care of my studies during the week.  But on the weekends I did not generally study.  I relaxed.  I had extracurricular things to do.  And that was my pattern through law school but it was discipline.  I did not generally play when I should have been working, you see.  And when my--when I'd done my work that I had to do to prepare myself, then, of course, I had, had time to do other things, yeah.
Story_ID: 5789
Speaker 1: When I completed my courses at the University of Illinois I had the advanced ROTC [Reserved Officers' Training Corps] finished, completed and an infantry commission second lieutenant.  And I also had my degree.  And I had been accepted at the--Harvard Law School [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I applied to four law schools and all of them accepted me, Harvard, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Columbia [University, New York, New York].  They did because I had a very balanced background.  I couldn't play football but I was even out for the 150-pound football team.  I was on the debating team [laughs] and--where I traveled around the state, you know and the like.  So let's say I was not viewed as just a student, student and I was not and I'm not.  And then so I entered law school.  I'd never been in that area before.
Speaker 2: In the northeast or--?
Speaker 1: No. My first occasion to go to Massachusetts was when I went there with my half trunk on my back, you know, to go to law school.  Interestingly enough I did not have advanced housing.  They had one hall for housing for law students and that was called Hastings Hall.  And the seniors generally had that--the rights to that housing and the other students stayed in places where the school had arranged, you know, they could go and find a place to stay and place to be.  Now I went to a--initial place for referral and I was not accepted, you know.  This was in Boston, in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  The reason why I was not accepted because of who I was, you see.  So I ended up staying at the--initially with a black family in 101 and a half Inman Avenue which is about six or seven blocks from law school, you know in a room.  I did.
Speaker 2: Did you have to find it yourself?  Did you have to find your own lodging?
Speaker 1: That was referenced too--that was on reference too.  But it was not the first, you know, reference I went to.  Yeah.  And after I, after I was, after about oh--three months, they were in the process--the school was in the process of building new housing for students.  Well strike that, 'cause that's not true--after about three months the school found housing for me on campus.  It was at the Divinity Hall, at the Divinity School [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I was assigned a room with a accommodation with another black student from New York.  His name was Lloyd Bacchus at that time.  Lloyd was repeating the first year at that time and from there after I was on campus.  At the law school I--again was not, you know, studying all the time but I can say this, during the weekdays I would be involved in my studies from morning to night generally.  That was the pattern with just about everybody there was that way, you see.  And sometimes into the evening because of the amount of work--but during--you had to do.  But during the weekends I had extracurricular activities.  During the weekdays we fitted in some things pertaining to school activity too.  I was active in the forum, the Harvard Law School Forum.  They broadcasted over New England.  We brought speakers in.  We brought [Adam] Clayton Powell [Sr.] in and I was responsible for that, you know, as a member of the forum.  "Invite him in, let him speak to us, you know, on our forum.  Broadcast."  I became chair of the Harvard Law School Forum.  I did during my senior year, what happen--but my activities socially by and large while I was in law school were not at the law school.  Well they had some functions there but that--on the weekends my activities were generally in Roxbury [Massachusetts].  Roxbury was where I went to.  That's predominately a black area.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us please.
Speaker 1: Roxbury, R-O-X-B-U-R-Y.  So I went to church in Roxbury and I became acquainted with, you know, people in the community.  And we formed a--an alumni chapter of my fraternity Kappa Alpha Psi in Roxbury.  So that was the--generally the source of my outlet for activities.  On campus I also had a bond with a group of students.  That group of students all were white.  Now mind you we had only three blacks admitted in my class.  One of them was [Clarence] Clyde Ferguson who later became a professor at the school.  Who was also a ambassador.  Clyde served as dean at Howard [University, Washington, DC] for a while.  Clyde had a tremendous career.  He died prematurely but he became the first black professor from my class at the law school.
Speaker 2: At Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: At Harvard Law School.  Clyde was not in my running circle though, see?  My running circle was comprised of a group of about several white fellows, one of whom was my roommate and we did things together on and off campus.  So for a while I lived--except the weekends, I lived in a different world, you see [laughs].  In other words my--of course, interaction was not so much with blacks as it was with my black, you know--white contemporaries.  And that's good for education.  Because they found out I learned--from what they told me some things they didn't know, through me.  And I found out some things that didn't know through them about race and relationships.  That's the advantage of affirmative action.  That's the importance of having diversity and interaction.  Now it's true it's minimal because of the minimum number of people.  But being deprived of that people grow up with false notions and presumptions that are absolutely and--wrong--.
Speaker 2: --and unfounded.
Speaker 1: Affirmative action is under attack now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, has been.
Speaker 1: Not much, from the president--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me, now you were the only black student in your graduating class at Harvard.  Right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Clyde Ferguson and I graduated together.
Speaker 1: Oh Clyde Ferguson.  You were the president of Harvard Forum or--?
Speaker 2: Just the forum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Harvard forum--right.  So who were some of the--who were some of the professors at Harvard then that you, you know of--.
Speaker 2: Well professors then they are not there.  But we had the dean of the law school, [Erwin N.] Griswold who taught taxation.  We had Austin Wakeman Scott who taught trust.  We had [Warren A.] Seavey who taught torts.  We had several of the most outstanding law professors in the country.  It--you can't get a better education, legally. You couldn't then, than you could get there because of the thought provoking way in which they taught you.  It was not a process where you learned by memory.  It was a learned--it's a process where you learned by thought, reasoning and analysis.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: It was a psychotic method that they used in law but it was also the prodigious amount of reading that you had to do.  It was prodigious.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Let's say you could feel the stretch [laughs] in your mind from what was going on based upon the amount of work that you had to do but you benefitted from it.  And you were well equipped to take care of what had to be taken care of when you finished.
Story_ID: 5790
Speaker 1: Now I did not--when I finished law school I had been called to serve in the military.  I was sitting on a second lieutenant commission infantry, having received that when I graduated from college.  I had not been active in the reserves, which I was entitled to be.  No, that's not altogether true.  I had not been active with an infantry unit in the reserves while I was in law school and the reason for that is because the Massachusetts military district had a--an infantry outfit, but it would not accept me.  That was so in Boston [Massachusetts], you see?  So I--.
Speaker 2: Yes this is so.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes. This is the cradle--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] If any place--.
Speaker 1: --of democracy.  But even so you have these vestiges and--of discrimination.  And so I was attending meetings with another group from time to time and--occasionally.  When the Chinese jumped across Yalu [River] in '50 [1950] I got orders two months later to report to the 10st Airborne division in Breckinridge, Kentucky.  I'm sitting on an infantry commission and that's my profile.  I withdrew from school in December to report.  I came home.  I wrote to the army though requesting a stay and the basis of my request was that I was being penalized with the discriminatory policies of the army.  I had no problem serving the army; however, I had been called at this time because I was at large.  My--now the unit there that I should have been affiliated with was not being called.  I was not asking to be scooted or exempt, you know, period but I was asking for a stay until I graduated.  To my surprise while I was home I got a twix [telegram] reversing those orders and ordering me to report to the commandant of Fort Devens, Massachusetts the day after the date I'd given them that I was to graduate, which was in June of 1951.  And then I did.  I attended graduation; went to the ceremony, my mother [Drusilla Cousins] had come to that, you know.  And then I went on out to Fort Benning [Georgia]--Fort Devens in Massachusetts reported for duty and then began my service.  But there at Fort Devens, Massachusetts I ran into something to be surprised about too.  They assigned me to the quartermaster unit.  They had an infantry unit.  I asked about that.  I said, "I'm an infantry officer."  That was my make-up at that time, you see.  Well they don't--they didn't have infan--blacks--infantries assigned at the infantry office.  They didn't assign me there.  I spent a month or two at that quartermaster outfit and then I went on to Fort Devens, Ma--Fort Dix [New Jersey].  And then I assigned at Fort Dix and then to Camp Kilmer [New Jersey] to be shipped or to be further assigned. I did courts and boards work although I was not a lawyer.  And there for--at Kilmer for several months and then I was given orders to report to Fort Deven--I mean Fort Benning, Georgia for an associate basic infantry officer's school. I didn't know it at that time.  Some people at Kilmer thought I was being penalized because of my active participation as a defense counsel in courts and boards there but that was not so.  I was in the pipeline to go to Korea at all times.  And after being at Benning for three and a half months I was then sent to the Far East Command by Japan to make the--have further preparation to go to Korea where I, of course, performed duties as a infantry officer between the fall--during the fall of '52 [1952] and through the spring and to the summer of '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Now wait--.  For those who may not know the difference between an infantry unit, you were the troops that would be on the fields and the quartermaster would be basically in charge of supplies.  Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: That's the difference.  I think most people don't--.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --hear the statement and don't necessarily--.
Speaker 1: Well that's true.  But I served as an infantry second and then a first lieutenant in Korea.  And then when I completed my tour of duty then I came home.  But an interesting thing about my service in Korea is that what is happening in Korea, see--people, of course are let's say--ignore the facts of life.  The facts of life as they were and to a large extent as they are now.  Race, prejudice and discrimination once was raw and rank but it has not abated.  It is being suppressed at this time.  Now while I was in Korea you're having a lot of turnover there.  I'm an infantry officer.  Things are happening and people are moving up because people are being moved out.  They institute a policy of--in some units of systematically shafting black officers.  I'm sitting back.  I mean I'm in a command--I have a heavy mortar platoon and I'm looking at this stuff and seeing what's going on around me.  And so I sent a letter through to Washington [DC] complaining about the systematic shafting of blacks in Korea.  Now I'm in combat, see.  My letter was not supposed to get through, but it did.  But in the meantime what happened is to my surprise, I was pulled out of the unit that I was in--had and was assigned to what I considered to be a lesser situation, and which would really impede my being able to progress and advance particularly in grade, you see.  And this was my complaint.  To my surprise I got a communication from [Joseph] Joe Stilwell Jr. who was then the commanding--the Commander in the Second Division, which I'm in, in Korea.  At this time we're--about the situation.  He'd received this twix from Washington about my complaint and he had me over to talk to him.  They sent a private plane to take me from where I was to where he was.  And he told me, he says, "I tell you this, you don't have to remain in Korea very long because you have served the extent to which you are really required to serve here."  I was in a--.
Speaker 2: You were in rotation?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was due to be rotated in June of that year anyway, this is early spring.  He said, "But if you wish you can stay.  If you elect to stay I'll reassign you.  And if you are right I'll take appropriate action."  I said, "I'd like to be reassigned."  I stayed.  I went back in the field again command of a platoon and was really ultimately promoted after a course of action because of my exemplary performance.  The officers in my battalion and the commander to where I had been were moved.  When I--completed my requirements I returned to the United States but not directly.
Story_ID: 5791
Speaker 1: I had been, completed my requirements to be married to my wife [Hiroko Cousins] now, whom I'd met when I'd first went to Japan.  And with whom I'd had liaison--contact with all the while I was in Korea.  And they gave me special orders to report to the commander of the Tachikawa Military Base, which is in Tokyo, Japan until further orders.  I went back on those orders stayed in Japan until I married and then they sent me home by plane.  And that's how I returned.  So I--to the United States.
Speaker 2: Now your wife who is--your bride is Japanese?
Speaker 1: Yes, she's Japanese.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now that's something that's a little bit different.  Most people--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [laughs] It's a lot different.
Speaker 2: Most African Americans from Chicago [Illinois] don't marry Japanese women.  So how did you--how did you fit into that culture?  How does she fit into this--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh this has worked out well, you know.  I--.
Speaker 2: How does it work?
Speaker 1: --to that matter.  She's assimilated well and because she had no problems out--I'd met her family before I, of course, went to Korea.  And then, of course, her family was open--just opened their arms up to me and to that matter and so it's been a blessing.  In and a--on that account I've said time and time again I came home victorious.  Really.  What might have turned out to be a--an experience that I would, of course, consider to be having a downside, 'cause Korea is the hellhole of the world.  I mean it's an awful place to be.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I read that--.
Speaker 1: And for that matter--.
Speaker 2: And the circumstances were very bad.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the treatments of blacks was very bad but my having met and married my wife eclipsed all of that and made it one of the brightest experiences of my life, see.
Speaker 1: Now did you experience racial prejudice when you came back with your wife?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: After World War II, during World War II there was a lot of anti-Japanese talk.  There was a word for a Japanese person.  The word was a Jap.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was during the war.  That's awfully--it's just propaganda and the way and afterward too.
Speaker 1: Afterward too.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I'd say afterwards but--now this is '53 [1953] though--.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And things to some extent have changed.  Now I don't say that, you know, there weren't some people who didn't have some--.
Speaker 1: No that's wasn't a popular [unclear].  The president [unclear] Japanese.
Speaker 2: --different views or action on it.  In fact I know there are. I know that's so. Yet to be so, you see. But they--I have not incurred any oh--problems or unsatisfactory experiences of any consequence as a result of my having married my--a Japanese person.
Speaker 1: Now you said that your relatives and the people in the black community accepted her?
Speaker 2: But yes.  Now those who may not have done so have not manifested their, of course, views otherwise to me.  Well I had one friend who did write to me at one time and indicate that he didn't understand that.  Yes, I had one but I mean it's so--small until I hardly count it.
Story_ID: 5792
Speaker 1: You were talking about when you came back from Korea and you're trying to find a job, got a new bride [Hiroko Cousins] and you're trying to find what you're gonna do next.
Speaker 2: Well I had been away from home, Chicago [Illinois] for the most part for eight years, from 1945 to '53 [1953].  And I arrived back home and the first thing I did was begin studying to take the Illinois bar in the summer of '53 [1953].  Arrived--got home in June and I took the bar in July and I passed the bar and the next week I went looking for an employer.  I went among other places the district attorney's office.  The district attorney then was a Republican named Teakin [NOT FOUND].  [chuckles] And went up to the desk of his office and spoke to  the secretary and said--and asked, "Is Mr. Teakin the district attorney in?" and she said to me--she said, "Do you have an appointment?"  I said, "No."  And she said, "What do you want to see him about?"  I said, "I am here to apply to come and assist the district attorney."  And I gather she was surprised and she put him on.  And after some conversation she said, "Mr. Teakin will see you."  So I went in and sat down in this expansive office without an appointment and had a long conversation and discussed, you know, my having--I'd just come out of the service and then had just taken the bar, but I didn't have the results of the bar though but I had just taken the bar and my schooling.  Interesting conversation. And then at the end of the conversation he asked me, "Who's your sponsor?"  and I thought about some prominent attorneys whom I knew, Earl [J.] Neal the father of Earl [L.] Neal who's now practicing, who was a fraternity brother and whom I'd met, and attorney [Zedrik] Braden and the father of another attorney brother, I knew.  And then he said to me--he said--and J. Ernest Wilkins who is Secretary of Labor another attorney--assistant Secretary of Labor--attorney whom I knew through the fraternity.  All these persons I knew through the fraternity or in through Neal's case his son.  And then he said to me, "I tell you what you do.  You go and get you a sponsor."  That was my first introduction to politics in this city.  And it was through a Republican, you see.  And it was a lesson I never forgot, that I never forgot in that in this city you needed sponsorship politically in order to get anything.  Then I went by the Chicago Title and Trust Company building and I had been told at--well they'd hired some black attorneys there recently. I went up to their personnel office and spoke to the person in the personnel department and that person later became the president of the company.  But he interviewed me and then he gave me some kind of questionnaire to fill out and some kind of test to answer.  And I turned that in and he said well now--his name was Al Long, Alvin [W.] Long and he said, "How much are you asking?"  I said, "Four hundred dollars a month."  I said that because that was what I understood to be the general going rate for new attorneys hired.  Of course, it may have gone back to a time when I graduated from law school.  So I'm hired.  So I started working [laughs] for the Chicago Title and Trust.  And walked off the streets now.  I'm telling you [laughs] I was proactive in my approach to things anyway and I'm hired.  So I started working for the Chicago Title and  Trust Company as an attorney, the third black attorney the Chicago Title and Trust Company had, you know.  Title companies examine titles to real estate and I had a background in real estate.  I had two years of real estate in--insofar as that I had, had two years of real estate in law school which is an extensive amount of one course to take in law school.  And--but I hadn't practiced it.  So I worked there for several years.  And one day I was talking to one of the officers and he said to me, "We've come a long ways."  He said, "But we hadn't, of course, come all the way yet."  Now what did he mean to me?  He meant to me that well, we've progressed some, but there are still plateaus here.  In effect he'd let me know there early that there's only so far I can go in the entire company and go--and that I might progress, but only so far.  And then  another day I was at my desk and an attorney walked by who was ahead of me by one year in law school.  And he tapped on my desk and he said, "[William Cousins] Bill, you don't wanna stay here forever."  That's all he said and kept going.  He was sending a message to me, don't you, of course, get wedded to this situation.  And he knew that, that would clearly minimize what I might do if I did so.  Why that was a wake-up call to me.
Story_ID: 5793
Speaker 1: Then they had an election for state's attorney and by that time I had become active with the Young Republicans. I had become active with Young Republicans because of the political situation in the city [Chicago, Illinois] at that time, where the Democratic Machine was in my view abusing its power and--controlling the black vote and voters in this city, while giving little in return.  I could not of course, in good conscience myself at that time join up and work within the system that way.  My make-up wouldn't permit me because I have always an independent vent in my make-up.  And I cannot, of course, bring myself to do with any zeal and zest what I do not really subscribe to. So I figured that, "Well this city needs some difference and some alternative.  And although the Republicans are not what they ought to be."  Oh there had been a history in Republicans in the past and it might be an option, it couldn't be worse.  So I affiliated with the Republican Party actively and worked diligently within the Republican Party in my ward, the sixth ward, becoming president of the Young Republicans.  I organized the Young Republican organization in that ward or reactivated it and built it.  So it became one of the stronger Republican--Young Republican wards in this whole county.  We had members that I brought in like Jim [James] Montgomery and like Garland Watt and a number of others, young attorneys.  And then when [Benjamin] Adamowski ran for state's attorney and was elected in 1957, he appointed the former chair of the Republican Party whose name was Elroy [C.] Sandquist to be his first assistant in charge of civil division.  And Roy Sandquist one day called me and asked me, "Why haven't you applied to become an assistant attorney?"  And I said, "Because over in my ward they have people ahead of me."  He said, "Well you apply anyway."  Well I did and the committeeman in my ward was a fellow named [Arthur J.] Art Wilson in the sixth ward--and lo and behold when Adamowski made his first appointments I was in that first group of seven that he appointed.  And I was then--I then  left the Chicago Title and Trust Company and took up my assignment in the condemnation division of the states attorney office, the civil division.  Now in that particular division, I had some special responsibilities.  I handled all of the money that was involved in conveyances by direct transactions that were had by the state's attorney office in acquiring properties in this county for expressways.  At that time we started working on the expressways, the Dan Ryan and the Kennedy expressway.  We were acquiring the property.  And I also participated in some litigation trials but all escrows are headed by me, you know, and all the titles situations.  And I was one of the higher paid assistants in terms of the way assistants were paid who were not  heads of divisions.  I was not.  That wasn't a lot of money to write home about but let's see I started at $7,200 and at that time most of the assistants were making if they weren't heads in departments making considerably less than $7,200 a year.  Now mind you I started at the title company I was making only $3,600.  This was a few years before and now I'm making $7,200 and I stayed in the--now let me tell you something else about the state's attorney office.  Here's another thing of interest; we had appraisers who appraised properties and being involved in acquisition, on one occasion I was traveling the route of the proposed expressway with one of the appraisers.  And we were driving south between the black and the white communities, which you know, they divided by that area at Wentworth [Avenue] you see.  And then we got down to 95th Street and we turned west which the area divided the white and black community.  And I said to him, "This looks like the Mason-Dixon line to me."  So it was--what the city was doing and what the county was doing, it's the county's part--was they were building an artificial barrier by using the expressway to do that between the black and the white communities, see.  That's what that was.  That's the way that line ran at that time, which shows you the forethought that goes the way things are being done in the city.  Just as when the--built the high-rise public housing it was built along that same corridor, you know.  It was built to contain the black community, see.  These are the kinds of thoughts that went into making decisions political decisions in the city.  Race has always been--was then certainly wrong in terms it's, of course, being a factor in the way things were done in the city, this county.  Adam--and I was the one who did not ignore that or disregard calling attention to what I saw. I had something to say about it at that time, you see.  What's going on?  Now  Adamowski lost when he ran for re-election to Dan Ward.  I then--well all assistants were asked to sign resignations when there was a change in administrations.  I signed the resignation.  Dan Ward had a meeting with all assistants and says, "No one has any need to be any--any concern--concern--concerned about anything and so forth and so just continue here."  But then a few months passed and there was a fellow by the name of [James C.] Jim Worthy who was a permanent businessman in the city, at that time he was a Republican.  He decided he would form--take leadership in forming a Republican Citizen's League.  And he called me to ask me if I would be a member of the board.  I said, "Yes."  A few weeks later--it wasn't a few weeks later but--this is about the middle of April of '61 [1961] it was.  The newspapers published an article, maybe it's trivial.  New Republican Citizen League formed and named the board of directors.  Then I get a call in the office by head of my division. His name was Blair Barnes in the state's attorney office.  And we had offices over at 130 North Wells separate from the other parts of the state's attorney office and he said, "[William Cousins] Bill, why'd you do it?"  I said, "What do you mean Blair, why'd you do what?"  He said, "Why did you join that organization, Republican Citizen's League?"  I said, "Blair I thought it was an organization--."  He said "Bill it asks for your resignation."  I said, "When!"  He gave me the date of the article, the date of the newspaper article, you see.
Story_ID: 5794
Speaker 1: So I packed up and left the state's attorney office and went over to a law office of an attorney named Jim Lemmon [NOT FOUND] at that time.  And I had been going over there from time to time on occasion anyway after my regular hours anyway to, of course, handle some minor matters there.  And so I moved in his office [chuckles] and occupied that office permanently then.  That's how I left the state's attorney office and started up my practice in private practice, you see.  I had bought a house and had a family and--but this is the way things were, you know.  But I just pulled in my belt and rolled with that punch and then organized a--participated in organizing a law firm called Turner, Cousins, Gavin and Watt.  [Unclear] is Turner, ringleading them and then my name and then Garland Watt.  Gavin--Marvin Gavin later became a judge, so that was our firm.  I was the office manager.  That's why I started the practice.  And so our firm remained, you know, intact from '61 [1961] to '67 [1967] when we dissolved and I joined the firm of Lafontant, Gibson, Fisher and Cousins in practice.
Story_ID: 5795
Speaker 1: Now I was active during this period of time with the Chatham-Avalon Park Community Council and became president of the council in 1963 and served as president for three years before that, I was treasurer.  I was devoting a considerable amount of my time to community work, particularly as president of that council.  And so--I was active in other civil rights organizations, the Coordinating Council of Community Organization [CCCO], which is an amalgamation of various organizations in this city [Chicago, Illinois] in particular which had come together because primarily because of problems with education and the board of education practices and [Dr. Benjamin] Willis.  Ben Willis--.
Speaker 2: Ben Willis.
Speaker 1: --and where he was functioning as the head of the board of education. And so we were holding weekly meetings.  And so I was active in other organizations.  I needed--needless to say I was deeply involved in the activities, community-wise and civil rights-wise in the city, during that period of time.  The sixty--1966 election for some offices came up, one being for state offices--senator and fellow named Charlie [Charles] Chew who was an alderman at that time.  And he made--of course, his name was well known for his activities that he was a alderman.  But frankly Charlie Chew wasn't taking care of homework.  He was, you know, he was out front but he wasn't taking care of homework.  In the matter of alderman involves taking care of homework, you know, home is based in your ward.  Getting knits and nuts--taking care of nuts and bolts matters is more important than being out front and making a lot of speeches when you're alderman.  They can see things that are happening in your ward.  That's more important to them than what you're saying outside the ward.  Well now Charlie then decided to run for state senator.  And it was a way to, you know, for him to stay viable too.  And he asked me to be his campaign manager and I agreed.  And so Charlie was elected state senator in that district.  That--the following February the aldermanic election was coming up and I decided that I'm going to run for alderman in the eighth ward.  My activities in the Chatham community and otherwise in this city at that time--let's see.  I'd been involved in--relative to the movement that was unfolding in the city to make some progress through civil rights action.  And the eighth ward had an alderman named Jim Condit [NOT FOUND].  It was about, oh perhaps two-thirds black at this time 60% or so. I felt I could win that election and so I prepared to run.  To run though I had to move from my location.  My address is 7705 S. Wabash where I was living at that time into the eighth ward.
Speaker 2: Oh I thought you were already in it [chuckles].
Speaker 1: No.  I'm living in the portion what was considered to be the Chatham [Chicago, Illioins] area.  But it's not the portion of the Chatham area--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] You're in the sixth ward basically.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  Not the portion that was in the eighth ward.  I was--had been talking with a fellow, he was a white fellow, who had some land for sale for a while, a good while before.  And had a verbal deal but no written deal about purchasing that land.  And I sold my house and then went back to him.  "Let's go forward."  And he said, "Well no, no.  That land is sold.  Now I can't sell you that land," see.  They purchased that land out from under me.  I mean I think somebody was involved who was going to, of course, see that I was stopped from my plans.  And then I had sold my--we sold our property and I had to move over to a property that my parents owned [laughs].  I had to move from their apartment to another apartment for a short period of time until we got another home, which was located in the eighth ward, which is where I'm staying now, 7705--let me strike that, 1745 E. 83rd place, you see.  This was in '66 [1966] that we moved and then the election takes place in '67 [1967].  I run for alderman, I'm elected.  This is a tough campaign.  It was the toughest I'd been involved in.  It had to go into a run-off election, but we won.  And it was said, we involved a lot of people in this campaign.  And the vote was large from both the white and the black community.  But the Chatham community--the Chatham community has always, did then and has alw--and ever since then delivered overwhelming vote for me.  Decisive; about nine to one, see--I won.  The next morning or so after the election a newsman came by my house and asked me, "What were the issues in the ward?"  And I said, "Race and space."  And I had a basis for saying that.  Race and spac--'cause race in the city of Chicago [Illinois] had been one of--perhaps the leading factor in the decision-making processes that had taken place in the city.  Now, I'd say things have changed to a substantial sense.  But then it was rank, you know, clear what the basis of decisions were in the city in space or in people cheating to make money if there was some vacant land and so forth.  They sought zoning and they built buildings, you know, out of bounds huge--overloading the land and that sort of thing.  So you needed to protect against that and that's one of the things I did.  And once I became elected alderman I rezoned everything that looked like it might permit itself to be abused, you know.  You know, we had that done in the ward, you see, to protect the land.  And the community is--was and remains and other areas remain.  And we instituted a lot of programs that precluded a lot of stuff from coming in that shouldn't've come in, you know.  Like being overrun with liquor places.  I mean these places just didn't get started and high rises didn't get started.  And let's say misuse of properties just didn't take place while I was alderman in the ward.  And what the people wanted was what they got.  And their views were, of course, the views that drove what we did.  And I was really doing what I said I would do, and that was represent my constituency.
Story_ID: 5796
Speaker 1: In 1976 some new judgeships were, of course, created by the state legislature and ten were judgeships to where people--where the new judges were to be elected from the city of Chicago [Illinois] by votes.  Only the city people voted, in the city of Chicago.  And I had run for reelection twice in '71 [1971] and '75 [1975] and been elected although they changed the ward dramatically.  They took all of Chatham away from me after the first election and gave me--.
Speaker 2: --southeast area.
Speaker 1: --the area east of Stony Island.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They moved--one time they moved me into South Chicago during a court decision.  That was a court proceeding there because I had been one of the principal challenges in the city rezoning in 1971.  And I said that they had rezoned so that they diluted the black vote and diluted the black strength in wards, so that they could minimize the number of black aldermen.  And that's exactly what they had done.  And a court had decided that I was partially right, you see.  They made a change and gave me South Chicago but then the appellate court looked at that and said, "Well, we're not gonna let that stand.  Revert it back to what it was."  And it went back.  But after election in '76 [1976]--in '75 [1975], I ran for a judicial position in '76 [1976] and the primary--was nominated and took my judicial office as circuit court judge in December of '76 [1976], and have been on the bench since.
Story_ID: 5797
Speaker 1: Who were the other black aldermen in city council when you were in office?
Speaker 2: When I--before I ran?
Speaker 1: We're rolling now.  We're rolling now.
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I entered the city council there was [William H.] Harvey from the second, [Ralph] Metcalfe from the third, [Claude W.B.] Holman from the fourth and then--on--before I went in--.  That's when I went in there was [Robert H.] Miller from the sixth.  And then they--you had two other black aldermen on the West Side.  I think one was named Biggs--and I forget the name of the other black alderman.
Speaker 1: Was it [William] Carothers?  Was it Carothers--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, wasn't Carothers--.
Speaker 1: Was not Carothers.
Speaker 2: --from the West Side.  Those were the six black aldermen who were in the council.  That's where I--.
Speaker 1: [George Washington] Collins is what I'm saying.  Collins.
Speaker 2: Collins?  Yeah Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Collins.  Yes, who later then went on to Congress.
Story_ID: 5798
Speaker 1: Now you were from what you then described to us a little different. You weren't a Democrat. You weren't--.
Speaker 2: [laughs]
Speaker 1: What were they doing with you?
Speaker 2: [laughs]
Speaker 1: You know, this is the [Richard J.] Daley Machine and you're--.
Speaker 2: [laughs]
Speaker 1: What  are you doing there, you know?
Speaker 2: [laughs] I'm there because the people, of course elected me there, to be there to represent them.  That's what I was doing and I kept my pledge.  Indeed when I ran for alderman the second time I--my campaign slogan was "He has kept the faith."  That was my campaign slogan.  And the people elected me overwhelmingly. And when I ran for alderman the second time.  And I assiduously did what I sought to do--what I indicated I would do.  And when I was an assistant state's attorney I served on--under a Republican Assistant State Attorney Benjamin Adamowski as I've indicated and when he lost, and I left the office, by virtue of my resignation having been accepted retroactively.  So I won't say that I've never been fired.  That was--they fired me because see well I--I continued to lend my name to a Republican organization.  And since politics were rank in those days, and there was no Shackman Decree.  I mean the new administration moved in and whoever they wanted out just moved out for whatever reason.  You had no tenure at all, you know in politics--in any job position.  And so I realized that I knew what you know, the situation was.  Now once I was in private practice, involving myself in community and civic matters as well as my law practice, I now had to, you know, have practice to provide for my livelihood.  And this I could do and this I did.  Which is one basis for my being able to be independent.  I said that I always felt that I could make it. And I always felt that I didn't have to be dependent and I could do what I felt I should be doing.
Story_ID: 5799
Speaker 1: And so although I continued for a while to be affiliated in name with the Republican party, when Barry Goldwater emerged as the primary contender for the presidency in 1964, it was, I looked at Barry closely.  I read what Barry had written and listened to what he'd said.  And I was disturbed that the party was moving in Goldwater's way.  Now Goldwater was a conservative and I felt uncomfortable with him.  But after him I can say there came others who were--made me more uncomfortable than Goldwater ever did.  Be he was--he made me so uncomfortable until I publicly resigned from the Republican Party. I saw no future for--under--for things for progress with Goldwater approach.
Speaker 2: [unclear].
Speaker 1: Now--and so I'm--.
Speaker 2: In Illinois didn't he have a--they had like some fairly moderate Republicans in Illinois in the '60s [1960].  Charles [H.] Percy--.
Speaker 1: We had--.
Speaker 2: --and [Everett M.] Dirksen wasn't what you'd call a super-conservative then.
Speaker 1: Well but Dirksen was the--I thought he was better than the Democrats.  And I wrote to that affect--.
Speaker 2: [unclear]
Speaker 1: --during the '50s [1950].  Not that he was anybody's savior or no panacea for what was wrong.  But the--considering where some others were coming from he looked better than they did.  And he was a better in my view at that time.  Now I left the Republican Party publicly and that, of course, resulted in my becoming an Independent.  Now basically, fundamentally my views and ideas and a plus and the minus to this one might say are the same now.  They were the same when I was holding office as an elected official as my views were when I was in high school 'cause I had formulated some views about things at that time relating to fairness and relationship to people and how one should treat another.  And the problems with segregation and discrimination in this city [Chicago, Illinois] and the need to have what--although it later became affirmative efforts--affirmative action.  Affirmative efforts to move forward towards progress in having an even field, playing field for all.  When I was in college I read a good deal.  I was a member of the Book of the Month club when I was in college.  It began when I was in high school.  I actually read less of those kinds of books in college than I did in high school.  I read a book of the month.  I can recall the names even now of some of those books.  And one of those books was 'A New World a-Coming' by Roi Ottley.  By Roi Ottley. And Roi wrote about the prospects of the future when the problems of segregation and discrimination would abate.  And people would, of course, begin to see and work with people more as people.  He didn't use the language "based on their character rather than the color of their skin" as King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used these--terms and I was and I--later.  But--.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that name for us 'cause it's kind of odd.
Speaker 1: O-I-T-L-E-Y, Roi Ottley.
Speaker 2: R-O-I, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Ottley, O, O.  No, no.  No, it's O-T-T-L-E-Y.  I think it is.  O-T-T-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: I think it's R-O-I.
Speaker 1: R-O-I, Roi.  R-O-I.  O-T-T-L-E-Y.  He was one of those writers out of New York.  He was, you see.  But I read a good deal, you know.  And I got a good deal--good many notions, you know, and from things I read because they were good things.  So I really felt that the--then--then I read too--Wendell [L.] Wilkie ran for president, you know, [laughs] in the late '40s [1940].  And Wendell Wilkie--and I was a Democrat.  And my family was a Democrat then, although I later affiliated with the Republicans, I was a Democrat.  But I voted for president from Korea.  I voted my first vote was [Adlai Ewing] Stevenson for president over [Dwight D.] Eisenhower.  I cast an absentee ballot.  So when I came home I was not, you know, a Democrat, I mean a Republican in philosophy except I did feel, you know, there was a basis for people affiliating with the Republican Party.  Of course, they had--because of [Abraham] Lincoln, you know, been better in ways than the Democrats, particularly the two layered Democratic Party.  They had one in the South and one in the North.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [unclear].
Speaker 1: The Democrats in the South were horrible, you see. But for political reasons there was a marriage.  Although I considered [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt to be a great president.  As a boy in high school I was mindful of these going-ons, see.  Aware of what was happening politically and the like, you see.  I tuned in.  That's why I say in effect grew up early and as a boy perhaps thought very much like the man I became, you see.  Now once I, of course, became active again after leaving the state's attorney office, I became active as a Democrat, an independent Democrat.  I affiliated with the Illinois--voters of Illinois.  I was very active.  I became a vice president of the Illinois--the Independent Voters of Illinois in Cook County, for organization which means I was, you know, designated to help organize not just in my area, but otherwise.  I was designated--and then I was designated to be a representative to the Americans for Democratic Action.  And met with their board, at times it was a liberal organization.  But this is my I would say political orientation and activity.  I ran for delegate to the Democratic National Convention in 1968.  I was asked to run.  I didn't have to do anything except be a candidate.  I didn't have to participate in any raising of any money.  They scheduled me and it was a fun campaign.  Dr. Quentin Young was--also ran as a delegate.  We ran in the second congressional district.  We got a lot of votes. We didn't win.  However, in '72 [1972] we had a different situation.  The--I didn't run but the regular Democratic Party violated the rules of the convention and they had some hearings.  And then they tossed the regular Democratic slate out and they adopted another slate and I was a member of that slate. And I went to Miami [Florida] as a delegate for the Democratic National Convention and--but--a fun situation. We stayed up all night, you know, all night politicking and you slept during the day and went to convention hall at nighttime.  These were some of the experiences that I was having during that time in politics.
Story_ID: 5800
Speaker 1: And this is why I was elected when I ran for judge in '76 [1976] because I had made a record and become well known and was very active in the movement.  When Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came here, I was one of the persons who was there much involved with the, you know, activities of Dr. King.  The reason why I wasn't with him on some occasions 'cause I was out of the--out of state attending to some of my duties that I was connected with, in connection with activity with the reserves, the military reserves, which I remained active with--as a assistant staff judge advocate and--in the reserves.  Now the Vietnam War came.  I had problems with that war.  That's why I was a candidate for the Democratic National Convention in '68 [1968].  I said I'd serve.  Certainly I would've served and--if called.  But there  were many problems with--and there were problems in that war.  We were ignoring those problems and later on they--we realized that we were ignoring those problems that we shouldn't have been ignoring.  Just as we're ignoring some problems now, relative to the war that is about to happen that we shouldn't be ignoring, you see.  But I was--as a judge, I wouldn't make that statement perhaps, but I'm retired and I can say that, you see.  As judge my statements where--had to be judicious.  I can say too as a trial court judge I made a record mostly as a felony trial court judge and many assistants whether they were prosecutors or public defenders still, of course, keep in touch with me, because of their interaction with me while I was on the bench.  One of the significant things that I, of course, can look back upon is the decision that I made and I was reversed on it.  In 1978, I held the death sentence statute in this state [Illinois] unconstitutional.  I did so based on the reasons which the United States Supreme Court gave when they overturned the death sentence statutes throughout the country, in the case of Gregg v. Georgia.  They held the death sentence statutes were freakish and wanton and they could not stand.  And I looked at our statute and I said the same thing in 1978, and it went to our state Supreme Court and they, of course, sent the case back to me on a four to three decision.  And I had to proceed with that case but it was not a death sentence case.  It was a garden variety armed robbery and murder case and the person should have never been, of course, selected as a candidate for capital punishment.  But the state has the option to do or not as it elects to do in this state under our statute.  They had no obligation to give any notice that they were going to seek the death sentence at that time.  I served on the capital sentence committee to be appointed by our Supreme Court just before I retired.  And because of my positions at that time, showed that I could be on--while they were considering some provision to be made.  And they recommended a different notice kind of requirement than we had in place before but there were problems then.  There remain problems and what could've been foreseen, what was foreseen, but was not acknowledge by others.  Other people agreed with me, but they didn't have the--oh strength of mind to be forthcoming in their decisions and reflect it.  Now we have a happening that shouldn't have happened and they're saying what I said twenty-five years ago.  The statutes--it's fundamentally flawed and unfair and an unfortunate things has happened.  Those are the things that've been undone that shouldn't've been done in the first place.  Now that's the kind of a judge that I had been.  And I have saved the lives of many people not because, you know, of deciding between life and death and I've handled death sentence cases, but because of the way I addressed the people before me. Every defendant, be he--no matter who he or she may be, is a person and they are entitled to be treated--even though they may have committed the most horrible crimes.  You sentence, when you have to sentence. Sometimes it's really such that they will never really come out again but you do what you have to do and you do it not because of your view towards them, but because what they did was wrong and they realized that when they were before me.  And to this day I've had many people who I've sentenced who've come out and thanked me for what I've done for them.  And that's the satisfaction that I got for serving as a trial court judge.
Story_ID: 5801
Speaker 1: I ran for the Supreme Court twice, once in '90 [1990] and once in 2000.  I lost both times.  I came in second.  The last time I carried the city [Chicago, Illinois], I did.  Lost by a head with little money, with little money by comparison. Outspent ten to one, a million dollars.  The last time I raised a couple thousand but ten to one.  But the people in this city have always stood up by me and that's because I've stood up for them.  Now I--.
Speaker 2: The people were shocked when you lost--.
Speaker 1: Well the people in our community felt that I was gonna win because I was carrying our community overwhelmingly.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But we ran into the suburbs, I got bushwhacked.  I did. I did not have the resources to really do enough education out there to offset, you know, what they had, you know, going really their way.  And now there's another factor into it.  There's another party involved, a third candidate who just really kicked the ball in a wrongful way.  And he fumbled away things there and ran a very misguided and inappropriate campaign and it hurt me.  It hurt me. He spent a million dollars.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: [Morton] Zwick.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He spent a million dollars. And then--and came up fourth.
Speaker 2: Didn't get--not only did he lose himself, but he contributed--.
Speaker 1: If he hadn't done what he did, I would've still won and--for the Supreme Court.  And I was withstanding the might that I was confronted with and the money spent and the power, 'cause I have as my commitment a sense of justice.  And nothing, but nothing has deterred me from that.  And a good many people know that.  And I have a record.
Story_ID: 5802
Speaker 1: Now, when--on the appellate court I had the opportunity to issue--so many decisions I really have no real idea how many.  It's in excess of a thousand.  And I'm pleased with my work.  I've done my best.  When I got started I never realized that I would reach the level that I've reached.  But I might've reached a different level because by virtue of my training and by virtue of my commitment I was prepared to serve at any level.  And I've had the good fortune to have the support of a myriad of people.  And that makes me feel good.  Last November just before Thanksgiving, there was a tribute held for me and there was an outpouring that just gave me such an uplift.  I got--I'm still feeling elated.  And numerous people came to, of course, express their views relative to my service, for which I appreciate.  With the support of these people and particularly with the support of my family I feel that I can say I've done the best with what I've had.  And let me just, of course, refer though to something that I think should not be omitted.  I've had the opportunity to serve as the chair of many organizations, including the Illinois Judicial Council, during the 1980 to '89 [1989] year, that's an organization of judges.  I was instrumental in that organization to--it's a primarily a black organization.  Now when I became chair, we only had blacks as members.  I broke that right away, immediately, 'cause I believed that we must be committed to inclusiveness in what we do and then I had the opportunity to serve as the chair of the Judicial Council of the National Bar Association.  That's the national organization that represents predominantly black judges, during the year 1995 to '96 [199! 6] and we, of course, had some significant courses of action taken there during that period of time.
Speaker 2: Now I know you're a recipient of the William R. Ming Award.
Speaker 1: I am a recipient of numerous awards.  The William R. Ming award goes back to the time when I was a lawyer and it was presented to me because of my work as a lawyer who was involved in politics.  But among other awards that I have received have been from the Chicago Bar Association, The Earl Burrus Dickerson Award.  I can think of no award that I value any higher than that Earl Burrus Dickerson, a legend.  A legend and a role model for all.  I received the C. Francis Stratford Award even, from the state's attorney office--presented me with that award.  I--the state's attorney presented me with that--the C. Francis Stratford Award, really.  C. Francis Stratford was the father of Jewel Lafontant MANkarious--who had a distinguished career and one of the pioneers really of making progress for black lawyers in this country, one of the organizers of the National Bar Association, an organization of black lawyers.  And from the Judicial Council of the National Bar Association I received the Raymond Pace Alexander Award.  A great Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] lawyer.  Yes, a great Philadelphia lawyer.  From other organizations I received the Thurgood Marshall award from student organizations, and particularly John Marshall Law School [Chicago, Illinois] and I received the Access to Excellence Award from the Illinois State Bar Association just last year.  Let's say I, of course, go out with my boots on and I think that for a person who started out in Swiftown, Mississippi that the Almighty has overseen my actions and I can say that I have done my best.
Story_ID: 5803
Speaker 1: Now sir, tell me what are your hopes and concerns for the black community at this point?
Speaker 2: I hope that the black community will realize that the most successful among us are diminished somewhat in our individual successes because enough hasn't been done to contribute to a general enhancement of the--of the success among the least of us.  And I hope that we will begin to realize that to some extent we are our brother's keepers.  And we must do more to help those among us who need help.  And we must also realize that what needs to be done will not be done primarily by others but it must be done primarily by us.  My concerns are although we have had progress in many ways, certainly things have changed to move forward markedly; almost unbelievably in certain spheres during the last half century, the lifetime of my adulthood.  My concern is that we've not progressed as much in terms of human relations as we ought to have progressed and as we must progress.  So that people will have their lives enhanced, and so that our people will not continue to be deprived of opportunities and so that the gap between the haves and the have nots will be reduced and the discrimination and biases based still upon race will be substantially reduced and that the world that Roi Ottley envisioned more than a half century ago, the world that I, of course, looked to more than a half a century ago will become more of a reality.
Story_ID: 5804
Speaker 1: Sir did your mother get a chance to see you become a successful gentleman?  How did she feel about--?  I know she got a chance to see you become successful.
Speaker 2: My mother [Drusilla Cousins] was present at both of my elections to the city council, which was a most important election for me.  It's an office for which I have derived great and immense fulfillment and I left that office because I moved to a different challenge, one that I had prepared for, when I attended school.  I majored in political science and prepared to enter the legal field and I prepared for a life of service.  And I've been able to do that and work in the areas that I spent my years of schooling making preparation to do.  And my mother was present and my dad [William Cousins] was present when I was elected to the office of judge in '76 [1976] and my dad passed in '80 [1980].  My mother was present when I was elected to the office of the appellate court.  So--.  My dad was not then present, but present in my thoughts.  Yes, they lived to see me fulfill some of their hopes for me.  Not that they ever thought that I would be an alderman or a judge because  of where we started from.  But this is a lesson to my life; it's not where you start from, it's how high you're able to rise and you can rise to infinite heights almost.  Infinite means you may never get there, but almost.  If you, of course, set your sights on worthwhile goals, stay the course and keep on rowing.  And I'm talking about like you row a boat. Keep on rowing and plugging--.
Speaker 1: Sir?
Speaker 2: --to go forward.
Story_ID: 5805
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: --I have striven to be a person who adhered to principles and who strove to help myself as best I could to realize my greatest potential.  And while doing that, I have striven to avoid putting down others.  On the contrary, I have sought to help others to also go forward, as I went forward.  And if I have a legacy, it is that success does not come quickly usually.  Success comes after long periods of effort and that one's success and fulfillment is not measured just in terms of money, although that's important but it's what you stand for.  And that honor is secondary to nothing.  Neither is integrity and yet above all we must always remember that love of oneself and others is paramount.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, now, one last question. I know most people don't think about this but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who sought to treat others, as he would have them treat himself.  And as a person who has always striven to do his best in whatever endeavor he was involved.
