Story_ID: 638167
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please spell your--I mean give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Cardiss Hortense Robertson Collins [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins], C-A-R-D-I-S-S, middle name, H-O-R-T-E-N-S-E, Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N, Collins, C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: September the 24th, 1931, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm retired.
Speaker 2: All right, and you are a retired member of the United States Congress.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, from the--
Speaker 1: 7th Congressional District of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is June the 29th, 2010 [sic. June 28, 2010].
Speaker 2: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're in my living room.
Speaker 2: Okay, in Arlington--
Speaker 1: In Alexandria, Virginia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alexandria, okay, Alexandria, Virginia.  Okay.  That's good.
Story_ID: 638168
Speaker 1: Now, we go into depth, there are, there are five, kind of lightweight, warm up questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first such question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Vegetables, mostly turnip greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think of--I can't think of any.
Story_ID: 638169
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Finley Robertson] side, but--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --we're gonna start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Rosia, R-O-S-I-A, is her first name, M-A-Y, her middle name, Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N [Rosia Robertson].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her maiden name?  Is that her--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Robertson.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She said it was January the 1st, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Whiteville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, Whiteville, Tennessee, okay.  Well, I don't know.  It sounds scary to me, Whiteville, Tennessee (laughter).  Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, they said it was named as my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Really, his name was White?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Erastus White.
Speaker 1: Erastus White, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story here.  This is your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Well, it's my, no, it's my great-great-grandfather [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's my grandmother's grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what's his story?  What can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Well, as I understand it, he was a freed slave, and he had land and a big farm, et cetera.  And he knew how to read and write, and that's about all I know except that he, they raised my mother and several of her brothers and sisters, Erastus did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he raised your mother and her--
Speaker 2: And one of her, and one of her sisters and her three oldest brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there a story behind that?  I mean how did he come to raise them instead of their parents?
Speaker 2: Well, because their parents, their--my mother's father [Robert Robertson] left my grandmother [Emma White Robertson] and went off with some lady or other.  And Mama didn't have any--I call my grandmother Mama, had no resources to provide for those children.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's Mr. White that stepped in and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Took in Mama, my grandmother as well.
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother his daughter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: His granddaughter.  He was my grandmother's grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, your grandmother's grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, Erastus White.
Speaker 1: All right.  So he, he became a freedman.  So he was born during slavery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: --and was able to acquire property, could read and write and all that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so was it just the area around his land holdings became Whiteville?
Speaker 2: As I understand it. I'm not sure of that, I can't say.  But as I understand, most of the land around there was his.  So they called it Whiteville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever get a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: No!
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I can--
Speaker 2: I mean I'm old, but I'm not that old (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, I thought I'd ask anyway.
Speaker 2: No, but I have a picture of his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of his mother?
Speaker 1: Of his mother?
Speaker 2: Of his mother, Grandma Rosetta [ph.].
Speaker 1: Is that the one behind us on the shelf?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's Rosetta, what's her name?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: Rosetta White, and that picture has to be from the mid-19th century, right, at least?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's circa around 1850, I'd reckon.
Speaker 2: I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Well, that's quite a history.  Is there a story about how he became a freedman?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that.  Unfortunately, my two aunts passed within the past five years, and the cousins, our cousin who was doing the family history has become very busy taking care of her grandmother who is now 102, I believe, and she just hasn't had an opportunity to put all of that together.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a story for somebody to research--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the story of Erasmus White.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, well, that's a good--I'm glad I asked you.  Okay.  So, well, so he had these, a large holding of land--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and I guess devoted most of it to agricultural pursuits?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638170
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Rosia Robertson] have any stories--or your grandmother [Emma White Robertson] have any stories about growing up there [Whiteville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, she never did, but my mother had a lot of stories about how wonderful it was, and they would take the, they--and how hard, there was hard work that was involved.  They had chores that they had to do.  But the most of their life, as far as my mother, I can remember my mother talking about was taking the wagon and going to church.  And then after church, they'd have picnic and so forth.  But I've forgotten a lot of what she told as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and hard work and picnics, church.
Speaker 2: Church picnics, church picnics yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother have a chance to go to school down there?
Speaker 2: She went through tenth grade there, and then she--that's as far as she got.  She didn't graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Was that the kind of high school that only went to tenth grade 'cause I've heard about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, a lot of the colored schools only went to tenth grade in those days, from the people I've interviewed.  A lot of 'em say that.  They'd have to go to a special school to graduate.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your mother, apparently, she did not stay there after she--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Right, so what--
Speaker 2: My grandmother had moved on to, elsewhere, where she was picking cotton or something.  And I believe it was in Illinois.  So my mother went to, where my mother--my mother went to where my grandmother was.
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2: And then from there, my grandmother sent her, my mother, to St. Louis, Missouri to be with my grandmother's sister whose name was Aunt Birdie, B-I-R-D-I-E, Aunt Birdie Johnson [Birdie White Johnson].
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was sent to live with Aunt Birdie Johnson in St. Louis.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Now, I think an interesting thing about Aunt Birdie's husband, his name was Beryl [Beryl Johnson], B-E-R-Y-L, is that he was a--he had graduated from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and he was an engineer, an electrical engineer.  However, the only job he could find--he worked for Laclede, L-E-C-L-E-D-E [sic.] gla- gas company [Laclede Gas Light Company; Laclede Gas Company], G-A-S.  The only job he could find was reading gas meters during his entire lifetime because that was the only thing that the people who owned Laclede could find that they thought he was able to do even though he was an honor student.  And that's the way things were in those days.  I remember my mother often talked about that, sometimes with tears in her eyes.
Speaker 1: So he got a degree from--
Speaker 2: Fisk.
Speaker 1: Fisk University.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, what kind of work did your mother do in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Domestic work.
Speaker 1: Now, what--tell us a little bit about your mother.  Now, did she have any special aspirations or anything in those days to--
Speaker 2: For herself?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She never mentioned any.  She did day work for a very long time, but then in later life, she started working for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  She was very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's later in life, she worked for the city (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: As a laborer.
Story_ID: 638171
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Finley, F-I-N-L-E-Y Robertson [Finley Robertson].  Now, at this point, I need to tell you that there are two groups of Robertson, unrelated in Whiteville [Tennessee] and near Whiteville.  And she [Collins' mother, Rosia Robertson] did not marry a family member.  She married a non-family member.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know that.  I know that she was one year older than he.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that put him around 1901, I guess.
Speaker 2: I would think that, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, was he born in Whiteville too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they weren't related at all.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: Not very--I know that his mother was a school teacher and all of her children became teachers and all of her children became teachers.
Speaker 1: Was she the first in her family to teach school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her name was Dora, D-O-R-A.
Speaker 1: So her name was Dora Robertson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did they teach around the Whiteville area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a name for the school?  What did they call the school there?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'd probably have to ask one of my cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it wasn't called the Whiteville Colored School or something like that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know this.  I would have to find out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, well, any other stories about his--what about his, his gran- his father, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: All I remember him talking about him, his name was Artie, A-U, let's see, A-R-T-I-E Robertson [Artie Robertson].  What he did, I do not know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he do agricultural kind of work as far as you know?
Speaker 2: I get the impression from a cousin who lives in Tennessee still that he was a laborer of some sort, but I don't think it was agriculture labor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so are there any stories about him or his side of the family?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No.
Story_ID: 638172
Speaker 1: So did your father [Finley Robertson] talk about what it like- what it was like in Whiteville [Tennessee] when he grew up?
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Rosia Robertson] and father were separated when I was a baby.
Speaker 1: So did you see very much of him at all growing up?
Speaker 2: I saw him frequently when I was in St. Louis [Missouri], but we left St. Louis when I was about eight years old.  And after that I didn't see him frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No. (Shakes head) She never said.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was a very small place though--
Speaker 2: Yes, a very small (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so kind of hard not to meet, I guess.  But, okay, so but they, did they migrate to St. Louis together?
Speaker 2: No, I do know that.  He was already in St. Louis, and my mother went there.  He had relatives who were there and, as I understand it, he had gone there to find a better way of life or something, didn't wanna be on the farm and had gone to St. Louis, which most of the people from Tennessee or from that general region of Tennessee, went to St. Louis to improve their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was already there.  So did they get together in Whiteville [Tennessee] or did they--
Speaker 2: In St. Louis (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Louis. Okay, so they really didn't--they knew each other probably, but they didn't--
Speaker 2: I would imagine.
Story_ID: 638173
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your, your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions and even what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rosia Robertson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tend to, the older I get, I was told by my aunts, the older I get, the more I look like my mother.  And I don't know my father's [Finley Robertson] disposition.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he just wasn't around enough to--
Speaker 2: No, he was not around.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, do you have an- any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an only child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638174
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Of myself--of who? My mother [Rosia Robertson]?
Speaker 1: No, of home, of, when you first, you know, felt conscious of who you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. When I first knew myself?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think it's when I was in childcare before I started to school.  My mother had me in a program, and I can remember that because I can remember the cots that they had for us to sleep on.  And I can remember the, there was--or I've been told enough times to think that there was a duck on my cot so that I would know mine from the others, and that when we entered into this location, wherever the daycare center was--I guess they called it a daycare then, they would give us a glass of tomato juice.  I must have been three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Somewhere along that time.
Story_ID: 638175
Speaker 1: Who did your household consist of growing up besides you and your mother [Rosia Robertson]?
Speaker 2: For a while, my Aunt Thelma [ph.] and mother lived next door to each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was basically you and your mom in the household?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know sometimes grandparents--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or people. Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't live with my [maternal] grandmother [Emma White Robertson] until I was graduated from high school [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in the summertime, I'd go to Cairo, Illinois where she was at that time and spend the whole summer.
Speaker 1: Now, is this where your relatives in Illinois went, southern Illinois (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where my grandmother was at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They spoke of other places in Illinois, but that's where she was when I was ten, eleven, eight, seven, six, something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a very southern part of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Very southern.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Cairo is not much difference in being in Tennessee or Mississippi or some place.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's what people all say in Chicago [Illinois] all the time.  So, and, you know, St. Louis [Missouri] is a southern town too in a lot of ways (laughter).  So.
Speaker 2: But it was southern, and I can remember being denied entry into certain places in St. Louis.  But it seems to me that they weren't as frequent.  There were other places that we could go in St. Louis that we could not go in Cairo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An example, I've always been nearsighted.  And I'll never forget 'Cabin in the Sky,' which was a movie that had come out.  And I believe, what's her name?  She just died.
Speaker 1: Lena Horne.
Speaker 2: Lena Horne was in this movie.  And we, my grandmother took us to the movie, me and my two cousins.  And we had to go in the balcony to sit down, and I asked my grandmother why I, we couldn't go down to the front and sit in the front row so I could see the movie.  And she said we were not allowed.  And I never forgot that, and I asked my mother why we were not allowed, because we didn't have that problem in St. Louis as far as I knew unless we went to movies in the colored area.  And I just thought that was so terrible that I could not see the movie.  And actually, to tell you the truth, I didn't see the movie until it was shown on television here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was a very negative impression I had of Cairo.
Story_ID: 638176
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood and the house you lived in growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, we lived in a, we lived (laughter), we lived on Stoddard Street, 2701 Stoddard.  That's the first address I can remember as a little girl.  It's a very short street.  It was a very short street in Chicago [sic.].  It's been torn down.  The whole street's been redone--I mean in St. Louis [Missouri] at that time.  We lived in the attic apartment, all the way up.  The house that I lived in had been a funeral home, and we lived at the very top.  And on the second floor was where the bathroom was, the regular plumbing bathroom was.  And we had two rooms.  One was a living room and one was a kitchen.  And our kitchen had a coal stove and refrigerator, I mean an icebox.  And I remember that icebox because the water would run from a pan as the ice melted.  And if I forgot to empty the pan, I got a spanking.  So that left a very indelible, (laughter) very, very del- very, very unpleasant memory about getting spanked for not taking that pan out.  The other thing that I can always remember is that knowing that this had been a funeral home, I used to hate to go down to the bathroom on the second floor which was like two stories down because we were at the very top.  It seems kind of foolish now that I'm adult, but I can swear that even today, that every time I would go to that bathroom, I would hear things.  And I'd be scared to death. And so I was, my body didn't like the fact that I didn't go to the bathroom as frequently as I should have.  And I'd also get punished for not doing what I was supposed to do when I was supposed to do it.
Story_ID: 638177
Speaker 1: Were you home a lot by yourself if your mother [Rosia Robertson] was working and you're the only child?
Speaker 2: My mother worked, but the lady down the street at the end of, who lived on the block, 2701 Stoddard [2701 Stoddard Street, St. Louis, Missouri], the lady at the, across the street at the other end was, had a beauty shop.  It was called Rose's Beauty Shop [ph.].  She took care of me while my mother--when I got out of school.  And then I had, I had a key pinned to my clothes so that just as the street lamps came on that WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] had put in, I was to leave and go home.  Well, I guess I was home maybe for a short period of time.  And I let myself in, and then many times, I would just sit by the window and wait for my mother to come in.  I didn't wanna move around too much because I was afraid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was, about how old were you when you started?
Speaker 2: Well, we left there when I was eight.  So I had to be younger than eight.  I had to have been seven, six, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is during the Depression, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: During the Great Depression.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were born right, two years after the Depression hit.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So times are hard for everybody, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of black people would room with other people. Okay. I just wanted to make that point 'cause your situation is not unusual at all of, you know, rooming, and you know, 'cause a lot of big dwellings were divided up.
Story_ID: 638178
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, particularly, in contrast to what goes on today?
Speaker 2: I could always smell food cooking.  My [maternal] grandmother [Emma White Robertson] and my Great Aunt Birdie [Birdie White Johnson] was a great cook, and she was always cooking.  And she loved to bake ham.  I can remember smelling ham all the time.  I can remember smelling, and I like cabbage even today.  Some of the sounds I heard were Joe Louis, when it was a Joe Louis fight.  Joe Louis always won and the people would run up and down the street and beat on tubs and pots and pans.  I can remember that very, very vividly.  I can almost hear those sounds.  I can hear the kids outside playing and jumping rope and making all kinds of noises like that, and skates.  Skates were not like the skates the kids have now.  You kind of wound them up and put them up on your shoes.  You attached them to your shoes.  They were, they weren't shoe skates or anything like that.  I could hear those sounds quite frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay, smells?
Speaker 2: Cabbage (laughter), either my mother [Rosia Robertson] or my aunt were cooking cabbage all the time.  Of course, there was more than that too.  At that time, before they sort of cleaned up St. Louis [Missouri], there were horses, a lot of horses around.  They would be pulling watermelon or ice or coal or kindling as they used to call it, and all that, for the fire.  And a lot of times, they would leave- relieve themselves wherever they were.  Well, we had a water trough right in front of our house because we were on the corner.  And as they stood there, they would do things they shouldn't do in public.  And you often could smell that, especially in the summertime because the, I guess the humidity would make the smell rise or something, even upstairs where we were.
Speaker 1: And St. Louis is humid, I know.
Speaker 2: It's humid, it is humid.  The last time I was there, (laughter) it was humid.  It's gonna always be humid I think because of the Mississippi River.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 638179
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of the river [Mississippi River]?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The only memory I have is going to church and (laughter) and screaming.  My mother [Rosia Robertson] took me to a baptism, and I saw the man in the water, and I was afraid that--I just--when they dipped him, I thought he had drowned or something.  And I screamed, and I was told to shut my mouth and all of that.  I can remember being told that that was not the thing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday, not only Sunday, but for BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], on Thursdays and on choir rehearsal, junior choir, and the little people's choir and all of that, always there.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your family church?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was Pleasant Green, I believe it was Pleasant Green Baptist Church [Pleasant Green Missionary Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] at that time.  When we moved to Detroit [Michigan], it was Second Baptist Church [Second Baptist Church of Detroit].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, we'll get to Detroit later, but Second Baptist Church, that's the famous Second Baptist Church in downtown Detroit.
Speaker 2: That's it.  And we were there--
Speaker 1: The Underground Railroad church, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, um-hm, as is the church I go to here.
Speaker 1: Okay, Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church] here in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No, I go to, can't even think of--I was just there last night, Alfred Street Baptist Church [Alexandria, Virginia], which is also a part of the Underground Railroad.
Story_ID: 638180
Speaker 1: Okay, so Pleasant Green Baptist Church [Pleasant Green Missionary Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri].  Can you remember who your reverend was?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, we left there when I was eight.  I can't remember any of that now.  And my mother [Rosia Robertson] didn't--the only thing that she had was something from Second Baptist Church [Second Baptist Church of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan], but I think when we left St. Louis [Missouri], she left just about everything there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you had just, basically, just been in school a couple of years, I guess, three years when you left--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --St. Louis for Detroit [Michigan].  Now, what happened?  What caused you all to leave St. Louis to go to Detroit?
Speaker 2: My Aunt Thelma [ph.] had already moved to Detroit, and as I mentioned earlier, she and my aunt used to live next door to each other.  And they were very, very close, but my mother and her boyfriend had a misunderstanding.  And my mother decided to leave.  And so Thelma sent her some money to come to Detroit to live with her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what was it, kind of like unexpected, kind of a quick move or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not because--there was no violence involved, but there was a whole lot of words being said, this and that, as I understand it.
Speaker 1: So they thought it best to move?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she and her sister were close anyway, right? So.
Speaker 2: Until the day my mother passed.
Story_ID: 638181
Speaker 1: Before we leave St. Louis [Missouri] now, you started school in St. Louis apparently (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of your school in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Banneker.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that Banneker Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a--what was the name for the part of town you lived in in St. Louis in those days?  Was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: I can't think of it.  But it was not a nice part of town.  It was a low rent part of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, Banneker Elementary School.  And so you were there 'til third grade, I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess, second or third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite teacher at Banneker?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember having a favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: All right.  So when you left, did you have a lot of friends in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to come over to Rose's [ph.] house when we'd get out of school.  And we would play until the kids had to go home.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 638182
Speaker 1: You moved, you're about eight years old.  So this is about 1939 or so.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So you moved to Detroit [Michigan].  Now, where did you all live in Detroit?
Speaker 2: We lived on Adams Street [sic. Adams Avenue].  Now, I don't know the address there.  I remember that, and we lived in the Avalon Apartments [ph.].  And I know it was right across the street from something, what was that?  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was that what they called the Black Bottom area of Detroit?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, it was not Black Bottom, but it was, it was near Hastings [Street].  Hastings was a big street in Detroit years ago.  Your friend can probably tell you more about that.  I remember I was a block Hastings, and that's where I went to Bishop Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's really, that's on the east side of Detroit, I guess.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the near east side of Detroit.  Okay.  So did you like, how did you Detroit?
Speaker 2: I liked it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you like it better than St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I can't say.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was, it was all right.
Speaker 2: It was different.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who, so you went to Bishop Elementary School.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay. But you liked school though?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you get any special attention at church at Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No, nothing special.
Speaker 1: Okay. And when you were a kid now, did you realize it had an Underground Railroad history (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: I wondered, you know, 'cause I don't think they really started, you know, touting that until the '60s [1960s], I think, really.
Speaker 2: Probably.  No, I had no idea.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And that's a pretty big church too.
Speaker 2: It sure is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.  Well, what did you like to do growing up in Detroit?  What was it like in those days?
Speaker 2: I think I studied most of the time.  I was a good student, but it didn't come easy.  I was a booker.  I had to, I had to hang out in the books.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked part time in high school [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, was your first part time job in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what did you do in Detroit when your mother [Rosia Robertson] was working and, you know, hadn't come home yet?  Did you have arrangements with another person?
Speaker 2: I studied.  I studied.  That's all I could do.
Speaker 1: So you'd just come home and studied then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a best friend, and she and I would get together and chit chat and walk home from school together or take the bus or something like that.  But that was, that was it.  Most of the time, I'd wait for my mother to come home and sometimes I'd cook dinner.  Sometimes she'd tell me what to cook, and I could cook.  She had taught me how to cook.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And not only that, but we lived in a building--let me not leave that out.  We lived in the building.  On the first floor was one cousin, on the second floor--and her husband.  On the second floor, my mother and I lived.  And on the third floor, there was another cousin.  So there was family in that building.  There were, all of us were in that building on Elizabeth Street, 245 Elizabeth Street at that time.  And then my Aunt Thelma [ph.] that I'm talking about lived right around the corner.  So I was always around family.  I wasn't just by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you were always around--you had a lot of cousins, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That makes, that makes sense, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 638183
Speaker 1: Tell us about, you mentioned Hastings Street.  Now, that's like one of the most colorful areas of Detroit [Michigan] in those days.  It's like a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like the pre-downtown or something, right?
Speaker 2: It was everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was it like? Just--
Speaker 2: All I remember is that (laughter), this is interesting to me, not to you.  But the only thing I remember about Hastings Street is that a lot went on on Hastings Street.  I don't know what that lot was, but I remember going to Hastings Street to pay my mother's insurance Charlie Diggs' father's insurance company, the Congressman Charlie Diggs, father [Charles Diggs, Sr.] had an insurance company.  And I remember going there to take my mother's nickel so that every week, I had to take the nickel for her burial insurance.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Diggs, he was a congressman from--
Speaker 2: Detroit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Detroit, yeah, for many years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So his father's insurance company was right--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --there on Hastings Street.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: If I remember correctly now.  I'm not sure of this.  I kind of wanna say that Bishop [Bishop Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] was just off of Hastings Street, but I can't get that straight in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure, but I know I had to go down Hastings Street to get to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Hastings Street, now that's, all that area was wiped out by the interstate highways, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so it doesn't really exist anymore, like it did in the old days.
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's one of these other areas where you can't go back there anymore 'cause it's not there. It's just--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not there.
Story_ID: 638184
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Went to--I went one year to Miller High School [Sidney D. Miller High School], which is in Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I went to Commerce, Detroit High School of Commerce [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan] for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you started at Miller.  Now, that's, that was your neighborhood kind of high school, right?
Speaker 2: That's where all the kids that lived in my area went to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how did you like Miller?
Speaker 2: It was all right, but I talked to my guidance counselor and told her I wanted to be a stenographer.  And when I knew anything, she had asked my mother [Rosia Robertson] to come in and she suggested my mother take me there with an application.  And I was accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was your--was this, what year were you in high school when you went to Detroit Commercial [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated in '48 [1948] so it was three years before.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a freshman at Miller.
Speaker 2: I was a freshman at Miller, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, is it Detroit Commercial High School, it's called?
Speaker 2: Detroit High School of Commerce.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Had that big long name, Detroit High School of Commerce.
Speaker 1: School of Commerce, okay.  Now, where was that actually?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You're asking me to go back a whole lot of years, more than fifty years, but let me tell you.  I can remember this much.  It was across the street from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I know you've heard of Cass Tech.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: There was an overpass between the two schools.  So I think it was at 2nd Street [sic. 2nd Avenue], but I'm not sure of that.  I can't be sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's either 2nd or 3rd [Avenue] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, somewhere in there, yes.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.  Yeah, I've known lots of people to come out of Cass Tech.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So did you like the commercial high school better than Miller?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, for what reason?
Speaker 2: Because I knew it was supposed to prepare me to be a stenographer (laughter).  And I wanted to be a stenographer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have--where did you get your concept of being a stenographer from?
Speaker 2: My cousin in St. Louis [Missouri] was a stenographer.  And she told me that she wanted me--she said, "You wanna be a stenographer."  I said, "I'm gonna be a typist."  She said, "No, you wanna be a stenographer."  I said, "Okay" (laughter).  I didn't know what I was saying (laughter), but I was following her advice.
Speaker 1: Now, had you--did you get a idea from, you know, movies or radio or what a stenographer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, just my cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay, just your cousin, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 638185
Speaker 1: Now, wa- was the media important when you were growing up, the radio and movies and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Movies and radio, yes.  Movies, I would--I still go to a lot of movies.  But the radio was all we had at that time.  We didn't have any television.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Newspapers.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get the black newspapers in those day?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We'd get the Chicago Defender.  My [maternal] grandmother [Emma White Robertson] believed in that.  We always got the Defender.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh Courier, Ebony.
Speaker 1: Okay. Ebony came out about, what was it, about 1947 or '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: Somewhere like that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ebony magazine.  Okay, all right, so did you have a favorite teacher at the commercial high school [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ms. Rawl [ph.].  She was an English teacher, but she was also the librarian.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she take a special interest in you, sort of, to try to help--
Speaker 2: Yes, she gave me the job that I had.
Speaker 1: So that was your part time job?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it was in the school itself?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, not only that, but she started giving me books to read that she thought I would enjoy and she actually was the one who increased my desire to read.  And I'm an avid reader now--at least I was until my eyes gave out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--what kind of reading material were you reading in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, things that girls would read, you know, at thirteen, fourteen years old, 'Little Women' [Louisa May Alcott], stuff like that, 'Pride and Prejudice' [Jane Austen] so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of that stuff is deep now, when you think about it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And some little kids today can't handle the depth of those books, you know, 'cause they're not trained to read like that.  But you were reading--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --pretty good literature in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Jane Austen and all of that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 638186
Speaker 1: Did you have any--you went to see 'Cabin in the Sky.'  Was Lena Horne a favorite?
Speaker 2: I didn't see that until, actually, here in this house, it was on television.  That's the first time I saw it ever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had never seen it before.
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite musicians and singers and so forth in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a favorite singer.  He was Billy Eckstine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I joined his fan club, had a picture--he sent me a picture.  You know, I thought I was the only one in the whole world who he had, (laughter) to whom he had sent a picture (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were in the Billy Eckstine fan club?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was there a lot of live music in Detroit [Michigan] in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that was the thing that I found so interesting when I, when I used to hear, go to what they used to call stage shows in Detroit, the stage would revolve, you know, like this.  And so you'd have one show right after the other.  And now they had to take the whole thing down and put it all back up again and all this.  But I can remember seeing many artists in Detroit during that time.  It was sort of like the, I can't think of the name of the theater now, but I remember getting home, getting off, out of school and going straight to the theater so I could get in line early to see the first stage show.  And we didn't have to leave right after the first one.  We could stay to see two or three, one or two, as long as we got home before it got dark.
Speaker 1: Okay, you could go on a school night--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you'd go down to the theater and see live music?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't know, I only know of the Fox [Fox Theatre, Detroit, Michigan] right now down there.  That wasn't one of the one's--
Speaker 2: At the Fox, at the Fox--who was that they had?  He is a trumpet player even today, and his horn is twisted.  What is his name?
Speaker 1: Dizzy Gillespie.
Speaker 2: Dizzy, I saw Dizzy at the Fox when I was a young girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other people that came through town?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, everybody came through because it was a hot market.  Every--Detroit loves music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As do most big cities.
Speaker 1: Count Basie, Duke Ellington and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Louis Jordan, okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't into Louis Jordan too much, but then when I got married to my husband [George Collins], he was into Louis Jordan, yeah, because he played the trumpet, and he said, "Oh, you know, this is the basics, this is foundation here.  You got to listen, listen to what you're hearing," you know, and I wasn't hearing what I wanted to hear (laughter).
Story_ID: 638187
Speaker 1: When you were--were you involved in high school activities in the school?
Speaker 2: Some of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I belonged to one club called the Echo Club [ph.], and I've forgotten what they did now, but it was, had to do a little bit with newspapers.  But I wasn't really--it wasn't a big thing.  There was no, I didn't do any sports activities or anything like that, but great spectator.  And I like basketball and all, but no.
Speaker 1: Were there any big basketball stars in Detroit [Michigan] in those days that you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't know of any.  I was very focused on school, and that was about it.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you--what was the composition of the high school you graduated from?  Was it--were blacks in the minority there or--
Speaker 2: We were in the minority, but it was a pretty good mix.  I would say it was--I'm guessing at this.  I would say 75/25 [percent].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all, at least a quarter of the class.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were you treated pretty well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, no difference that I could see.
Speaker 1: Were there black teachers there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I wondered, so.
Speaker 2: I never had--I only had one black teacher at Miller [Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan] with the combination from Miller or Commerce [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan] and that was a man who spoke French.  He taught French at Miller.
Speaker 1: So that's interesting 'cause I would have thought that Miller in those days would have had some black teachers too, but no (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't.
Speaker 1: Just one black French teacher.
Speaker 2: Just one black teacher, and he was the one who, he spoke--he taught Spanish one semester and then the next semester, he taught French.
Speaker 1: That's really surprising.  Well, when you were a senior--now, did they have a prom at Co- at that high school?
Speaker 2: If they did, I didn't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, most commercial high schools are kind of--they don't have a lot of social activities (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was gonna say, no, they don't have too many social events, unh-uh.
Story_ID: 638188
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1948.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That meant that you were there during the war years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --World War II [WWII].  What was the impact of the war on the community that you could see?
Speaker 2: I don't really know that I, I don't really know how to answer that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember feeling any way about it.  I remember the night that war was declared by Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].  I was a little bit afraid, and I told my mother [Rosia Robertson].  And I remember when I went to sleep that night, that I was afraid that during the night there was gonna be skirmish or something.  We lived on the sixth floor of this apartment building, that when I woke up, there was gonna be trouble and a rubble and all of that.  But it didn't happen.  But that's all I remember.
Speaker 1: Do you think that most people really didn't have--I mean, I guess yourself at the time, did you ever really have a sense of what the world was like in terms of the politics and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --the geography and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And the interesting thing is that we weren't taught in school.  Now, we were taught the war songs, like (singing), "Over there, over there," you know, that sort of thing, but nothing more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you notice the disappearance of a lot of black males in--
Speaker 2: No, but I did notice this.  At Commerce [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan], they put up a--there was like a fence, a wire fence in one of the entryways at Commerce.  And the reason for that is that as the men were coming home, and the government had given them the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]. We were not allowed to go to that section of the school.  This is late, like in the late '40s [1940s], just before I graduated from high school because we were told that those were servicemen who had returned from war.  And they were adults and we were not to talk to them in any kind of way, just stay away.  And if you were caught standing by the fence, you were in trouble.  You would get demerits.
Speaker 1: Well, I hadn't heard that before, that they made a conscious effort to separate the juvenile high school kids from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the adult soldiers coming, returning from the war (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did, yeah, because a lot of the soldiers--there was a little part of Wayne University [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] that was there.  That's why that was.  I remember that part now, and they said that they were adults.  It could have been seventeen or eighteen years old as far as I know, but they were adults and you stayed away from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have to like raise money or collect anything for the war effort?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to do that.  We had to buy stamps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when the war was over in 1945, I guess you were a sophomore, I guess or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a big deal in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember a big deal. I remember everybody was pleased. I know that my mother was then able to buy silk stockings or some kind of stockings.  I know that because before then, she couldn't get stockings.  She couldn't get sugar because everything was rationed.  But one, at some time or other, I noticed, I can't say what year it was or anything, that we had real sugar on the table.  And she had stockings rather than having to paint her legs a certain color to pretend that she had on hose.
Story_ID: 638189
Speaker 1: Did the appearance of Jackie Robinson in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] make any difference to you in high school [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I liked baseball a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the Negro League games at all?
Speaker 2: No, but I used to hear my mother [Rosia Robertson] talk about 'em.
Speaker 1: I think Detroit [Michigan] had a team, the Detroit Stars, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay, so your mother used to go to games sometimes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she used to go to games, but she didn't take me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638190
Speaker 1: So, well, when you're ready to graduate from Detroit High School of Commerce [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan], what were your prospects?  What were you thinking you were gonna do next?
Speaker 2: I really wanted to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], but we didn't have any money.  So then I had to find a job, and I looked--I stayed in Detroit [Michigan] for a year job hunting and couldn't find anything.  And so my grandmother [Emma White Robertson] told my mother [Rosia Robertson] to send me to her in Chicago [Illinois].  That's how I got to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, your grandmother who had been down in Cairo [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was now in Chicago?
Speaker 2: She was now in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, she moved to Chicago.  Now, why did you wanna go to the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Because that's where all the people that, all of my friends were going there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wanted to go where they were going, like any other kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're talking about the white students, basically, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going to the University of Michigan.
Speaker 2: What did I know (laughter)?  You know, the people that I talked to every day.  They were going there.  I wanted to go too.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it cost too much money?
Speaker 2: Any school costs too much money.  My mother was not able to send me to school.  I mean she's still doing day's work at that time.
Speaker 1: So you were looking for a job, but--
Speaker 2: None ever came.  So my grandmother sent for me to go to Chicago, and I bounced around Chicago for a year.  Then one day my grandmother heard an ad from the, I believe it was the department--employment service department [Illinois State Employment Service] for the state.  And she said, "They say if you go to this place you can get a job."  So I went, took the test, got a job working for the State of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what department did you work in?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't remember.  But I remember I started there in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I worked clearance department.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Chicago?
Speaker 2: In Chicago at the Merchandise Mart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Merchandise Mart.  Now, this is, now, this is right downtown Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right, right on the river [Chicago River] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right in the heart of, you know, the Magnificent Mile or whatever and all that activity--
Speaker 2: Just a little bit from it.
Speaker 1: So this, was--did that make a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Not really because it was going to work and coming back.  But it was different to say the truth, and I felt good about it because I had my own desk.  I told my grandmother I had my own desk.  Now, the reason why I thought it was so important is because my cousin, one cousin was working for Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.] and the other cousin was working for Campbell Soup Company.  And it made me proud, you know, little, little egotistical (laughter), yeah.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a pretty good stenographer in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew your business.  So how long did you stay with the state?
Speaker 2: I stayed with the state until I left in 1972.
Story_ID: 638191
Speaker 1: Now, during that period of time, did you, did you--now, at one point, you went to Northwestern [Northwestern University], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so when did--how did that come about or am I jumping ahead too far (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was all in the evenings.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to night school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, stop me if I jump ahead too fast 'cause I don't wanna--
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: --jump way out there.  But did you start to, when you came to Chicago [Illinois], was there anything about the political climate of Chicago that you took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I wasn't involved with that at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, you weren't even thinking about it--
Speaker 2: Although, I know that a precinct captain had talked to me when I was living with my [maternal] grandmother [Emma White Robertson] still, and wanted me to be a worker in the precinct.  And I didn't wanna do that.  I can recall that.  I just couldn't see myself jumping over fences and all of that.
Speaker 1: Jumping over fences?
Speaker 2: Yeah, trying to get in touch with people to go out to vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I figured that was too hard.  I had seen him doing that.  That's why I say that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he actually would jump the fence (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I had seen him do it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Chicago is highly politicized, and I just wondered what, you know.  When you were there, in 1950, was it, was it Kelly [Edward J. Kelly] was the mayor, was that it? Or was it--
Speaker 2: I don't know who the mayor was at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You weren't paying that much attention to it?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so when did you start going to night school, and how did you get the idea to go to night school?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I wanted to get some kind of education, as much as I could.  So I just started and somebody mentioned Northwestern.  And I said, "Good, I'll go there."  That's what I did.
Speaker 1: So did you go to the downtown campus or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went downtown, off of Chicago Avenue.
Speaker 1: So in those days, your life consisted of going to work and then going to school at night?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and sometimes, if I got tuition money I would go, and if I didn't have tuition money, I couldn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay.  And you were there, you went to night school and finally got your degree in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: I didn't get a degree.  I got sixty hours of accounting.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is there any people at Northwestern that really stand out as teachers or people that were able to help you in any way?
Speaker 2: I worked, by this time, I was working for audit department with the department of revenue, Illinois Department of Revenue.  And everybody in the office except the, one lady and me, they were all accountants, tax accountants.  And so they helped me with my homework and things that I had to do, and the head of the department was very understanding.  And when we didn't have a lot of work to do, he let me do my homework on the job.  That was very helpful--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because by that time, I had gotten married [to George Collins].  I had a little boy [Kevin Collins], and I didn't have any other time to do my homework.
Story_ID: 638192
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet George Collins?
Speaker 2: Oh, you won't believe this.  I met him in a bar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't drink, and he didn't drink.  And one of my close--girls that I worked with right there for the State of Illinois, said, "Come on, I know you like to hear records."  And they used to have guys sitting in the window playing records in those days, jazz records.  She said, "I know where we can get some good jazz.  Come on," and so we went to this particular bar.  And he was playing the records.  And he noticed that I didn't drink.  So he passed, he had the bartender to give me some orange juice.  And so then I went up to where he was sitting in the window, playing records, and asked him did he have a certain record that I wanted to hear.  And he said he didn't have it.  So I said, "Well, if I ever see you again, I'll bring it so you can have it with you because it's really nice."  He said, "Well, I'll do better than that.  Where do you live?  I'll come by your house and get it."  And that's how we met.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  This was in--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, this was in--
Speaker 1: So you got married in '58 [1958], right?  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about 1957, I guess.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], okay.
Story_ID: 638193
Speaker 1: So you met George Collins in 1957, and you all were married in 1958, right.  And it says here that he, he also studied at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois].  He studied business law.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had he been there already when you met?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, he was a World War II [WWII] vet--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and served in the Pacific.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what was George Collins like, you know?
Speaker 2: What was he like?
Speaker 1: Yes, what was he like?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was very outgoing, very warm, very friendly. Always had a smile, always talk a lot of junk (laughter).  You know, everybody liked him.  That's the kind of guy he was.  Everybody he met liked him.
Story_ID: 638194
Speaker 1: Now, by this time now, you're working as an accountant at the Illinois Department of Revenue.  Your first son is born in 1959. Kevin [Kevin Collins], right?  Let's see, so what--now, there was, at that time, looking at the political thing, it was only one black congressman in the community in Illinois, and that was William Dawson [William L. Dawson]--
Speaker 2: Dawson.
Speaker 1: --in the 1st district [1st Congressional District].  And there was no black congressman on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], right, or on, in the 2nd district [2nd Congressional District], which is--there are three now in the Chicago [Illinois] area, but at that time, it was one, and that was a seat that had been a black seat going back to Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --way back.  So that Chicago had a tradition of having somebody there longer than other cities.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So how did--and now, where did you live when you all got married?  Did you live on the West Side or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so whereabouts on the West Side?
Speaker 2: We lived at 30--3536 West Douglas [Boulevard].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had your [maternal] grandmother [Emma White Robertson] lived on the West Side too?
Speaker 2: No, she lived downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She lived on Newberry [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so this is like pre-urban renewal or something, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, big time.
Speaker 1: So the city looked different.
Speaker 2: Because the house has now been torn down, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Across the street from Old Town Chicago boys club [Old Town Club, Chicago, Illinois] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was actually downtown, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's good that I asked that 'cause, you know, people wouldn't get a sense of where you were living (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the West Side, so you moved from your grandmother's to the West Side--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Douglas Avenue [sic.].
Story_ID: 638195
Speaker 1: Did he [Collins' husband, George Collins] finish law school and become a lawyer or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He became a precinct worker, and, and had a city job.  He, his uncle was a precinct captain in the 25th Ward, and he gave him--he had a city job.  And he worked on that job for a long time.  And then what happened is that Ben Lewis [Benjamin Lewis] who was an African American in the 24th Ward had become ward committeeman.  And he was looking for good men to join him as precinct captains.  And he knew of George's experience as a precinct captain in the 25th, and he asked him to join him in the 24th and he did.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the advantage of being a precinct captain in Chicago [Illinois] in those days?
Speaker 2: You were assured of a job for one thing, if you carried your precinct.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And see George was just a precinct worker under his uncle.  But he wanted to be a full captain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the fact that Ben had sort of seeked him out, played into it too.
Speaker 1: So what was his uncle's name?  What was George's uncle's name?
Speaker 2: John Ray [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Last name Ray.
Speaker 1: So now he's working in the 24th, he actually has a job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, he's working in the 24th as Ben's assistant.  Now, they used to call them secretary, as his assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Ben gets killed.
Speaker 1: Now, that's--I thought that was the person now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I wasn't around Chicago in those days, but I've heard this story before.  But tell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably weren't burn--weren't even born at that time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us what happened.  What happened to Ben Lewis?
Speaker 2: Well, Ben got killed and then George took his place as the ward committeeman.
Story_ID: 638196
Speaker 1: Well, what are the rumors about how Ben, why Ben Lewis [Benjamin Lewis] was killed?
Speaker 2: Well, they said the mob killed him because he had a real estate business or insurance business or something and didn't pay the money to people he was supposed to or something.  I don't know.  But it was written all up in the newspapers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So speculation that he was killed by the mob.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, he seemed to be a political mentor for a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.
Speaker 1: They talked about him.  And it was Arnette Hubbard's husband was active on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] too, right?
Speaker 2: No, he was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: South Side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.  I thought (unclear) maybe he was West Side.  Okay, all right, but, so who were the black political people in those days that were really--
Speaker 2: Ben was the guy on the West Side.
Speaker 1: So Ben was it on the West Side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Had Nancy Jefferson come to, in the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she hadn't come into play yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She really didn't come into play until Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] started PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and then started gathering people and started talking politics, et cetera.  Now, there were others who had, for example, [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage, and others, but the movement had not grown at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, kind of--was [HistoryMaker] Iola McGowan doing anything on the West side in those days?
Speaker 2: Iola McGowan was there.  Iola--but she really, she really wasn't into politics at that time.  Iola got really into the politics when her husband [Adam McGowan] passed.  Before then, I don't know 'cause she was in a different ward, but she really didn't get into a lot of politics until after her husband had passed.  And she became precinct captain, I believe of the 29th--I mean ward committeeman of the 29th Ward.  And then she hooked in with Jane Byrne, and that's where she got her clout, was from Jane.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now here we are, and Ben Lewis is killed.  About what year was he killed?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was it shortly after--was it in the mid-'60s [1960s] or was it--
Speaker 2: I'd be absolutely guessing.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was it before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got killed or afterwards?  What would you say?
Speaker 2: I want to say--I don't know.  I want to say before, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know it all kind of happens in there at the same time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it all happens at the same time.
Speaker 1: --because I know Reverend Shelvin Hall [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall] and some of the reverends got together.  They brought Dr. King to the West Side. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, we were living across the street from the church that Reverend Hall had at that time [Friendship Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember Dr. King coming there and the crowds of people that were on the outside of the church who could not get in.
Story_ID: 638197
Speaker 1: Well, kind of give us an outline of how George Collins got elected to [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, being the ward committeeman, there was a fellow by the name of--well, he decided--well, first of all, let me say this.  He had become very friendly, he and 2nd Ward committeeman, the congressman from the 2nd Ward [sic. 2nd Congressional District].  His name eludes me right now.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage?
Speaker 2: No, no, before.
Speaker 1: Before Gus Savage?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we just talked about him.
Speaker 1: Oh, the white man, Murphy [Morgan F. Murphy] is it?
Speaker 2: No, not Murphy.
Speaker 1: God, what was it?
Speaker 2: We just talked about it.
Speaker 1: I know.  I can't remember.
Speaker 2: He followed De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest].
Speaker 1: Oh, William Dawson [William L. Dawson].
Speaker 2: Dawson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the 1st district [1st Congressional District].  That's the 1st district.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's 1st district.  He and Dawson had become very good friends.  George used to go to his big meeting that he would have.  And George said, George said he has a lot of ideas about organizing people and doing this and that.  And they, he--Dawson used to come by the house, and they would go for long rides in the car or go down in the basement of our house and talk about things.  And then George decided, "Well, we don't have anyone on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I think I'm gonna run for that office."  Well, the mayor told him that he couldn't run that time because the fellow [Daniel J. Ronan] that was then the congressman needed one more year for whatever it was.  The fact is that he died in office, so George then ran to fill his unexpired term and was elected in 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is interesting though.  You said the mayor said, "No, you can't run now."  Now, for those who are watching this and don't understand Chicago [Illinois], in the sense--Chicago is not different from a lot of major cities--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the fact that--
Speaker 2: St. Louis [Missouri], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: --that the Democratic Party in Chicago is basically it, and--at that time, and Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] was the Democratic head of the party and--
Speaker 2: In the whole state, really.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and if you ran--right.  And some say, part of the country (laughter) too.  But if you ran for office, you ran as a Democrat.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So it all came through the Democratic Party structure, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Machine, they called it.
Speaker 1: Machine.
Speaker 2: But structure sounds nicer.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Yeah, I was trying to be nice (laughter).  So that's the way everything works.  So you couldn't just jump and--if you jumped up and tried to run without the blessing of Daley, you probably weren't gonna--
Speaker 2: You were gonna lose.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who did your husband supplant as--
Speaker 2: I'm trying my best to think of his name.  I just can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: Was there another ethnic group on the West Side invested in that seat?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What other group was it?
Speaker 2: I can't think.  I just can't think.
Speaker 1: Well, that's also, just--maybe you wanna talk about that.  That's another feature in Chicago, that ethnics groups have different fiefdoms and, you know--
Speaker 2: I just can't think right now.
Speaker 1: Well, that congressional seat was probably somebody's, and I don't know what group it was.  I know that part of the West Side was heavily Jewish at one time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I don't know if that was a Jewish man or--
Speaker 2: Well, the whole West Side was Jewish before we moved out there and moved into their homes.
Speaker 1: Right.  So was this a Jewish congressman that he took the place of?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I can't say.  I can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: But that constituency apparently was waning, and as the African Americans were moving in.
Speaker 2: They owned most of the property, and we bought the property from them.
Story_ID: 638198
Speaker 1: Can you, now, they often talk about Chicago [Illinois].  Now, I was a newcomer to Chicago, and people talk about the difference between the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  What is your take on the difference between the South Side and West Side?
Speaker 2: I don't think there's a great deal of difference.  I think that the, the West Side people who came from the South, most of the West Side people came from the South, as did most of the South Side people.  However, those who came from the South came from Mississippi, Louisiana and Georgia, primarily, mostly from Mississippi, large number from Mississippi, who were uneducated, who were sharecroppers, et cetera.  And so that's where they moved, to the West Side.  Those who had a slightly better education, for some reason, moved to the South Side.  And I think that's because their family knew, their family members knew that it was probably gonna be better for them to move there.  But at the time, when they moved to the South Side, the South Side wasn't that great.  You had 35th [Street], which was a big slum, all the way out to 42nd Street and beyond.  So it's just one of those things where people decided to go.  And then, of course, there was the South Side wanted to down on the West Side.  But to tell you the truth, many of the West Siders who got jobs, et cetera, then moved to the South Side because they thought they were moving on up like 'The Jeffersons.'
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the dynamic of the West Side.  Now, was it harder to get voter turnout on the West Side or easier because of those dynamics?
Speaker 2: I don't know what the South Side, how the South Siders ran.  I know that we worked hard in the 24th Ward.  I know we worked hard.  We worked very hard.  We had good precinct captains and we had good precinct workers.  And that's why we were able to turn the votes out.  We also had the reputation of having the most vote getting ward in the city when President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] ran for the first time.  And so we tried to keep that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the history, a tradition--
Speaker 2: It was a tradition, that's right.
Speaker 1: --in the 24th Ward.
Speaker 2: In the 24th.
Story_ID: 638199
Speaker 1: I had a good question, just--now, now did your husband, like did he hold any other position before he ran for [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: He was the alderman--
Speaker 1: Alderman (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of the 24th Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was in city council [Chicago City Council].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what that means in Chicago [Illinois], alderman of the 24th.  And when he was in city council, how many other black folks were in city council?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) There were a few.  I don't remember how many.
Speaker 1: Those were the early days sort of.
Speaker 2: There were far more on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] than from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  Yeah, I don't think he was the only one from the West Side.  I don't believe--I can't recall.  This is going back to the '60s [1960s] now.
Speaker 1: And there were roughly, what, how many aldermen in the city?
Speaker 2: Fifty.
Speaker 1: Fifty, okay.  So, and in those days, how many were black in the whole city council, would you say?
Speaker 2: I'm just gonna--this is a guess.  I'm gonna say 5 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Because I'm trying to think of some of them, Shannon [William Shannon] and, oh, gosh, I don't know.  I can't think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know a lady on the South Side.  I'm thinking of her name, and I can't think of what her name is now.  But I'm--
Speaker 2: Oh, she wasn't there then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one from--is she still there?
Speaker 1: She ran, and she lost, and then she ran again and won.
Speaker 2: She was from the projects?
Speaker 1: No, not that one.  I just haven't been in Chicago long enough.  I've been out of town too long to think of the names right.  But I, you know, so there were a minority of black aldermen in those days is what we're saying--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'd say, that was--
Speaker 1: --and George Collins was an alderman first.  When was he elected alderman?  How many years was he alderman before he actually--
Speaker 2: Now, that I could find out.  I'd have to find out.  I've forgotten that too.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was--
Speaker 2: It was in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, say if he was elected say in '65 [1965] or something, then he became congressman in '69 [1969], okay.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I think he was alderman, he was alderman when--he was the alderman when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's also when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was he alderman when Dr. King came to town--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in '66 [1966] and lived--
Speaker 2: I believe he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so maybe '65 [1965].  We could find out.  I was just, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna say, I just--
Speaker 1: About '65 [1965] then.  So--
Speaker 2: I just can't remember now.
Story_ID: 638200
Speaker 1: Well, so he ran for [U.S.] Congress with the mayor's [Richard J. Daley] blessing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now--so how did that change your household? Now your husband [George Collins] moving to Washington, D.C. for most of the year and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he came home every weekend.  So there was--I think my son felt the change more than anymore because he was used to his daddy being there all the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was about eleven, I guess, then.
Speaker 2: Well, he was thirteen when he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well--
Speaker 2: And then there was more for him to do when he came--you know, things had just piled up while he was in Washington, and he'd come in.  So he had so much more work to do.  So he had fewer hours to spend.
Speaker 1: Now, did you like being a congressman's wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought it was interesting.
Speaker 1: Were you still working?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't quit your job (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you thought it was an interesting job, and did he share ideas with you on some of this?
Speaker 2: Some of them.  At election time.  But not too much of the work that they were really doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he told Kevin [Kevin Collins] more of the things that they were doing than he did me.
Story_ID: 638201
Speaker 1: I know when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to town, there was--people who brought Dr. King to town, Al Raby [Albert Raby] and some of the others, and they, there was some resistance on the part of some of the pastors and, you know, Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] met with Dr. King, but he wasn't that happy about Dr. King being in town either.  How did your husband [George Collins] handle that?
Speaker 2: Well, he was following the Daley line.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he soon realized that it was important for Dr. King to be there.  Matter of fact, Dr. King was in an apartment two blocks from my grand- from my mother's [Rosia Robertson] house.  And that was very interesting, you know, I thought.  He was there for a reason, and it was a good reason.
Speaker 1: So you agreed the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] needed a lot of help and that--
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yes.
Speaker 1: And did you feel in those days that Chicago [Illinois] was, had just the, you know, same kind of a crisis that say, Mississippi, had or had, you know, did you think that it was racial tension in the city?
Speaker 2: I knew there was tension in the city.  I didn't know it was racial tension.  I knew that, I wanted things to be better, but I didn't know how and why I wanted them to do better, to be better.  I knew that, I knew that I had never been denied access to a restaurant or something like that.  So I didn't feel that our kids were not able to go to the schools that they wanted to go to because I had never been denied a school that I wanted to go to.  So I had no frame of reference in that regard, when--like they were talking about the Willis Wagons and this and that.  So I didn't have any way to judge what was really going on at that time.  And then I was working full time.  My main excuse is that I was working full time, I had a child [Kevin Collins], and then I was trying to do all that I could do within my family structure, my immediate family structure.  So I don't know.  But when Dr. King came, he began to open my eyes.  And then as I was talking to other members of my family, et cetera, they said, "Oh, girl, you just don't know.  Where you been?  You've been sleep all this time?"  And that's when I began to realize how deeply concerned people were.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories about Dr. King's visit that stand out now or anything that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the only thing that I really, really, really remember is that we were living at 3536 West Douglas [Boulevard], and the church [Friendship Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] was just right around the street, it was across the street and down at the corner.  And I remember all the people that were there.  And then I remember some of the activity that was very nasty.  You know, they had left there and gone to, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and people had been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cicero [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, South Side, people had been hurt around 55th Street, somewhere, Gage Park [Chicago, Illinois].  People had been hurt and rocks were thrown and Dr. King had been hit.  And then that, I remember that part of it.  But that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your husband hosts any event for Dr. King at all, when he was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --during the visit?  Okay.  It was Daley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not to my knowledge.  Put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the Daley machine wasn't really happy about him being there anyway.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Story_ID: 638202
Speaker 1: Now, did you remember how, how--or how did you feel when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: I thought it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I thought it was terrible.  I really did.  I thought it was terrible.  I thought it was unfair, that they would take this man's life, and he was doing so much for the people.  He was a real leader and that his life had been snuffed out before he could finish doing what he had set out to do.
Speaker 1: Now, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] erupted in riots, you know, right after King was assassinated.  What, what was--how did you all deal with that?
Speaker 2: I was at school [Northwestern University] that night.  And I had left school, and I was coming down 16th Street to go to my mother's [Rosia Robertson] house to pick up my son.  And there was a police car out there.  And the policeman said, "You can't go any further."  I said, "But I have to."  I said, "My son is there.  I have to pick up my child."  He said, "You can't go there."  So then I turned around, and I went home, and I called George [George Collins] who was at the office, headquarters, his office.  And I said, "I can't get through to pick Kevin [Kevin Collins] up."  He said, "No, you stay in the house."  He said, "You don't know."  He said, "There's fires all over Roosevelt Road."  He said, "You stay in the house," he said, "and don't open the door for anyone."  I said, "Well, I wanna get Kevin."  He said, "Kevin is okay."  He said, "If Kevin's not okay, I'll let you know."  And then he came in, oh, I guess it must have been maybe four or five o'clock that next morning, smelling like smoke and everything.  And he just sat down, he sat down like this (gesture).  And he said, "You will never know," he said, "it's the most awful thing I've ever seen."  He said, and then he--you know, he was always one to, cracking jokes and different things.  He said, "You know," he said, "now, I know I don't wanna go to Haiti."  He said, "Oh, this is the most awful thing I've ever seen.  People's homes burning up and kids throwing firebombs into their friends' homes, they're so excited."  He said, "There's a real riot out there."  And he said that they had--he had been talking to people and talking to kids, and they--he was in the fire trucks and all of that.  And he said he never wants to go, he never wanted to go through that again.  It was so horrible.
Speaker 1: What--did your husband have any official role in trying to quell the--
Speaker 2: No, but he was the alderman.  He felt that, you know, he knew everybody in the ward [24th Ward].  He felt that it was his responsibility to try.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's all he would say about it.
Speaker 1: Now, the area that your husband was alderman for Lawndale [North Lawndale], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they call it, Lawndale, in Chicago [Illinois].  And I know years afterwards in the '70s [1970s], there's a book by [HistoryMaker] Useni Eugene Perkins called 'Home is A Dirty Street' ['Home is a Dirty Street: The Social Oppression of Black Children'] and had a, on the cover, the two kids standing over some rubble looking there, was a poster, one of your husband's campaign posters on the wall behind.  That's when I first read about George Collins 'cause I, you know, I saw that.  And people were, you know, read the book, but they considered the West--that part of the West Side one of the toughest, you know, ghettos, I guess in the United States in the sense, in that sense, and it suffered the most during the riot.  So, you know, he had to try to rebuild, you know, I guess that burn out--
Speaker 2: Well, not only that, but, you know, Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] made a statement or somebody made a statement.  They attributed it to Mayor Daley.  I don't know if he said it, that there was, what they call it, slum clearance, a great slum clearance.  One of the news, one of the radio guys--no, one of the newspaper men wrote that.  I don't know who it was at one time.  I believe it was.  But I thought that was the most awful thing because so many people were homeless as a result of that.  The thing that happened is that the city did not go through and clean all that out.  And they could have done it because it was rubble.  They should have done it.  They should have torn those houses down and--because they were inhabitable [sic.] and gotten rid of all that stuff.  But they left it there which was terrible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I know for years, the Better Boys Foundation [BBF Family Services, Chicago, Illinois], and some of the other organizations struggled to try to get that cleaned up.  Still, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's still not all cleaned up.
Story_ID: 638203
Speaker 1: What were some of the other issues facing the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in those days that your husband [George Collins] was dealing with?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a lot of unemployment in the area.  Like I said, a lot of the people didn't have the skills that were needed, and at the same time, a lot of our jobs were being moved out of the West Side and moving, being moved out of the city.  We have to think about that too.  A lot of jobs were going to other places in the world.  At one time, the West Side had shoe making companies and all kinds of factory jobs that people could get.  But then when the jobs left, they had no way to make a living.  And so, what happens?  People who owned property there couldn't keep up with their, couldn't keep their property up.  They couldn't pay their taxes and especially, if they could pay their taxes, they couldn't keep their properties up.  So everything just fell apart.
Story_ID: 638204
Speaker 1: So with all these--now now, tell us about, I guess what things were like when your husband [George Collins] passed away.  Now, he passed, when, 1971?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972] December the 8th (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two [1972].  Okay, all right.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, there were other people who wanted to run for his unexpired term, and as I understand it--well, at his funeral, let me put it this way, at his funeral, Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] stopped by and said to me, "I want to see you in about a week."  And I said, "Okay."  So I, in a week's time, I went by his office.  And this I didn't know at the time: one of the congressmen from Chicago [Illinois] had mentioned that I might be the person who wanted, who could best fill that job because three precinct captains wanted it.  One was a state rep, one was a lawyer, and I've forgotten what the other one was, and that he thought in order to keep the ward intact, that I might be the person who could do that without breaking the ward up because as I said, the ward was a very strong ward.  But somewhere in between that time, I know that Reverend Hall [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall] and his group had gone to see the mayor because it was in the newspapers.  And they had suggested that I be the chosen person to fill the unexpired term and run for election.  So when I got to Mayor Daley's office, he said that if I would do that for a year he would appreciate it because they wanted to keep the ward together.
Story_ID: 638205
Speaker 1: How did your husband pass away?  We just wanted to make sure we--
Speaker 2: He died in an airplane crash from Washington [D.C.] to Chicago [Illinois], and he died in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is like, the crash really is a big news item in those days.
Speaker 2: It was a big news item, yes.
Speaker 1: And totally unexpected, and so here you are with this big blow.  Your husband just is killed, and then this responsibility of trying to fulfill his term.  How did you feel about, you know, taking the reins of--
Speaker 2: Well, I talked to my mother [Rosia Robertson] about it because she was the person closest to me.  And I said, you know, "Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] asked me, said if I--asked me if I would run for George's [George Collins] unexpired term in order to keep the ward together because all these guys are making all kinds of noises and what have you, and there's a lot going on in the 24th Ward that should not be going on at this time.  And he wanted to keep things intact."  And she said, "Well, what do you think?"  I said, "I don't know.  I don't have anyone to keep Kevin [Kevin Collins] and so forth."  I said, "He has to be cared for.  I can't take him out of school and all of that."  So she said, "Well, I can keep Kevin," said, "if you want to do it."  I said, "Well, he said it was just for the rest of the term."  She said, "Well, why don't you try it?"  I said, "Well, okay."  You know, after some thought.  I mean it wasn't as easy as I'm making it sound, but she said--we said, we agreed.  And I said okay.  So I told him that I would.
Speaker 1: Did you get any other advice?  You mentioned Reverend Hall [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall] and his group.
Speaker 2: Reverend Hall, yeah, and his group.  I had met with them again, and they encouraged me as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, any other people that you--
Speaker 2: No, mostly the church people and my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did--now, Nancy Jefferson had kind of, starting to rise in prominence in those days, I guess and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], were they involved at all?
Speaker 2: They weren't involved.  Now, the only thing that Nancy did, Nancy--she wasn't really in the campaign, but Nancy said, "I wish you well," and that was saying a whole lot for Nancy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she wasn't gonna bother--oppose it.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What about Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] who's the current congressman (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I don't know how far he was involved in politics in those days at all, but--
Speaker 2: I don't either.
Story_ID: 638206
Speaker 1: So you decided to take the, you know, fulfill the unexpired term?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, well, was it what you expected or, or--
Speaker 2: Well, running for office is a whole lot different than (laughter) trying to plan somebody else's campaign because I used to work on George's [Collin's husband, George Collins] campaign, all of his campaigns as a matter of fact.  But that was the hardest part. Running for the, running the campaign and campaigning was very difficult.  First of all, it took a lot more time, and I was not prepared for the meanness of political campaigns and it hurt a lot.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your opposition (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But we endured.
Speaker 1: Who was your opposition?
Speaker 2: Well, there was, he's a magistrate now.  I can see his face.  I just can't call his name.
Speaker 1: He's a judge now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Shoot.  I just can't call his name.  I can't think.  Well, he was one, and Earlean Collins' husband [Otis Collins] who has since passed, but he was state representative at the time.
Speaker 1: And his last name was Collins too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did that create confusion?
Speaker 2: At first, but we straightened that out in a hurry 'cause I started campaigning on Cardiss [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins].
Speaker 1: Now, this is a typical Chicago [Illinois] kind of thing where someone with a similar name runs to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to fulfill the seat of someone who just left the--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know.  I just thought I'd point that out.
Speaker 2: And then at that time, I've forgotten the ward number now, but just south of the 24th Ward was a ward whose ward committeeman was a woman.  And she was of another ethnic group, and her group would not support, did not want to support African Americans or women.  And so for that reason, we had to have posters printed up in a different manner than we would, having my picture shown or name shown.  So there were all these little conflicts that had to be settled.
Speaker 1: Okay, was this a Hispanic woman or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay, so one of the white ethnic groups, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did the community organizing groups fall out over there 'cause there's quite a few of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came out fine, just great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Northwest Austin Council, the South Austin Coalition [South Austin Coalition Community Council] and--
Speaker 2: Everybody came through royally.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause it's highly organized just to put that out there, the old Saul Alinsky groups were real strong on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and still are probably today.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so they all came out behind you?
Speaker 2: I think that I probably got the benefit of being the widow as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was the election close at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I won overwhelmingly in the primary and in the general.
Speaker 1: That's really not that hard to imagine in Chicago in those days, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 638207
Speaker 1: Going to [U.S.] Congress, what was that like for the first time?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a whole new world.  That was a whole new world.  First of all I had missed the beginning of the Congress.  So I--and I had never held an elective office in my whole entire life, so I didn't know the procedure.  I didn't know the rules.  I didn't know anything, and I relied heavily on the two people who were still there, because you know, once the congressman leaves, everybody gets automatically let go.  And you have to put 'em back on the payroll.  So that was hard, but interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who was on staff then for you?
Speaker 2: Nell McDaniel was George's [Collins' husband, George Collins] secretary here in Washington [D.C.] and also in Chicago [Illinois] but she went to Washington as well.  A lady by the name of Dorothy Ross [ph.] was still there.  And we were the only two.  She and I are still good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1973, right?
Speaker 2: This is 19--June 5--June 7, 1973, 'cause the general was June 5, 1973.
Speaker 1: Now, it says here at the time, the Democratic Party was a majority party in both houses of Congress.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The president was Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], a Republican (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So had the Congressional Black Caucus been formed yet?
Speaker 2: Yes.  George was one of the founding members.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were thirteen of them at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was something new that never had been before--
Speaker 2: They had never done that before.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, Charlie Diggs [Charles Diggs] had the great idea of organizing the group before it was even named a caucus.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, someone else was telling me that too, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 638208
Speaker 1: So what were the, what were the issues when you hit the ground running?  What were the issues that, that, that black folks had nationally and, you know, locally?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't remember what they were the same day that I got there, but I remember shortly after I got there, we were very concerned about getting 10 percent of the military budget or whatever.  Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] had been talking about let us in or cut it out on various buildings that were being thought about in Chicago [Illinois], et cetera.  And we noticed that much of the federal budget was for construction and other things, and yet our people weren't getting the contracts.  And so I think it was, there was a lot of that talk about going on, letting us get a fair share of some of these expenditures that were being made.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's typically what ethnic groups have to fight to, you know, for--
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: --is, contracts in government.  Okay.  So how did it, I mean so who was leading that fight?  So Jesse Jackson was, you say, a national spokesman for that, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think it was Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III].  His committee was the one that was working on it the most, but we were hearing it in all the caucus meetings that were going on at that time.  Another thing that was being done at that time that I think is extremely interesting, is that I remember at one of those early meetings with the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus], it was decided that each member would try to get on a committee because they felt--a committee that could lead to a chairmanship of a full committee because they knew that--or felt, that they could probably elected enough terms to earn that position.  And we did that.  Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] went on appropriations [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations], I think.  Charlie Diggs, not Charlie Diggs, but Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] was on ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means], went to ways and means.
Speaker 1: I think Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] was on judiciary [U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary].
Speaker 2: Conyers was on judiciary, but there was someone else as well.  Oh, Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] was in labor [House Committee on Education and Labor; House Committee on Education and the Workforce] and they, although they already had other assignments, they decided that they were going to go to these new assignments because they felt that in the end, they would be able to chair those committees.  And it worked out for some, and some it didn't.
Speaker 1: Who did it work out well for?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, Conyers and Charlie.  Charlie stepped aside however.
Story_ID: 638209
Speaker 1: Who did you really, who were you really impressed with when you came to [U.S.] Congress, of the people that you saw? Well, first of all, who was your husband [George Collins] impressed with that you--did you have any expectations about who was really trying to do something and who wasn't, based on--not that anybody wasn't, but, you know, who was really, you know, setting the best example from your husband's point of view.  And then what did you see when you got here, when you got to Congress?
Speaker 2: I, he was on public works, on the public works committee [U.S. House Committee on Public Works], and he felt that he could do a great deal on the public works committee.  As a matter of fact, he had the chairman to come out a couple of times.  And his chairman liked a certain kind of music.  And he had him come out to one of the big hote- one of the big restaurants in Chicago [Illinois] because he wanted to work with him more closely.  That was one person that I--and I was not on public works.  I was on public works for a very short time, but that was necessary for, to bring jobs to Chicago.  He often spoke of Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums].  He spoke of Dellums because he was on armed services [House Armed Services Committee].  And this is at a time when I think Vietnam [Vietnam War] was still, was just getting started good or Korea [Korean War] was just ending good or something.  I can't remember now, but he was interested in how he was going about doing his job.  Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins], he really liked Gus Hawkins because he said ed and labor [House Committee on Education and Labor; House Committee on Education and the Workforce] was so important and Gus was always authorizing big bills and getting 'em passed.  And he felt that was important.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the guys from California.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what committee did you get on when you--
Speaker 2: At first, I was on public works.  Then I got on foreign affairs [House Foreign Affairs Committee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And government operations [U.S. House Committee on Government Operations].
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot to ask you, who you thought was really, you know, who was impressive when you got there, got here, rather?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you, I liked, I really did like this guy because he was, he could get things done, and he was a good leader.  I liked Dan Rostenkowski because he was the chairman of the committee that could get a lot of things done and it was important to Chicago.  He was on ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means].  And everything was gonna come through him, and yet he was easy to talk to.  If you wanted something--and also he was the delegation leader.  And we met once a month.  So if there was a problem of any kind or there was something you needed to know or something that was gonna benefit Illinois, you thought, but you weren't sure, you could go to him and say, "Now, how is this gonna help Illinois," especially for a new person like me.  And he would sit down and just sit down and talk and tell me.  And I thought that was good because I needed to know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Rostenkowski, you know, gained a reputation as one of the most powerful men in Congress--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at one point.
Speaker 2: And I thought a lot of him.  And he was fair.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He eventually got in trouble--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.
Speaker 1: It was over that postal thing, I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. A lot of people, I think Charlie Hayes [HistoryMaker Charles Hayes] got in trouble over the same thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, yeah, Rostenkowski was really, really had a powerful reputation in the country.
Story_ID: 638210
Speaker 1: Were you often torn by temptation to do something that, you know, were people bringing you deals in [U.S.] Congress?  I know it's a--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't used to a lobbyists at first, and I wasn't used to being swamped by all these people, and everybody wanted to come in and, "This means jobs for your district, this means jobs for your district."  I wasn't seeing those jobs for my district.  They (laughter) all came and they meant jobs for someplace else or somebody else, but I wasn't seeing that.  That bothered me a great deal.  So rather than talk to a lot of them, I had my AA [administrative assistant] to talk to them first, to see exactly where they were coming from.  And then I would make a decision later, when I saw them, about how beneficial it was gonna be to the 7th Congressional District because I knew the kind of people who lived there.  We had both the wealthiest and the poorest.  And we had to have some kind of accommodation to make things work for both of us, well, the wealthy and the poor.
Speaker 1: Okay, as you were there, over time, what became your personal agenda in Congress for your district?
Speaker 2: Jobs (laughter). Jobs, housing, education, the usual things. Health.  Health was a big one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I know, the Westside Health Authority [Chicago, Illinois] is a big--was that in your district?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Was Westside Health Authority in your district?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.  I know there were struggles with Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], trying to keep that opened.  Was that in your district?
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in those days, I mean there was always talk of closing Cook County up.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember that.  I remember the University of Illinois Hospital [University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, Illinois], everybody would go to, but I didn't know that Cook County was ever in jeopardy.  I never heard that.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, okay.
Speaker 2: And Presbyterian St. Luke [Presbyterian St. Luke's Hospital; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] came in.  That was helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a cluster of hospitals on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Right there, yes.
Speaker 1: --right there, near the University of Illinois.
Speaker 2: There was talk about one of the, Hines Hospital [Edward Hines Jr. Veterans Administration Hospital, Hines, Illinois] and another veterans hospital, one downtown by Northwestern [Northwestern University].  There was talk about one of those having to go, but it didn't happen.
Story_ID: 638211
Speaker 1: So do you think you, you, do you think you accomplished, you know--I know you couldn't accomplish everything you wanted to do, but what were some of your major accomplishments in [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that I am most proud of, and it doesn't sound like a great deal, but I am most proud of the fact that women have been given the opportunity to be in sports and recognized for their ability.  For example, we now have the Women's National Basketball Association.  I'm proud of that fact because when I looked at it, Title VII--Title IX didn't mean a thing to anybody.  It had been out there for a long time, but nobody was doing anything about it.  I'm very proud that I had hearings on that.  I'm also proud of the fact that I authored legislation that enabled people on Medicare to get mammogram tests for cancer, breast cancer.  People might think I'm silly, but every time you ride your bicycle and put on a helmet, that's my legislation.  Every time you take your child or you know of a child being taken to daycare on federal property, that's my legislation.  So I'm proud of those. Not a lot, but some.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your toughest challenges in Congress?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Getting legislation passed because you have so many, you have so much to go through to get legislation passed.  And especially at a time--as long as we had both the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and the Senate [U.S. Senate], there wasn't that much of a problem.  But once we lost either the House or the Senate, it was always difficult.  Those were the toughest times, and people had to believe you.  Legislation that dealt with women in sports was tough because the speaker, who was from Chicago [Illinois] at that time, was a wrestler, and he didn't see the need for women to have fair opportunities in sports.  He wanted everybody to wrestle.  Well, all of us don't wrestle.
Speaker 1: Now, who is this?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of his name now (laughter).  He just left.  Oh, what's--Kevin [Collins' son, Kevin Collins]?  Oh what's his name?
Speaker 1: KEVIN COLLINS:  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who was the speaker of the house from Illinois, Kevin?
Speaker 1: Bennett, I wanna say, is it Benny.  What was his name?  Oh, shoot, I'm looking at him.
Speaker 2: KEVIN COLLINS:  What was the question?
Speaker 1: Who was the speaker of the house from Illinois recently, in the Republican administration, Kevin (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: KEVIN COLLINS:  (Simultaneous) Oh, Hastert.
Speaker 1: Hastert, Denny Hastert.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was tough legislation to get through, you know, things like that.  It all depends on what's happening in the House or in the Senate.
Story_ID: 638212
Speaker 1: Okay well, in, in 1980--well, what was your working relationship like with Ralph Metcalfe first of all?  Then I wanna ask about Harold [Harold Washington].
Speaker 2: We didn't have much of a working relationship.  I always (laughter), it was funny.  We lived on the same block at that time.  Ralph--I would start out--and sometimes I would see Ralph.  We always took the same course to get down.  Ralph was still racing (laughter), and even though I'd leave out, he'd always make sure he passed by me in my car.  Ralph was the kind of guy who always wanted to be first doing everything.  We had an encounter when I wanted to become a member of the commerce committee [House Committee on Energy and Commerce].  Tip O'Neill at the time said, "Well--." I went to Tip.  And he said, "Well," he said, "both--Ralph has asked me about that slot too."  Ralph didn't even know there was gonna be an opening on the committee.  The chairman had to me there was gonna be an opening on the committee.  So I went to Tip.  He said, "Well," he said, "if the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] gives you an opportunity," says, "okay," he said, "you can have the spot."  So I went to the caucus at that next caucus meeting and mentioned to them that there was an opening on Commerce that I'd like to fill this position.  Ralph said, "Well," he says, "I've been here longer than she has and I think I deserve the spot."  This is what he's saying to the caucus members, the black caucus members.  And I thought that was not the right thing for him to do because he didn't even know about the spot.  And so he got the spot away from me.  I never forgave Ralph because he didn't have to do that, I felt.  I felt that if he had come to me and said, "Cardiss [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins], I have been here a long time, and I've been keeping my eye on that spot.  It has come up and I'd like to have it, and as soon as I get through with it, you can have it back," (laughter), "you could have it."  But he didn't do that, and that annoyed me to no end.  I never forgave him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think that you were, do you think that the black men who were elected to [U.S.] Congress treated the black women differently than--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I think that Ralph just wanted to be first.  He wanted to be first on commerce.
Speaker 1: Okay, but pretty much you think you were treated pretty well by the black men in Congress (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, no question.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I thought I'd ask that question.
Story_ID: 638213
Speaker 1: Now, when Harold Wa- when Harold Washington was elected in 1980, after the death of Ralph Metcalfe, and [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage was elected in '80 [1980] in the 2nd district [2nd Congressional District], that gave three, you know, black Chicago [Illinois], three congressmen.  How did that affect what you were trying to do?  Did it make any difference?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we were on different committees.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you all worked together on?
Speaker 2: No.  As a matter of fact, the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] worked very well as a whole, not individually.  If I had a bill or something that came up, then I would talk to the caucus about it or something that was going on with the telephone company or something like that, I would bring it to the caucus.  And they would say, "Well, you know, we need to do so and so about this," or whatever it is, as a group.  But individually, we didn't do too much work individually with each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean did you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We would vote for each other's bills.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did--well, that's important.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you, were you close at all with Gus Savage?  Did you know him very well?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gus is a funny guy.  Gus (laughter), Gus had marched all around my husband's office building in the 24th Ward at one time.  He was against something that had gone on, and he, you know, anti-Daley [Richard J. Daley] and this and that.  And so (laughter), and he was out there marching--this is a funny story.  He was out there marching, and Kevin [Kevin Collins] was a little boy.  I guess he was about two or three.  And all of a sudden somebody from the office, George [George Collins] told me, ran out and grabbed Kevin.  Kevin had a stick in his hand (laughter), and he was marching too (laughter), didn't know that it was against his father.  And later I told Gus about that, and he just laughed.  He said, "Cardiss [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins], it's probably shows that your son has a lot more sense," (laughter), "than most people have," you know, so that was fun.  But he was a good guy.  I like Gus a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We never had any problems.  He told me that I had the making of a good golfer if I would just keep my eye on the ball and not try to look all around.  He said, "That's why your ball goes either this way or that way."  So we had a lot in common.  He was a great guy.
Story_ID: 638214
Speaker 1: Now, what about Harold Washington?
Speaker 2: Harold was a different man.  He, he, he had his own agenda, whatever it was, and he was not very forthcoming, as far as I was concerned.  Now, he was--as far as I could tell, he was friendly with the guys.  But I never saw him sitting down having dinner or lunch or anything with any of the guys.  It's not that he didn't do it, but I never saw him do it.
Speaker 1: With any of the--wait a minute--
Speaker 2: Like Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] or Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] or anybody, any of the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] members.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't very collegial with the rest of the black caucus members?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, but I don't wanna make a misstatement.  Not as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you think of his candidacy for mayor in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: That was a tough one.  I was still a Democrat, at that time, I was still a Daley [Richard J. Daley] Democrat.  So I didn't vote for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't help campaign for him or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were clear that you, you know, were part of the Daley camp or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So at that time, the Daley camp would have been backing, I guess, Richie Daley [Richard M. Daley], right, 'cause, you know, it was Richie Daley, Jane Byrne, and Harold.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, how do you think he did as a mayor?
Speaker 2: Oh, he did fine as a mayor.  As a matter of fact, we threw--some of his friends and others, he decided to stay out of my race, which was my toughest race.  Some of the caucus members and some other people asked him not to get involved in my race, my next congressional race.  And he did not.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the race when Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] ran against you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Now, that was a--
Speaker 2: That was a tough one.
Speaker 1: --hotly contested race.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was hotly contested.
Speaker 1: And Danny Davis had been, he was an alderman and a supporter of Harold Washington's coalition--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from the very beginning.  So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so how did you manage to win that one?
Speaker 2: Well, I won through a big vote and the party was right behind me.  They pulled the vote for me.  It was a tough race, the toughest I ever had.
Story_ID: 638215
Speaker 1: That was the election in 1984, I guess?
Speaker 2: I believe.  I can't remember the dates.  I don't remember dates good any more.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that was '84 [1984]. And subsequently, I guess, since you left office, Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] has become the congressman
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from that district [7th Congressional District] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I supported him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all get along well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we get along.  Danny, as a matter of fact, was the one who had the post office downtown named after me [Cardiss Collins Post Office Building, Chicago, Illinois].  Yeah, he's a good guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I knew he was a good guy.  I just didn't want him to have my job (laughter).
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  So, when--now, you were in [U.S.] Congress until--
Speaker 2: January 7, 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why did you decide to leave Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, I said it was because I had reached age sixty-five, but the true reason is because my eyes were giving out.  I knew that.  And I thought that I didn't want to be stumbling around Congress with a red stick.
Story_ID: 638216
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this--now, now I don't wanna jump too far ahead without asking you about--I probably should ask you about the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration and the--well, maybe you can summarize your feelings about some of the administrations and how they related to the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] beginning, I guess with--you came in when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was president?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But he wasn't there long because Watergate hit right after you got there, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So what was the relationship with Richard Nixon?
Speaker 2: Not very good.  He, he had a secretary who was from Illinois, and I never asked any special favors.  I didn't wanna go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for anything, so I didn't have any close relationship with that administration at all.  But I knew her.  Her name was Rose Mary [Rose Mary Woods] or something.  I've forgotten her name now.  But anyway, she would call from time to time to see how I was, and that was about the size of that.  And that was just, you know, woman to woman. 'Cause women, the women's movement was starting up, and that's what that was all about.
Story_ID: 638217
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a very strong relationship with Shirley Chisholm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not strong, but a good relationship with her.  We, she sat on one end of, on the left side of the, of the [U.S.] Congress, and I sat about four or five seats from her most of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she ran--she had a high profile in the '70s [1970s], and she ran for president in, I guess in '76 [sic. 1972], right?
Speaker 2: I believe, yeah.  But she, Shirley had her own agenda.  Everybody had, you know, members of Congress have their own agendas.  They have their own districts.  So their focus is usually on wherever their district is and whatever their needs are or what the people are and in what's on in that district.  You need to know what's going on in your district every day.  So you call every day.  You have people calling you every day from your office, letting you know.  You don't really have time to be, to, to do a whole lot of getting together, per se, you know.
Speaker 1: Or networking with the other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you just don't have that kind of time because you're focused on what's going on or you're not gonna be there.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask you about her and I know there were other black women in Congress at the time, [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.
Speaker 2: I liked Yvonne a lot.  She would come and sit next to me sometimes, you know, and say, "Girl, what's happening," that sort of thing.  The day that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], it was found that Nixon had, indeed, been less than honest about what had happened, she came over.  She was happy.  She said, "Girl, he lied," (laughter), you know, that sort of thing.  And that was the most of that, and then most of the time, she was going on, sitting around talking to somebody because what happens, during the time when you're in the hall, you're talking to other members about what's going on.  There's this bill that you have or somebody else has. And how does it affect you and your district.  You see members moving around a lot.  You don't see 'em sitting in their chairs.  They're moving from one person to the other.  And they only have fifteen minutes to vote to start with.  Many times you'll see member standing by the door to catch somebody who's coming in because you wanna know how this is going to affect you or your district or how is it gonna benefit somebody else's district that you're concerned about, a district that you might be getting in redistricting.  And so you don't have enough time to be collegiate.  You see what I'm saying.  Yeah, you just don't have it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask about her and, well, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like Max.  Max, Max is fun to be around because, I like to see her work.  She has a very low tolerance level (laughter).  When she wants something and she's not given it, she just explodes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's fun.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And smart.  Max is very smart.  Most people don't realize how smart she really is, but she is.  She's very smart.
Speaker 1: Now, who was the one from Pennsylvania, C. Delores Tucker?
Speaker 2: C. Delores Tucker.  I worked with her a lot.
Speaker 1: These are just some of the ones that came to mind, just immediately as I'm sitting here, but these are class (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was not a member, but she was always around members because she--she wasn't a lobbyist at first, but she became a pretty good lobbyist (laughter) for what she wanted.
Story_ID: 638218
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the oth- the administrations.  What about the Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] administration?  What kind of relationship did you have with--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) A little bit of disappointment, but he was very open.  We could go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and sit down and talk to him about certain issues.  But I think the problem there was that the people who were closest to him, his advisors weren't listening very carefully about what we were saying.  Let me just give you one episode or one time I was there, one little story.  I needed some housing very badly in Chicago [Illinois].  I went to talk to him about the housing, and we were conversing and he had almost said that he was gonna give it to me.  Then Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] shows up in a big hurry.  Apparently, she had heard that I was meeting with the president.  And the president said, "You know, Cardiss [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins] is here because of so and so and so.  And there's an area that really needs housing and so forth."  The first words out of Pat's mouth was that, "Mr. President, I think this is premature."  And killed the deal right there on the spot.  Well, I wish he had--and certainly, he's gonna listen to his secretary of housing, of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] at that time.  But I needed it so bad.  So what she did, she said, "Well, I'll go out and take a look."  And she called herself being fair.  She came out and she took a look, and she says, "Well, Cardiss, you don't need new housing."  This is what she reported to him as well. "What you need is to have this, these, these houses rebuilt."  They were stone fronts and all of that.  She said, "These are good houses," right along Douglas Boulevard there.  Well, they might have been good houses, but they hadn't been kept up.  I mean you can mistreat a brick and knock it down.  And that is what happened ultimately, and I told Pat.  I said, "Pat, you're not listening to me."  She said, "All you gotta do is put some new floors in and some new windows," and this, that and the other thing.  "And they're perfectly okay."  Well, I thought that the president should have said, "Let's wait six months and go back and take another look," and by that time, I could have proved my point even better.  I could have proven it, you know.  So I was disappointed in that, and that hurt.  So how did I think, what did I think about the president?  I thought that his advisors didn't advise him well, not because of that one incident, but because of other things that the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] had talked to him about.  And he didn't react favorably.
Story_ID: 638219
Speaker 1: Well, what about Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  Now, he comes in 1980 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, forget that all together.
Speaker 1: He's there for eight years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a long time.
Speaker 1: And then George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], you know, the elder George Bush. Not much there either.  Were you surprised at the selection of Clarence Thomas when he was president?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  I had a friend who used to have open house every Sunday.  She has since passed, but anybody who wanted to could go by, you know, wonderful--she was a gourmet cook, have a wonderful meal.  And people used to just drop in and discuss politics for the City of Washington [D.C.] and national politics.  And Clarence Thomas used to come by every so often.  And he had before--he had appeared before one of my subcommittees at one time or another.  And we'd really get into a lot of discussion, and Clarence is Clarence.  He believes in what he's doing and saying.  I always thought that's just the opposite of what I believe in and what I was talking about.  And I just felt that he was not the man for the--that I wanted to see in the job.  I wanted to see somebody more liberal, but he got the job, and I respect him.
Story_ID: 638220
Speaker 1: The Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I love them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wish he could have run forever like Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] did, wish he could have had at least four terms.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you love so much about the Clinton administration?
Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, they were easy to work with.  His staff was a good staff.  You know, you could call up, and you--if you had something important that you wanted to discuss, he would find the time to discuss it with you.  If he came to the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] for a meeting of his own, and he would allow enough time for, we had those big meetings in the ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means] room, it's on the first floor.  And if you would stop there and say, "Mr. President, can I see you for just a minute?"  He'd always stop, and say, "Of course, you can."  He was very warm and friendly.  And if you wanted to discuss something with Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], she would do the same thing in hearing, you know, she'd sit down, "I only have a couple minutes, but let me hear what you have to--tell me your story."  And I liked that accessibility.  I really did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so an open kind--
Speaker 2: Open, yes.  And you know they were busy people, and you knew you were imposing on them, but you wanted to get your little point across.
Story_ID: 638221
Speaker 1: After Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], we've got George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush].
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so you left during the--well, during the Clinton administration, actually. So--
Speaker 2: Right after.
Speaker 1: So you were--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't get any Bush administration, any George Bush administration.
Speaker 1: Did you have an assessment, although you were, you didn't serve during this time of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] now, and what he's doing?
Speaker 2: I like Barack Obama a lot.
Speaker 1: Do you get good feedback about--
Speaker 2: I just wish he wasn't being treated so unfairly.  He's doing a good job, and I think that all this nonsense about what he has done and what he has not done is just scurrilous.
Story_ID: 638222
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice maybe or analysis you can offer, I guess in terms of what the Congressional Black Caucus is doing today?
Speaker 2: No. I haven't been to any caucus meetings.  Although I'm emeritus, chair emeritus, I've only been to one meeting.  And that was last year.  I've always felt that I don't need to be sitting there listening to what they're talking about because there are so many of them, if they want me to come, they'll let me know.  And they did.  They invited me to a meeting, but as emeritus, I think my position is to come whenever I'm asked.  And when I'm not asked, to stay away.
Story_ID: 638223
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think one thing that I would do differently is that I would take my son to Washington [D.C.] with me, my son and my mother [Rosia Robertson].  I definitely--I would do that.  The reason for it is because as Kevin [Kevin Collins] grew up, I wasn't there.  I was not there when he became fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen.  I was not there.  I was not there when my mother got into her eighties, and I just feel now that that was a big mistake.  I should have taken them on with me.
Story_ID: 638224
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm gonna say--I don't know what my legacy will be, but I'd like to say that the most important thing I did to benefit the most people is to be able to see the growth of childcare facilities in federal buildings.  I think that's important.
Story_ID: 638225
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about your family?  You just talked about your mother [Rosia Robertson] and your son [Kevin Collins], but they constitute your current family, I guess.  Can you tell us something about--has your mother passed away?
Speaker 2: My mother has passed on.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she get a chance to see you in [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did she think about that?
Speaker 2: She was pleased.  She was proud.
Speaker 1: Is it something that she'd ever imagined?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, neither of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't either.  You never imagined this--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: If somebody had told you, you were gonna be in Congress when you were in high school [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: I didn't, ever talking about it.  I didn't know there was such a thing as a congressperson when I was in high school.  I mean my little high school civics didn't read that far.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, and--
Speaker 2: I knew there was the president, period.  He did all for all people.
Story_ID: 638226
Speaker 1: Do you have any plans for the future in terms of writing about your experiences?
Speaker 2: I have been asked to write about my experiences, but at one point I thought I would.  But I haven't, and I don't know if I will.  I remember so many--I don't remember things about work.  I remember things about my childhood.  I don't remember the things that happened at work, and I don't have a lot of anecdotes, and so it would be hard for me to write about some of the things that happened in [U.S.] Congress.  I just don't recall those anymore.
Story_ID: 638227
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Most people say something nice or something great about I did all I could, the best I could and so forth.  That's what I did.  I did all I knew to do, and I did it as well as I possibly could.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  You're a good interviewer.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you, (laughter) thank you very much.
Story_ID: 638228
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother.  Her name is Emma Robertson [Emma White Robertson], my mother's mother.
Speaker 2: About what year is that, do you think?
Speaker 1: That was taken, oh, gosh, I'd say--oh, I have no idea.
Speaker 2: That's me when I was about three years old.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins, and I was in a friend's wedding.  My mother [Rosia Robertson] had that picture taken.
Speaker 1: That's me when I was a little bit older, maybe five years old, Cardiss Collins, 1936.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Kevin when he was in childcare.  He must have been about three years old at that time, Kevin Collins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't see that one.  That's my mother and me.  That had to be some time in 1931 before September the 24th.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: High school graduation, June 1948, Cardiss Collins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, if you could tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To the left--to the left, baby in mother's arms.  In the center, I believe that's the same one we just saw.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And then the, on the right is another picture when I was in my mother's, one of my mother's friends' weddings, I'd say about six years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my husband, George W. Collins [George Collins].  That was taken in 1969 or '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: That's when he was congressman?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was a congressman then.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's a campaign poster, Cardiss Collins, please reelect Cardiss Collins.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, is that it?
Speaker 1: There's one more, her sitting on a committee, oh, two more.  There's one with Ron Brown here.
Speaker 2: That's the Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown, and Cardiss Collins, doing the Electric Slide at one of my fundraisers.
Speaker 1: Electric Slide, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the Slide had just come out then, so we were showing others how to do it.
Speaker 1: And one more.  I'm not sure where you are.  Can you see yourself before I put it up there?
Speaker 2: Am I up there, Kevin?  I can't see that far.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, you're in here somewhere.  It's one of your committees.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me.  What committee is that?
Speaker 2: It's down below.  There's a legend down there.
Speaker 1: Oh, government operations [U.S. House Committee on Government Operations], okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The lady in blue at the top of the picture is Cardiss Collins.  That's me in committee meeting.  The committee is government operations.
