Story_ID: 93252
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Mildred Cruzat.  M-I-L-D-R-E-D, C-R-U-Z-A-T.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 17, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay and where you--.
Speaker 2: And that's Detroit.
Speaker 1: In Detroit?
Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: At the present I am a fitness instructor, and also I model for Stewart's [Modeling] Agency.
Speaker 2: Okay and you're a former dancer as well?
Speaker 1: Yes, I've been a former dancer also been asked to go back and would I go back--go back and start teaching children dancing again where I once taught which was at the Robert Taylor Homes in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], but it was the Beethoven Elementary School, and they feel that they still need--the children still need that form of art to enrich them and they need it more now than ever.
Speaker 2: Okay now what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date?  Today is August 28th.
Speaker 2: (Whispering - the 6th).
Speaker 1: Oh, excuse me August 26, 1903.
Speaker 2: No, not quite (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) 19--I told you I'm sorry, 2003.
Speaker 2: Alright, okay we got that.
Speaker 1: So I'm not comfortable with what I'm doing so.
Story_ID: 93253
Speaker 1: Okay but before we get into depth, that's why we have these five "People-Magazine"-ish type questions that just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm compelled to ask these questions and--.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, see I'm not present (simultaneous).  Okay go ahead.
Speaker 1: So before we get into anything serious, these five questions first, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: Now the first question is, ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Well let's see, what is my favorite food?  I really don't have favorites, I like most anything but a little bit of things but I am a chocoholic.  I like chocolate okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like white.  I don't (laughter).  Is that a color, but I like white, bright colors, bright yellow and blue, baby blue.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring is a very--it fascinates me because I like to see the trees blossom and the flowers bloom and you get to see things bud and you get to see things--the world just seems to brighten up in Spring.  The trees come out. It's green, and it's very--it's just a beautiful time of the year I think.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's another problem.  I like just traveling anywhere is a great destination I like.  I can feel very comfortable wherever I go.  If it's--but the place I--that fascinated me a lot was, recently--was I went to South Africa, Cape Town and that was a beautiful sight and a beautiful trip for many reasons.  It was an enriching experience so and the last two places I went which were as equally as beautiful and fascinating was Aspen, Colorado, I went skiing there and Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] which is another place that is again very simple, earthy, very natural.  So, all these places have a certain kind of calmness, but beauty about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now ma'am do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Alright now (unclear).  There's the expression.  Wisdom--no, the mintage to wisdom is not to--wait--wisdom--to wisdom is not rust?  Is not to rust and the advantage--wait--can I go--.
Speaker 1: Yeah you can start all over.
Speaker 2: Do you--can you break that up in two or no?  Okay.
Speaker 1: No, just take your time.
Speaker 2: I got it, this is one I like reading.  "The mintage of wisdom is not to rest and rust and the true happiness--true happiness is consists really of love, laughter and work", and it's very true.  Love, laughter and work is something that is very precious, and if you include it in your life its, it works very well.
Story_ID: 93254
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I wanna ask you about your family history. I wanna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  I'm going to start with your mother's side first.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Florence Richerson and--.
Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have to look at that piece of paper there. I think it is 1904 if I am not mistaken, 1904--February 8, 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born?
Speaker 2: In New York [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay now how far can you trace her family back and where do they go back to?  Do they go back to New York or some other place?
Speaker 2: No, her-- Now it's very difficult because parents didn't speak a great deal of--for many reasons.  I do know that on her mother's side there--they were from Kentucky and their father--their great grand--their grandfather was the first Governor of Kentucky who was James Shelby [sic, the first Governor of Kentucky was Isaac Shelby].
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was--he was White?
Speaker 2: Yes that's right.
Speaker 1: Is he associated (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: So he was not--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry was he associated with Shelbyville, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Well they could been named after--cause he was the first Governor.  So it could have been named after him.
Speaker 1: That's what I am thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was probably the clearest thing I know about her side of the family.  I'm trying to--her father--.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: That was--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Oh, well I'm just gonna say that's a long time ago, the first Governor of Kentucky.  I guess we are talking about the 1830s or something --1840s (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right about 18--we were talking about, maybe about--it could have been about '56 [1856] could have been around '50 [1850] [sic, Isaac Shelby took office in 1792, and again in 1812].
Speaker 1: 1850s?
Speaker 2: Right about then (unclear) I think yes.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And all the other little nationalities I'm not quite clear on, okay, could have been a number of--it could have been French because of--could be--now someone says "Indian", "American Indian", those are the three nationalities that are--that I would be familiar with.
Speaker 1: In addition to African?
Speaker 2: Af--yes, but it was more (unclear) but these were as predominant as Af--as being black.  I say "black" instead of "African"--it's black cause when I went to Africa people did not really want to know whether I was Afro-American, they wanted to know whether I--was I a black American?  They look at Americans black or white or whatever you come from the United States you are American.  So, they don't refer to us as Africans, so that's why I say black.  I will refer to being black.
Story_ID: 93255
Speaker 1: Okay now, see, so that's your mother's [Florence Richerson] side of the family or her (simultaneous) father's side?
Speaker 2: Mother's side and my father's [Sevar Clemon] is more complicated because I really know very little about--.
Speaker 1: But your mother's side started in Kentucky (unclear) and then they migrated to New York--.
Speaker 2: Not really, they migrated to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay then you mother is actually born in New York?
Speaker 2: Born in New York and then was raised in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay alright, okay.  Now are there any stories passed down through anyone on your mother's side of the family about life in the 19th Century or life in association with this Governor Shelby, or any of the aftermath of the Civil War (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, really they didn't mention--that didn't come about until we got older that, that was mentioned and no, families did not really sit around and talk about the backgrounds and heritage of--they were--it was, I think where Afro-Americans were because of our back--because of the Shelbys and all these people that our grandmothers worked for.  The people were more or less of light-skinned tones, what they call "good hair" (laughter), those things--really stood out and were important and your education.  Those things were very and how hard the mother or the father worked; how hard her mother worked.  Her mother was a--at that time was a maid in a wealthy, in wealthy homes and all the aunts were and so they really talked about their work and what they did and my mother was a--I remember my mother telling me all the time how she was left at home alone because her mother [Mildred Shelby Richerson] had to work and her father [Redrick Newsom] wasn't there.  How she had to carry water and coal when she was a little girl and that those things had to be brought into the house.
Speaker 1: This is in Detroit?
Speaker 2: This is in Detroit, yes and (laughter) my mother was smaller than I was so she was a very tiny little person but how hard she worked as a child of seven, six and seven years old, and today children--you can hardly tell them to take the glass from the table to the kitchen sink (laughter), but she did very laborious work as a child.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was she raised in the, what they call--
Speaker 2: She was--.
Speaker 1: --the "Black Bottom" section of Detroit?
Speaker 2: No, no this--no they were not poor people or middle class, but when you had--people didn't have--you either were doctor, lawyer, teacher and they were--her parents were none of that-weren't any of those so, but they lived comfortably and they lived and I guess I go back to how I compare to what I see children now living, having what maybe what I had, but they live so--they live so poorly now.  We were enriched by culture, by art, people were very proud, were very proud then and very dignified and even as poor as they were they had a touch of class (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay but I was asking what side of Detroit they lived on you know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Detroit, oh, what part of Detroit they lived?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what part of Detroit (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Oh, what part of Detroit they lived?  Okay--.
Speaker 1: Did she--?
Speaker 2: Okay I'm trying to think cause see Detroit's changed so and where did she live?
Speaker 1: Yeah I know the whole section they called "Black Bottom" is destroyed now (simultaneous) (unclear) okay alright, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no she didn't live in Black Bottom, no, not at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we've interviewed some other people, [HM] John Conyers [Jr.] and some of the rest, were raised there, and I don't know--.
Speaker 2: Okay that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I never heard.  They lived on the West Side as far as I know and the West Side was a nice little residential section.
Story_ID: 93256
Speaker 1: Okay now what was--you said your life for your mother [Florence Richerson] was hard early on right and (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: She just--
Speaker 1: And did she have a chance--well she went to school in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: She went to school, she didn't finish high school when she got married, but after she had four children she went back and got her degree in high school--her diploma for high school when she had four children then she--then she started working for my dad [Sevar Clemon] who had--at that time they called it a "haberdashery", a cleaners and a haberdashery.  He opened up was--which was sort of new at that time, a store that actually sold merchandise and at that time it wasn't a big thing for a person to have a little store which sold hats and ties and shirts for men and from there he had a cleaners and then my mother joined him and helped him in his place of business.
Speaker 1: Okay now is there a story about how your parents met?  Do they talk about that?
Speaker 2: Only thing I know she met--again, through friends.  There were a certain little cluster of friends and through them she met--through her relatives she met my father, and I think she was about seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Had children early, I think, eighteen.
Story_ID: 93257
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about your father?  What was his full name and date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Dad was Sevar, S-E-V-A-R.  I think his middle name was Baldwin.  Is that right Baldwin?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I couldn't think--.
Speaker 2: It's B-A-L-D-W-I-N, Clemon, C-L-E-M-O-N which is French.
Speaker 1: Okay, is Sevar French as well, I mean the whole name is French?
Speaker 2: I don't know where they got Sevar from.  I don't--I think they--yes I really don't know how that all originated.
Speaker 1: And the last name is--.
Speaker 2: Clemon, C-L-E-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh okay.
Speaker 2: That's French.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So there--.
Speaker 1: And when was he born and where?
Speaker 2: He was born in [Montgomery] Alabama and I think that was 19--no sorry, 18--.
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1899] I think.
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1899]?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his side of the family, about your father's side?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's even less, (laughter) okay.  It was in--I only knew his aunts, never knew his father or his mother.  I do know there was a lot of--now you know Alabama was segregated but there was a lot of people that were--they called "mixed".  What--what do they call them now "interracial marriages?"  Well they weren't marries so there was a lot of people that had white fathers.  So a lot of my relatives from the South were very fair skinned.  Some of them were blondes, a couple of them were blondes, but you never heard the whole story of who the aunt was or who the father was or who the mother was.  Okay, so you kept it quiet, but no one looked like a full black, Afro-American, everyone was--looked multi-racial (laughter) or white, very--so, no, I know very little of his dad or and nothing of his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--.
Speaker 2: But his aunts I knew.
Speaker 1: As far as you know was the family from Alabama for the most part?
Speaker 2: From Alabama, Montgomery, Alabama. In fact, I spent--
Story_ID: 93258
Speaker 1: I never (unclear)--it's very clear when I was three or three and a half I think it was or four, my time I spent living--when I was four or five, I spent in Montgomery, Alabama with his, my father's [Sevar Clemon] aunt.  I remember being called "nigger" and I remember going to school being a special child in this all black school where they lifted my dress to see how clean I was.  I was so clean and so--I was so clean and I had a different look than the other children because of my physical appearance--was--the teacher, I remember that so (unclear) brought me up to show the children how clean I was and she was absolutely right because my aunt who I stayed with washed me in a tub of lysol.
Speaker 2: Lysol?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) She literally washed me in lysol, my sister and I (laughter), so I was very clean.  When I would go to the bathroom I would just cringe cause the lysol got into me, but my aunt kept very good care of us.  She taught us how to read and everything, my sister and I.  We were there because of the--my sister and I were there because of the--what happened in the 19--in 1926, when the--what is it they had--.
Speaker 2: In Alabama?
Speaker 1: No this was in--.
Speaker 2: In Detroit?
Speaker 1: In Detroit, yeah in the (unclear) what is it? When the city, every place went--when the Stock Markets went down and everything--.
Speaker 2: Oh, '29 [1929] the Stock Market crashed in '29 [1929], yeah.
Speaker 1: So we came there to live and because of people were out of work, the Depression--the Great Depression that's what it was.
Speaker 2: Okay so you--.
Speaker 1: So I was--I was born in '27 [1927] was the Depression about '28 [1928] - '29 [1929]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Stock Market in '29 [1929] and most of the '30s [1930] they call the Depression right.
Speaker 1: So that's what it was.  So I lived in Montgomery, Alabama with the aunt and I, who was my father's aunt who kept us so clean and really was very good about teaching us to read and write.
Speaker 2: Okay now-
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Okay so is there--any stories about the family at all, about his side, about anybody in the family that are passed down?
Speaker 1: (unclear) no, other than like I said no.  I know there was a lot of mixed relationships at that time; that people would not go into detail or discuss because it wasn't--all of it wasn't totally legitimate, you know.
Story_ID: 93259
Speaker 1: Okay. So you said that generally--I suppose that in general race relations were bad in Montgomery [Alabama] I guess.
Speaker 2: I said they called me "nigger" I mean--I remember we had to--you had to be--as small as we were, we couldn't--we were not allowed to mix with hardly many children because we either had the "whites" or the children that lived--weren't as fortunate as I was.  That's why-my aunt had a home--she had a house and I remember we lived on an avenue where the bus ran.  The bus that ran that took Mary Parks.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Rosa Parks.
Speaker 2: Rosa Parks, that avenue was where we lived on and I use to see that bus or that trolley that would come down that street before the--before that incident happened, and I remember distinctly you couldn't--there weren't any places you could go--not many places that were open to black Americans.  I remember that very well at four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is your--can you give us a sense of--that--how long did you stay in Montgomery?  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: It seemed like a--probably a year, maybe it didn't have to be that long, but I know it--I would say about a year.
Speaker 1: So you primarily grew up in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  I went back to Detroit and to stay--to live with my mother--
Speaker 1: Well--
Story_ID: 93260
Speaker 1: Kinda take us back to childhood and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells in growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know when you're young everything is so nice isn't it?  You really don't--and I was--heard someone say the other day, "children didn't have problems then.  They didn't have what they have now and I didn't realize it until now, but you did have problems--it was very obvious about black and white, where you could go and where you couldn't go.  We--kids had fun.  I remember having fun roller skating, bicycle riding, where you could actually do that.  You could ride a bike blocks and blocks.  You could play hide and go seek in the alley.  You run in the alley--you hide in the alley.  You play--we played theater in the garage, you know, we played theater.  You set up a little theater in the garage and set up milk box crates so your people coming to see the--and you had a curtain or a--in the garage and you had--and then you put on this play.  So there things that I remember, those things were very--I don't know.  It's so special.  I say it's special now because children they don't have that kind of freedom today, and we were raised with--in Detroit [Michigan] there was a group of children.  It's sort of--I don't even know if I'm going to call it a clique or a group of people, black, African American people that all were professional people and they all had comfortable or comfortable living and those were all of our friends, although we were not in their class but we were accepted because we were--because of the way we looked and because of our hair, because we were cute, and that's--I'm a little ashamed to say it but that is what existed.
Story_ID: 93653
Speaker 1: There's something I thought was drudgery but yet it was fun.  It was--because you could have time to talk to your girlfriends, play (unclear), jump rope, you know, skip, go to the candy store, but it was walking to school [Alger Elementary School in Detroit, Michigan] it would be a mile or two, to school and back.  It was no bus that you--those were things.  So knowing the neighborhood, knowing the kids, all the people in the various neighborhoods because you'd go--you would go through several neighborhoods before you got to school and one of the neighborhoods, the neighborhood that I--was right in where the school was.  It was at--it was a Jewish neighborhood and the school that I went to was predominately Jewish at that time--
Story_ID: 93654
Speaker 1: Going to school [in Detroit, Michigan] when I was a little girl which was, and it was sort of--it's a nice,  memorable thing to do.  You run to school, and walk but going to school walking for two miles or so and it was part of the fun of going to school.  So you had a lot of fun walking back home then it took, I don't know, maybe a half an hour or more to get back home, but I was also saying the school I went to at the time when I first started the school was predominately Jewish and I remember distinctly the Jewish children in school, how their backgrounds and they were very relig--they weren't orthodox, but maybe I--oh, correction, when there was a Jewish Holiday, half the class was gone cause half the--there, but they were a unique group of people.  I loved going to their shops and stores when I was a little girl.  They had a market, an old fashioned market, like you go down a whole block and you go and buy pickles out of the pickle barrel, you know it was dill pickles and salami and halva, the candy that they have.  Their bakery goods, I just loved it all, and it was such a--I liked those little intimate things, and there intimate things that were available in those days.  You had intimate stores.  There was an ice cream store that was down--a drug store that was down the street from me owned by a black pharmacist, and he had a drug store that you could sit at a bar you know and have a coke and a hamburger and he had orange sherbet ice cream for ten cents for two huge dips, the best orange sherbet you'll ever taste, and I just--those kind of things I miss, because we are paying more for it now and getting less and they were--it was delicious (unclear).  It was owned by Bartholomew and then there was a candy company.  It was a man called Dodson.  I told you I like chocolate.  This man had his own candy company.  The best chocolate candy you would ever--if you ever taste it, Sara Lee, Fannie Farmer, any of those do not compare to this black man's candy.  His name was Dodson.  The unfortunate thing about it was this man took his recipe to his grave.  He didn't let his children have the recipe.  I never understood that but it was, again as I said before I've never know any candy company that even could compare to this black man's (unclear) candy.  Are you asking about what I enjoyed and---?
Story_ID: 93655
Speaker 1: Yeah, what were the sights and sounds and smells (unclear).
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds, okay, we can talk about the streetcars because I get on the streetcars.  We had to go everywhere on the streetcar, and again traveling by yourself at seven and eight, which was no problem then, you know you didn't have to call your mother and let you know--because we had errands and things to do and going downtown shopping with my mother [Florence Richerson] at Hudson's [Detroit, Michigan] which is no longer there now.  They tore Hudson's down completely [on October 24, 1998].
Speaker 1: It's the famous Hudson's Department Store-
Speaker 2: Hudson's Department Store
Speaker 1: --Thanksgiving Day Parades (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Going downtown and watching all this on Michigan Avenue, going to the Fox Theatre to see all the top entertainers and what was so beautiful you'd go see the entertainer and you could see them because you were sitting in the theater, a small theater, an intimate theater and you could see things that were so--entertainers that came--Nat "King" Cole, oh, he was a fabulous entertainer, and of course we can go on, Billy Eckstine and whatever and they were so personal.  They were not--you felt that you actually--oh, Frank Sinatra, all those people you would go and see and what a joy it was to see them in that arena, that kind of theater.  Then there was a hotel owned and operate by black, the Gotham Hotel.  Detroit was ahead of a lot of things.  They had the first of everything--a lot of things and they were done with a lot of class, and this Hotel was very special and all the entertainers would come there and stay, not the hotels downtown, they could have, they had a choice but they stayed at the Gotham Hotel, and then there was Belle Isle [Park] a beautiful place.  I remember going there skating there for the first time--ice skating. That was quite an experience, okay.  I did--It took me thirty years later to actually know how to skate.  I found out that the real key to ice skating was to get the right boot on your foot, to get a boot that fit.  Not to get one that belonged to somebody else (laughter) okay, but--and I didn't see--they had the riot [Detroit race riot in June 1943] I think in Belle Isle.  I wasn't there when they did, but before all that happened, before a lot of things happened--.
Speaker 1: This is what when you (simultaneous) (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: (unclear) in Detroit when I was young--
Speaker 1: A little girl?
Speaker 2: A little girl.
Speaker 1: They had a riot on Belle Isle?
Speaker 2: No they had the riot after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, what I'm saying is the beauty of Belle Isle, you'd go--you'd always want to go--well a friend us--a friend of ours, my mother's had a car that had what you called a "rumble seat".
Speaker 1: Now what is that?  Describe that?
Speaker 2: A rumble seat, it's like a convertible car but in the back was a seat that you could sit back, you'd lift the hood of it back, instead of having a trunk.  You could sit and we were little girls and all four of us could sit in the rumble seat in the back, and let the breeze blow through your hair and then--just like a convertible car and convertible cars were not in at that time, but we were sitting in the rumble seat and that was a big treat to me to drive around and to see the beauty of Detroit.  Grosse Pointe was the elite, okay, of course you know now we live in Detroit, Grosse Pointe, but Grosse Pointe was what a very elegant place.  That's where one of my aunts worked as well, and then Belle Isle was such a--it was just--everyone would go to Belle Isle, especially--that was super cheap and wouldn't cost you anything.
Speaker 1: That's an Island right off the strait of Detroit [Detroit River] right (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right, now I forgot what street it was.
Speaker 1: Right off East Grand [Grand Boulevard, Detroit, Michigan], I think.
Speaker 2: Thank you, that's right.
Story_ID: 93656
Speaker 1: My mother [Florence Richerson] was interested in the theater as always.  She use to take us when we were little to the Cass Theatre to see Marian Anderson, Paul Robeson, all the ballet companies.  I'd see Maria Tallchief; that was quite, that was something because most of my friends or my peers did not go to the theater and this was something my mother just elected to do.
Speaker 2: Now is this something that she had been exposed to when she was younger?
Speaker 1: You know I don't know where my mother came from because she was into health.  She was into about eating the right foods.  She would eat wheat germ.  I'd see her eat all these foods that I just--beets, cottage cheese and I was say "oomph", I wouldn't dare touch that, and she would do exercise, she would somersaults.  I saw this when I was young and I just--I really didn't think it was anything special, but I found out no one else's mother was doing it (laughter), and she would walk, she didn't drive so she walked every place and she had a very rapid, very crisp walk, energetic walk, a very proud walk.  So I, no--I do not know because she started my sister [Mary Ann Bailer] off to taking dancing, ballet, and that turned out where my sister had to pass for white, she could not be black cause they didn't have ballet schools for black children, so my sister had to pass for white.  Now my mother did not pass for white but we were taken for to be many things.  People didn't know what we were, and when these four girls came along with my mother, it was fascinating to see these four little girls, very tiny, hair past their shoulders, mine was the shortest and curliest so I didn't (laughter)--theirs was blowing and falling over--mine I had this little curly locks, and at the time I thought that was the worst thing to have.  Well   it--(laughter) as time changed the curls turned out to be the best thing to have, but anyway, yes my mother exposed us to the theater and to the arts to museums.  We lived across the street from a museum at one time, the Art Museum, the prettiest art museum I've seen, it's--.
Speaker 2: The Detroit Institute of the Arts [sic, Detroit Institute of Arts].
Speaker 1: Yes, right across--in a little green and white house with little green--white house with green shutters.  Now that didn't happen until we got, we moved when I was about fifteen maybe, but while we were younger I said my mother did, and it's a funny thing my mother elected to do this.  My father [Sevar Clemon] had no input (laughter), he just was the--tried to be the breadwinner of the family, and he had this cleaners and he also worked in a factory.  He supplemented, he did both as well, and my mother just--she--we went to symphonies, I heard a lot of classical music.
Story_ID: 93657
Speaker 1: So, and then I would go and visit my aunt--my grandmother [Mildred Shelby Richerson] who worked for the Strohs, they owned a beer company and they had--.
Speaker 2: Right remember Stroh's beer?
Speaker 1: That's who she worked for.  So I saw as a little girl how wealthy people lived.  They usually had three maids and a chauffeur who lived over the garage, and everyone--if you worked for these people there was a certain kind of air you had, there was a certain kind of dignity, there was a certain kind of style you had, there's a certain kind of--you carried yourself a certain way.
Speaker 2: Do you think the employees represented their employers when they--?
Speaker 1: I'm very sure that this is what--and I remember the employees would come in the kitchen and she'd say "Margaret or Millie"--Millie was my grandmother, that's who I'm named after, "How is everything in the kitchen"?  She would check the kitchen to see how the kitchen was running and the kitchen was run like pristine.  They were cooking but everything was in order.  You cooked, you washed and you cleaned and you put things up.  So that's how I cook.  I cook as--I clean as I go along as I cook.  My kitchen is never--so you learned order, and the house was always orderly.  There was always some--there was one maid or another to pick up something to see that it was in place.
Story_ID: 93658
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: Now tell me now what kinds of things did you like to do and what kind of little girl were you when you were growing up?
Speaker 1: That's oh, play dolls, paper dolls, paper dolls, paper dolls and fantasy.  I lived in a world of fantasy.  You know, one day I'll be a, you know thinking I could be in the movies, now there weren't any blacks in movies, there weren't any blacks in a ballet, but that's what--I was fantasizing--I thought I would be--could I be a toe dancer?  I wasn't taking dancing, my sister [Mary Ann Bailer] was, but I would imitate, I would take time out to do things--imitate her you know, do kicks, splits, that was very important that I, and so in school when people would ask you to do something I would try to perform, I would try to sing even and I was not a singer, but there was a lady, Gladys Mills, who got a group of kids when they're young, I was about--that did very well with theater, and she got these so-called "The Lilly Children" together and did "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" and my sister was Snow White.  She was the one that danced and sang, and there was a young man that had a gorgeous voice and he looked like Prince Charming too, and we were all in this show, and I remember that was a big thing about because we performed for several nights for several groups of people, and it was a very serious thing that we did and it took time and all the young ladies that were in the show with me either went to Vassar [College in Poughkeepsie, New York], Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Radcliffe [College in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  These are some of the kids that would--oh, what is his name, taught at Yale.  He did the--he was the Director at Yale University [Yale School of Drama in New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: In Drama?
Speaker 1: In Drama.
Speaker 2: [HM] Lloyd Richards?
Speaker 1: Lloyd Richards, thank you!  Lloyd Richards was a friend of my sister's.  These are the kids, Lloyd Richards was one of the kids, another girl that use to sing with Duke Ellington was another girl that was in the show.  These people were very special, and it was no big deal.  I mean people didn't "make over" them, there was no hoopla.  It was not like you were going to end up making a lot of money.  I said before these were dreams that we all had and like I said my dream was a fantasy and like the little paper dolls, Shirley Temple, remember Shirley Temple?  So that who we had to idolize, Shirley Temple, blond curls and everything.  So, but my sisters, my younger sisters and not my oldest sister--we would--it was busy playing with--and dolls, paper dolls, and dolls.  We played dolls for a long time.  It seemed like we were 12 or 13 years old and I remember having an electric cooking stove when I was a little girl, and we got these special toys from these wealthy people so I had a stove that they don't make today.  It had an electric plug.  You get plastic stoves now.  I had a stove I could actually cook on, could burn you.  I use to like to make fudge.  My aunt cooked--again they were good cooks, so cooking fudge, the best fudge you ever tasted and my mother making sauerkraut--that was a big thing, my mother [Florence Richerson] making this pot of sauerkraut for my grandmother [Mildred Shelby Richerson].  This is before she died so I was about seven or eight, so my mother made sauerkraut every Thursday for my grandmother and I know how to make sauerkraut today and everyone loves sauerkraut.  So that was something that was very memorable to me.  Oh, and my mother knowing, my (unclear) knowing how to make lemon pie.   Best lemon pie and all these things I don't see today.
Story_ID: 93659
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about school now?  What school did you go to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: School, I went to Alger [Elementary School]  which was I told you (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: started (unclear) predominately Jewish.
Speaker 2: And you said it was like a two mile walk to school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: How did you like school and--?
Speaker 1: I found it very difficult because I was very shy.  Again, I was into--I was sort of fantasizing and my older sisters were more outgoing, and my older sister [Mary Ann Bailer] was very outgoing, in fact she was the leader of the family and I was just taking orders, okay.  I was cleaning up behind my sister, you know.  She was--.
Speaker 2: How many sisters do you have?
Speaker 1: I have three sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay and do you--?
Speaker 1: Mary Ann, Bella [Sprott] , Mildred and my youngest sister Savara [Freeman], and of course Savara, the youngest was very quiet because the two oldest sisters were doing the talking and the directing.
Speaker 2: Her name is Savara?
Speaker 1: Savara?
Speaker 2: Ok, she's named after your--?
Speaker 1: She's named after my father [Sevar Clemon], they just added an "A" on it and then I named my daughter after my sister.  So I have a daughter named Savara.  So I've three sisters and the second sister was very caretaking.  She cared for--she took care of everyone.  She made sure that you were doing what you were supposed to do and very protective of us and everything.  So I was probably--I was sort of--I didn't know it at the time but I was sort of athletic.  I didn't know it, so I joined a pentathlon and decathlon, you do run, you race, hop, skip, hop, jump, throw balls and everything so I was--I got into that, and won a couple of bronze medals which isn't the greatest thing but I thought I did pretty good because I was very small.
Speaker 2: This was in school?
Speaker 1: This was in school, during grade school, and the school we went to which I said was sort of enriching--this was not a private school.  You had music, a excellent music teacher, which you actually sang in class when you went into the class.  The teacher would sit at a piano and you would sing, then you go to the cooking class, you learn to cook and you learn to sew, all--they had facilities in the school.  They had the cooking class, they had stoves in the room.  They had a lovely auditorium that they had, they gave plays.  So the school was--they had facilities to use.  A great playground I remember, so and teachers that were very--were teachers you know, just taught--.
Speaker 2: Who are some of the teachers that you remember?
Speaker 1: Oh, one teacher I remember.  What is her name, Mrs. Ford?  I didn't do well in her class so she-- and the harder she got on me the more frightened I got and the more and that's--I carry on--that's why I do some of the things that I do.  I know that in order to open up children you have to be--you have to embrace them.  So, and I always thought everyone was smarter than me, everyone was you know, everyone was smarter, knowing that you know, you know you were--that every person is--has a talent and they can excel in something other than what--but anyway it was a good--it was a great school.
Speaker 2: Now what were you favorite subjects?
Speaker 1: I don't know if I had any.  I just liked--I liked the school itself.  The school itself I liked, course I liked gym that was because I was physically, you know the running and jumping and I was fairly good at it, but the reading and writing I just worked hard at it.
Story_ID: 93660
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up was the church a big factor?
Speaker 2: Oh, Presbyterian Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very--at the time I didn't know any other Church.  I didn't, so--.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your Church, I'm sorry, what was the name?
Speaker 2: St. John's Presbyterian Church (unclear) St. John's, and--just a nice, simple little Church and we--I grew up in this Church until I guess about--when do you start thinking you don't have to go to church, 14, 15?  But I was Church Sunday School and my mother [Florence Richerson], it was very important that we went to Church, you know, that you wear that dress--that certain little dress and certain little shoes and you go to church.  And my mother did all this work six days a week and then she got us to Church the next day.
Story_ID: 93661
Speaker 1: Now was music a big part of your life at home?  I mean did you all listen to a lot of music or play music?
Speaker 2: No music wasn't--not until--was the records came along and then we listened to--yes, we started listening--that's the music of who were they now?  All the jazz at that time; Glenn Miller was playing the jazz and you would dance to Glenn Miller and Louis Armstrong, Count Basie, okay and found out later on in my life I met these people when I moved to New York.  It was very interesting.  Lena Horne, I remember just coming out, she was just making her debut, but then I--then we bought classical music.  I loved classical music and I loved listening to the musicals like "On The Town", you know, "Pal Joey", anything that Gene Kelly--I loved Gene Kelly.  I thought Gene Kelly there was--his movements were fabulous, you know he had energy, grace, energy and he was balletic in a sense.  Fred Astaire, [HM] Katherine Dunham.  I never will forget going to see them.  One of the most fascinating things at that time, Katherine brought this--that was the first time ever seeing an African American group really together by a black female.  She did a tremendous job.  You saw color, you saw excitement and she came out looking--she didn't dance that much but it was her presence and she great legs and a beautiful foot.
Story_ID: 93270
Speaker 1: No okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Northern [High School in Detroit, Michigan] and then to Northeastern [High School].  I really went--I started at Northern and Northern as I said before, it was--they had very-they had excellent teachers I said.  All I remember is [William] Shakespeare, having to read a lot of Shakespeare and that's the time you have geometry.  I wasn't--the only thing I got involved in, in high school was--I think I got involved in like soccer, field--.
Speaker 1: Field Hockey?
Speaker 2: Field Hockey, and it wasn't popular then, now you know, it was not--in fact they really weren't encouraging you to do that, and I like it because it was running and I just liked that and football.  I couldn't play football so this would be something I could do, but I was just in high school.  I wasn't outstanding in any way.  I had, again, very--they were my girlfriends, a small, a very small group of friends I had, because my sisters' group had very close connections and belonged to clubs and everything with kids that we grew up.  I was a bit shy or intimidated, I don't know which and I felt like it's like always competing with these--meet these people and I knew there was something that I wanted to do and at the time I didn't know it was dancing.  I was just--I just kept imitating my sister [Mary Ann Bailer] who had the dancing lessons, imitating all these musicals I saw or just, and thinking maybe one day I'll go to New York [New York City, New York] and study dancing and be in the theater.  How I was planning to do that at the time I had no idea.
Story_ID: 93271
Speaker 1: Then I remember seeing [HM] Ruby Dee in "Anna Lucasta".  That was another--.
Speaker 2: The movie?
Speaker 1: The play.
Speaker 2: The play!
Speaker 1: She was the original.
Speaker 2: You saw it in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Saw it in Detroit and she was--she was so cute and so vivacious.  She just--she had tremendous presence and yet she was very petite, but she played the role so well and I think they traveled extensively with that play and it's so funny how my life sort of passed--crossed her path because her husband who is-now, [HM] Ossie Davis, he took me out when I was in high school (laughter).  He came, I think he came here for a play, not that he was with her at the time.  He was not married to her and I remember he was one of the nicest people, young men that I knew because he was such a gentlemen and he had such character about him and I was a very green little young lady, 16, 17.  I wasn't hip at all, didn't know anything, nothing about even kissing a fella, you know so it was--(laughter), but he was such a gentlemen, and--but Ruby, yes I said we saw plays, my mother would see all the plays at the Cass [Theatre in Detroit, Michigan], at the theatre.  Like most of my friends did not go to the theater, but Ruby--that particular theater did show was something I never will forget, and I say our paths crossed because when I went to New York to live I lived in her ex-husband's apartment in New York.
Speaker 2: Ruby Dee's?
Speaker 1: Yes, Frankie Dee [Brown].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now isn't this a small--that was her ex-husband.  She was just getting divorced from him when I moved in his apartment [Ruby Dee and Frankie Dee Brown divorced in 1945].
Speaker 2: I didn't know you know, I just thought that the "Dee" was--it just stood for Davis, but it didn't, it actually stands for Frankie.
Speaker 1: Frankie Dee, I don't know, don't let me--but she was married to Frankie Dee and I'd say because he was very--he was very helpful to me in New York.
Speaker 2: Okay did he do something special himself?
Speaker 1: He let me live--I lived in his--he had a brownstone apartment right across the street from NYU [sic, the City College of New York in New York City, New York], the University there and--.
Speaker 2: I meant occupation-wise did he have a special (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No, he didn't, no one, no he didn't no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--.
Story_ID: 93272
Speaker 1: But-
Speaker 2: But in high school now--?
Speaker 1: In high school [Northern High School and Northeastern High School in Detroit Michigan] no, like I said there was not anything I was involved in the school because I did not--like I said I did not take part--I was--I didn't know I had any talent.  I didn't know how to use it or when to use it, okay.  My thing was to get in school and get out you know, get out, get into high school and take these classes I was supposed to take--Latin, Geometry, just, that was it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's as far as I know, but outside of the school I was into these little things that were involved in the theater.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And again I wasn't starring then, my sister [Mary Ann Bailer] was doing all the starring.
Speaker 2: Now is Detroit, it seems to me that when you think about Detroit in terms of the Black community, you got [HM] Lloyd Richards coming from Detroit, [HM] Woodie King [Jr.] coming from Detroit, Ron Milner lot off--it seems like there is a lot of theatrical talent coming out of Detroit at a certain time.  Was theater a real big thing when you were coming along in the Black community?
Speaker 1: I told you this group that we had ["The Lilly Children"], this is what this woman [Gladys Mills] did, was very unique.  There was a little girl--another girl named Mary Lou Fisher [ph.], beautiful girl.  They use to compare her with me, but I wasn't as pretty as she was but and she had a beautiful voice and she was also in this group.  She's now singing, she moved to Palm Springs [California] and sings in Palms Springs as an entertainer.  Her ex-husband was a magnificent singer although he didn't go onto singing but he was--he had a great voice.  There was a man-[Joseph] Ziggy Johnson, I don't know if you've heard of him. He was from the old school of dancing, he danced, he knew all the tap dancers of years ago.  He did, I'm very sure all the hoofers in New York years ago would know Ziggy Johnson, and he wanted me to teach in his school, teach ballet which I did for that--not when I was in high school though, it was after but I wasn't even taking dancing when I was in high school, that was like I said I knew I wasn't ready to pass for white.  I didn't want to go through that.  It was bad enough I was doing enough of it in the school, cause it doesn't give you--it doesn't give you a lot of self-esteem when you do that.
Speaker 2: So there were times in school that you kinda pass for white or people didn't know who you were?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes and I wouldn't say anything.
Speaker 2: You were in an integrated school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But yet all my friends, all my friends were there but again I wasn't' real--I didn't socialize a whole, whole lot you know (unclear).  I did, let me see I did get a group called the "Delt Strites" [ph.] together where they were affiliated with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], they were--that was the and I was the president of that, that's when I realized that I could have a voice and I could direct and do and I had these young girls that were in the Delt Strites and again, there wasn't--they were all attractive Afro-American girls, everyone of them was and it--yeah I had this club and we would give, I would give skating parties (unclear) roller skate the greatest--you could really roller skate and have a good time with not to--like I said it's just--you just- you could rent skates you didn't have to have special skates or anything.  So those things and you had--I enjoyed doing that with these special kids and we'd go over to--I'd go over to Canada--we'd go over to Canada and that was a special trip going over to Canada and renting horses so we could go horseback riding, so these are things outside of high school.  These are things that I had a special group--I had a special group of friends that were mine, that were--that enjoyed--you had to find things to-- for enjoyment, but they were--it was all good clean fun and I started trying to learn to play tennis, again tennis wasn't offered to anyone, but there was a fellow named Delbert Russell who played tennis extremely well and he was our elite tennis player.  He knew Althea Gibson, he knew people like that and he played with them and I wanted--I thought gee that would be-maybe I would like to start playing tennis, but again, no one was giving lessons at that time and I would try to just get a racquet and do that, but yeah they didn't teach it in school, they didn't have it.  Now they have that in school, it's available in school now yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--.
Speaker 1: But they didn't have--they didn't have the sports, athletes, they didn't have any of those things to offer you when you were in school, needless to say if you are black or you were a female.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that was (unclear) lost.
Story_ID: 93273
Speaker 1: Alright, well, when you were a senior in high school [Northeastern High School in Detroit, Michigan] did you have a sense of what you wanted to when you got out or?
Speaker 2: Then it started coming to me that maybe I would like to dance or go to New York and dance.  Now do you start dancing when you get seventeen, well maybe it could work you know,
Speaker 1: Most people don't right?  They don't start that late.
Speaker 2: Yes most people--but you know Katherine Gra--.
Speaker 1: Graham?
Speaker 2: [HM] Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 1: Dunham, okay Dunham.
Speaker 2: Not Katherine Dunham, but Martha Graham.  Martha Graham didn't start dancing until she got into her twenties.  She took yoga and then she, and she's excellent.  Her technique is excellent, but she didn't start dancing until she was 18, 19 or 20.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's--.
Speaker 1: So did you apply to a dance school or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No I thought I'd go to a junior college and see what I would like to do.  So I went to a junior college called Highland Park Junior College [Detroit, Michigan] and maybe by that time I would know for sure if that's what I wanted to do, and I got in a bathing beauty contest and came in second so I took that money and took other money that I did from working.  I worked at the post--oh, I worked at the post office cause at that time they--you could work--I worked at the post office in the evening and saved my money and then went off to New York to live and work.
Story_ID: 93274
Speaker 1: Something in about '48 [1948] [sic, 1947] and I went there [New York City, New York] and got a job at Bloomingdale's as a clerical worker and went to Carnegie Hall, and signed up for classes at Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York] to take ballet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: With probably one of the worst teachers in my life (laughter) but that--that I didn't know until I left, okay, but I took ballet at Carnegie Hall.  It was quite an experience--it was, the thing about walking from Bloomingdale's to Carnegie Hall every other day to take these classes, and then getting on the subway and then going--getting on the subway and going to 141st Street where I lived which was across the street from the City College [of New York] and I had some ex--.
Speaker 2: 141st Street?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know (unclear), I got off the bus (unclear) Subway, 145th and I lived on 141st Street, the University was on 141st, and was it Amsterdam [Avenue]?  I lived near Amsterdam.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was a big--that was a big street.  That's where the elite black use to live okay.  I think. who is his name?  Lionel Hampton lived down the street in his--and he did very well, he was doing very well.
Speaker 2: And that was the heyday.
Speaker 1: Parker, the photographer, is his name Parker?  What's--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Parks?
Speaker 1: Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: [HM] Gordon Parks [Sr.], Gordon Parks lived around the corner, Gordon Parks.  Tennis court down Amsterdam where Althea Gibson played, she played there.  I use to see her play there to hit, you know before she became the star that she did, and that particular club had an elite group of Afro-American people that played tennis.  A select group of blacks that played tennis, I mean they had to be a select group.  It had to be like a club, it was a club because if you weren't in that club you didn't play tennis, so they played tennis and they--most people played well, of course Althea played exceptionally well.  So that, that was the environment and that was where I was staying in Frankie Dee's [Frankie Dee Brown] apartment, his brownstone apartment, and he--.
Speaker 1: Did you know anybody in New York before you went, no?
Speaker 2: No, oh, wait the only person I knew was my sister's husband's brother who worked for the Urban League.  That's how I got my job through the Urban League, cause he worked for the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he lived out in St. Albans [New York].  I first moved to St. Albans, and Lena Horne lived right around the corner from me when I lived in St. Albans, and at that time she was traveling a lot so her daughter was living there.  Her children were there more than she was, but that's where I lived in St. Albans and then I moved to 141st Street in New York and worked at Bloomingdale's and went to--.
Speaker 1: Carnegie Hall?
Speaker 2: Carnegie Hall.
Speaker 1: Now how long did you study at Carnegie Hall?
Speaker 2: I'm--see I'm not real good on these dates.  I think two or three years, it wasn't long.
Story_ID: 93275
Speaker 1: And then I had a sister that said, "Now Mildred, okay you'd better do something with this dancing that you're doing", and I said well I don't really think I'm really ready, I'm not the ballet dancer the toe dancer, I know it.  She said, "Well why don't you join this show, this man wants a toe dancer", and it was a night club.  It was Larry Steele's "Smart Affairs."  He had this show he would travel with, and he was considered had the prettiest black girls and he was very selective.  He would go all--he would even go to colleges, he would go down South to Tennessee to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] to find these girls, California, and so I accepted the job mainly because he allowed me to do my (unclear) he allowed me to toe dance on the stage and he included it in this nightclub act that he had.  He had Josephine Premice was in one of the shows with me, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah now she's one of our yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay yes I know, okay.  She didn't speak to the girls in the dressing room so.
Speaker 2: Josephine or Pearl Primus?
Speaker 1: Wait.
Speaker 2: Pearl Primus?
Speaker 1: Is it Pearl Primus?  Josephine Premice?  Okay correction, Pearl, yes is that the name?
Speaker 2: Pearl Primus.
Speaker 1: Pearl Primus, she's a singer right, singer?
Speaker 2: She's a dancer.
Speaker 1: A dancer, no wait a minute.  This one--was she a dancer and singer?
Speaker 2: Pearl Primus pretty much was a dancer, she was a very, maybe it was I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Where's Josephine Premice, where'd I get that one from?  She's married. Josephine Premice, I'm very sure.
Speaker 2: Maybe that is her, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Josephine Premice and a girl named Rose Hardaway danced in the show, one--a fascinating body and she did a fantastic which was called quite, you know risque in that days, really nothing compared to what they do now, but she was that--great body, she used her body in such a way that it was very sensuous.  I don't see that now, she had such charisma and its--she had a tremendous sex appeal.  I was just cute I guess or petite, but I didn't have that kind of appeal, but this show--we worked from--we had to do two or three shows, so some nights we didn't get off until 7:00 in the morning.  It was in Atlantic City [New Jersey], so I made sure I got my rest so when I wasn't performing, I was resting.  It was very interesting, that was my real introduction to really--how black entertainers have to work, how hard they had to work.
Speaker 2: So most people might think its fun but it's--?
Speaker 1: It's hard, hard (unclear) and how you had to survive, cause drugs was you know, was there, was available.  I had a thing to "no", just say "no", cause when I was in high school kids wanted me to smoke.  The word is "no", but I was in New York so I could--I went to drink beer.  The word is "no" it's simple as that.
Story_ID: 93276
Speaker 1: Now how did you develop a conviction about these things (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It started probably when I was in high school.  I told you I was sort of alone.  I--you watch other people, you see how people, you see how well they do.  Also you see how--what--the things that you don't--you don't do everything you see.  You benefit by what people benefit from, and you watch people that you really respect and you admire.  So that, I limit that, I even limit that today, limiting it to people you respect and who you admire.  People that have--as I grew older I found it was wisdom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And character.
Speaker 1: Okay--.
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous) (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Florence Richerson] influence you she had a very healthy--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother must have because like I look back I go back and say "my mother" and she but-why? (unclear) because my mother never preached.  My mother never said you have to take dancing, my mother never said you don't smoke, my mother didn't smoke, my mother never said you didn't--don't drink.  She didn't drink.  So she never, she never put demands on us.  She never said come in you have to be in at twelve.  Well I was never out (laughter), I was only out to twelve because I worked at the Post Office, but I was never--I never, okay I was sort of a square.  I didn't have boyfriends in high school, so I didn't have problems date--you know that thing--and calling on the phone and all that.  So I never--I thought that those things were--demanded your time and your attention, and I didn't want that I wanted to be an individual so when you are by yourself you have time to think and be an individual, and be strange or whatever it is, but you have to think and to fantasize and you don't have, you don't have--you are not following a group and that's what I went when I was in night club [Larry Steel's Smart Affairs] it was not by following anyone in the club, it was definitely--cause I use to be in the night would be in the dressing room and I would just listen to the conversation and oh, they were having a swinging time and they were--they didn't even know who I was dating.  I wouldn't even let them know who I was going out with because I didn't anyone to know.  I think it was the smartest thing I did.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So that was-
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: I was a very private person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93277
Speaker 1: So all through--well here you are in a very tempting situation, I mean and in terms of doing wrong if you wanted to.  They--"Larry Steel's Smart Affairs" is a lot of--in Atlantic City [New Jersey], yeah but you were with him for about a year?
Speaker 2: I traveled with--and then I went to New York and performed in--they went to New York and performed at the "Club Harlem", called the "Club Harlem", and then I was introduced--then I saw more--I met people like [HM] Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier.  I saw Sidney perform when before he became a star.  This is, oh--going back when I just got to New York [1947], Sidney was just beginning to develop his career, and there was a little store on the corner of 125th, right down the street from the Regal Theater, and I never will forget seeing Sidney up there doing a little "creation" with--about being a doctor or something.  He did the thing of threading a needle or something and he was very elegant how he was doing all this.
Speaker 1: He was pantomiming?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and he--so I was around a lot of people that were just beginning to blossom and Harry was at the Village Vanguard he was there and I was at the Club Harlem and through that someone called me and asked me would I be on Ed Sullivan's Show [The Ed Sullivan Show] with the Mills Brothers.  Well it was just a little (unclear) or something and so Larry Steele chose me because he thought I was a--he thought I would represent, so I went and did that for while I was (unclear) and at that time there were a lot of night clubs, you know where they had the Village Vanguard and there were--what is it, oh goodness, you go down the basement there were clubs that you go to because you couldn't go to the big clubs because they were predominately--they didn't allow blacks to go to the club.  'Cause Sammy Davis [Jr.] at that time was having a hard time going through the front doors or eating at the night clubs so, but they had great clubs, private clubs that I saw all these musicians were at, Billy Eckstine, Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald, you know all these people just walk.  I mean you didn't have to have ticket you just see these people.  These people had, this was just a part of being in each other's environment.  Johnny Hartman, I just brought a record from him.  His voice is clear as can be, excellent and it hurts me to think of how they were treated.
Story_ID: 93278
Speaker 1: After that they wanted to revive "Bye Bye Blackbird" and I was--it was called "Shuffle Along", and I was in that.
Speaker 2: Now that's the old musical that Eubie Blank and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, they were there to direct us in "Bye Bye Blackbird" [sic, "Shuffle Along"]
Speaker 2: Now that's a song from that show?
Speaker 1: "Shuffle Along," yes that was one of the songs and then were all dressed in Army uniforms.  I had to learn how to make a tie, (unclear) I gotta learn to tie right.  This, so I learned how make a tie--to tie a man's tie cause we came out--it was our first number to have these uniforms on.  It was really Eubie Blake, who is it?
Speaker 2: Noble Sissle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Noble Sissle, but I'm trying to think who was in the show.  Oh, a number of people were in that show tha--Huey Long?--was it Long?  Was his name Long? [sic, Avon Long] Noble's--.
Speaker 2: Noble Sissle you mean (unclear).
Speaker 1: He's been--oh, God I should have written these things down.  Somewhere in the movies, people have been in the movies and everything, it was an avenue that opened up for people that were just beginning to get into show business who wanted to act, but there were no plays.  There weren't, there wasn't anything to be.  There weren't any shows to be in and this was an avenue and of course you know blacks weren't at that time used to going to the theater.  So if they had supported us we would have lasted a little longer but they were not used to going to the theaters.
Story_ID: 93279
Speaker 1: Tell us about your impression of Sammy Davis, Jr.  You were just talking about him.
Speaker 2: I was just saying that he's--he was so--he was awesome.  I--it was a joy to see him.  He lifted you, I mean he entertained you and it was--he entertained you if you were in the back row.  He entertained you with heart, it was just simple heart.  It was not commercial.  He was so musical from his head to his toes.  Out--his voice was musical, his feet were musical.  He had--that word embrace--he embraced you.  I--if all--at that time he was the entertainer that I admired so and I knew he must have had a hard time getting even to a club, one or two clubs because I know some of the clubs he was not allowed to go into the front door, alright the backdoor, and same way with Lena Horne.  She's another one that her talent, her beauty and her talent is so--and I think she was cheated so she was just cheated.  With her beauty--with her beauty and her talent I don't know what she would be today.  These people, it's hard to have someone replace 'em or imitate them or duplicate them, (laughter) and Dorothy Dandridge, it's really, really hard to do and I guess that I said I'd like to be an individual.  It's hard to be that individual and that's what most stars want to be is an individual, and [HM] Harry Belafonte was an individual.  When I met him and Village Vanguard just another--the interesting thing about all these people: you're seeing them in an intimate type of atmosphere, you're in a club usually.  They had great clubs, intimacy, not an arena--.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) there's a difference right?
Speaker 2: I hate to date myself, but I now, I've seen all these people, I told you about [HM] Katherine Dunham, theater was, you could just see the colors from the costume, the personalities--everything was so fabulously great.
Story_ID: 93280
Speaker 1: Did you know anybody from [HM] Katherine Dunham's group?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, goodness gracious there I go again.  Quite a few people I knew.  Where's my resume?  What is that form--he taught dancing here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Tommy Gomez?
Speaker 2: Tommy Gomez, thank you.  Tommy Gomez, in fact thirty years later I was taking classes from Tommy.  Any technique you learn, I found this out.  I use to be one-dimensional we had to (unclear).  You learn something from every style of dancing and I wasn't into Afro but I admired it but I wasn't--.  They did a style of dancing really was from Cuba, Caribbean, but he was very good, and these people all came out on the stage.  All the male dancers in that show were individuals, they were all--you just thought oh, they were men that you would just love, you know.  They had such sex appeal and they had charisma and of course as I go back again, you saw it in a theater, in a small theater maybe holding 500 people or something.  You are not looking at a auditorium, and let me see--you were asking about which--.
Speaker 1: About Katherine Dunham's dancers and--.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was something very--she--I--well as you know and eventually forty years later I did something with Boykin, Randsom Boykins [sic, Boykin].  We tried to revive her work and restore her work and I worked on that committee for Katherine Dunham.  She met me once or twice but I don't know if she'd know me now, but it finally went--they finally took it to New York.  I didn't go for the opening but I worked for three years doing fundraisers for Katherine Dunham, just to--so that they could do the same thing that you're doing now, is to enlighten people and she's one of the few dancers that we have, just like with the Harlem Dancers, and with--not Harlem Dancers (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], yes.  Alvin Ailey those are--those people worked--I can't tell you how hard they must have worked because they really were not recognized or res--I don't think respected enough for people--I guess maybe money wasn't as available to give them the grants that they should have gotten?
Speaker 1: Well Katherine Dunham often appeared in--her dancers appeared in movies.
Speaker 2: Yes they did.
Speaker 1: Often but--.
Speaker 2: Before she went to St. Louis [East St. Louis, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah but and I know even the people in my little home town, and my mother even knew who Katherine Dunham was and she was, you know and that they often were in situations where they looked like they were exotics from some other country or something they (unclear) (simultaneous) they weren't identified as being black or negros.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I hate to (laughter), no, they were, the girls were all--I think Harry Belafonte's wife [Julie Robinson] danced with them at one time you know, yes she did she--.  [HM] Eartha Kitt I think might have been affiliated with (unclear) at one time.  It was an avenue to go--if you wanted to have exposure to some kind of theater, cause as I said there weren't theater like it is now, where you could be in one show, or you could be in some kind of talent or so.  They had nothing out in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  Hollywood was the most--you'd have to go to Paris [France] before you could get anything done.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: L.A [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Are you saying the racism there was more--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Story_ID: 93281
Speaker 1: New York [New York City, New York] was supposed to be better [than Losa Angeles, California] but if you weren't playing an all-black show, "Raisin in the Sun" as you know, okay, but that--that she did, that was extraordinary, so it's very hard, but yeah Sammy [Davis, Jr.] with all the talent he had, I just wished he didn't have to work so hard near the end of his life, because I think he was in a movie, was it "Children Who Loved Christmas" [sic, "The Kid Who Loved Christmas"] or something like that, in fact they did a shot up here in this, in my apartment when they shot it, and yes those people all had a lot of odds against them and they did such--and the Mills Brothers, of course, came along way before that, but they were such a classy group of people so that they were able to and what the (unclear) was it--the Mills Brothers, tap dancers.
Speaker 2: Oh tap dancers.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The Step Brothers.
Speaker 2: Step Brothers (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Step Brothers, the Mills Brothers (unclear) The Step Brothers and I'm trying to think (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Hines Hines and Dad?
Speaker 1: Was the Step Brothers.
Speaker 2: The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers] yeah.
Speaker 1: But they were two--again another unusual--if you see the movies that they have performed in and their numbers--.
Speaker 2: The Nicholas Brothers, no?
Speaker 1: The Nicholas Brothers [HM Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], unbelievable, unbelievable.
Story_ID: 93282
Speaker 1: Now you were in theater in a variety of shows-- T.V. shows and theatrical productions, I guess for--.
Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous) (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: I guess until about 1955?
Speaker 2: I did something in St. Louis [Missouri], a black fellow named [Jesse] "Spider" Burke [sic, Burks].  They were trying to get a black show so he thought that since I had some kind of experience I could get on the show and they tried it for a couple of months, but you know again, you have to have--you--there's a lot of things you have to do in order to make the--to make the--to make it happen, but this fellow was a radio announcer and he thought he would take a stab at doing and felt well, "gee", why not ask me to do--to work with this.
Speaker 1: Okay so you did a variety of different things until about '55 [1955] in show business as a dancer.
Story_ID: 93283
Speaker 1: And now, in '55 [1955] it seems to be--you didn't--.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) had children (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you got married in '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '55 [1955. Sic, September 11, 1954] had children in '56 [1956], and in '58 [1958] another daughter in '63 [1963], and I enjoyed having them and I enjoyed making sure that they learned to swim, you know back to the athletics again okay (laughter), so they had to swim, they had to ice skate, play--so they--my son he had to ice skate, play tennis, it was done in a fun-lite way cause my husband [Edward Pedro Cruzat] could ice skate, could play tennis, although he was a surgeon he could do those things and I guess that's how me and my husband I sort of meshed or something, and he could sing.  He was a, my husband was a great singer.
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: I met my husband in St. Louis [Missouri].  I was visiting my sister who thought I should--it was time--what's this in 1954, it's time I get married or get a boyfriend cause she hadn't heard me talk about a boyfriend or husband and I hadn't thought of a boyfriend.  Again, that meant being confined didn't it?  It mean being someone being in control (laughter) so, if you want me to meet someone.  So her husband was at Homer G. Phillips [Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri] in--which was a great hospital at the time, doctors galore, were single, five, six, ten.  So I met them all (laughter).  She introduced me to who she thought were you nice, eligible gentlemen and I said "No, I don't think," I'd say.  But then she introduced to a young man the last day I was there.  He was with his girlfriend, and his best buddy was with his girlfriend and she said "This is Ted Cruzat."  I said, "Well how do you do?"  I was at the hospital and he was--and then the next day I knew he called me up, but he was with some--.  So I said "I think I like him."  She "Well you--he has a girlfriend."  I said "I understand, but he is not married is he," and I said--so that's--but he was very--I liked him because he was so--quite regular, you would not know he was a surgeon.  He was just a person, very warm, very knowledgeable, he could sing, could dance, play tennis which I didn't meet many doctors that did that but he did this, but because of his background.  His father was a surgeon, his father was violinist, he played the violin to raise eight children before he finished med school.  He had eight children before he finished med school, but he had a job on the side to be violinist in a group in an orchestra, but he had to pass for white but that's what he did, and his father was also a very good singer.  So my husband came from, had a very unusual dad and his father spoke [William] Shakespeare, all kind of things he would recite.  So we'd had the use of diversity and these things were so meaningful and they do and I tell my children and anyone that-- that adverse environment really you learn so much, you get so much.  It's not when things are so simple and so given.
Story_ID: 93284
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and so you were married for yeah (unclear) the rest of-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: For--my children were in, were in college, I had two children in college, one in high school when I joined Joseph Holmes [Dance Theatre].
Speaker 1: And that's the last twenty years where you didn't really dance professionally or anything.
Speaker 2: And if I'd have known--I had played tennis, skated, did all that kind of stuff--I'm not dancing, I stopped dancing and some man said, "you know, I got just the thing for you to do Mildred, they are looking for a dancer.  I want you to take-- join-come to this company, and I went to Joseph and he started doing [Martha] Graham.  I never had Graham before and I said, oh this is modern dancing, never had it before.  The man said, "but I would like you in the company".  I said oh, I never (unclear)--and they were all kids, mostly in high school, kids from high school or first year-- or in college, but I didn't think because I never mentioned my age, age was not a big thing, but when I got on the floor it was a big thing cause I said "Oh, am I ready for this?"  But the man was determined, he liked the way I presented myself, I guess it was my ballet background, but I still hadn't danced and I was really not in the shape I should have been.  So, one thing led to another and the man never put me out, he made me sit there and learn Graham technique which was--which was very good.  It was a tremendous--that opened up a lot.  The lady that created the technique really learned yoga at an early when--or she learned it when she was in her twenties and she took some of its style to use it as her technique, and so yoga is something that is very special and this woman's work is very special (unclear), Martha Graham's technique was very special.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just like [HM] Katherine Dunham is special.  These are women that I admire because it was--well it takes a lot of dedication, tremendous dedication.
Story_ID: 93285
Speaker 1: So I dedicated myself to stay in and hang in with Joseph [Holmes] with my kids and my husband [Edward Pedro Cruzat] was very tolerant, very giving and very supportive, in helping me get along though this hard time that I went through (laughter), but it paid off because that's what I'm about today.  I never let it go, because once I left the company--.
Speaker 2: Now you were there until 1980 right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when I said I'd better jog.  I better start jogging, so then I started jogging six miles, eight miles.  Been in a couple of races; also people started asking would I teach dancing and I taught various little places and then finally a lady--then I started teaching my own fitness classes that was in '80 [1980]--yes, and found I was getting comfortable in teaching, cause remember I told you I was not the most forward person and the more I did it, the more I became comfortable and then I was asked to teach at-[HM] Lula Ford and Grace Dawson, both of these principals were very impressed with what I did with the children and would I teach at Beethoven Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], then I--well that was by accident, didn't intend to teach, I had a group of twenty little girls that never had ballet, didn't even have shoes on their--soles were falling off their shoes, and did not know how to ever hold their head up.  Every kid came to me like (head bent down) everyone, everyone stood like this.  You saw pictures of them, did you not?  I lifted everyone's head, tried to change their attitude, tried to tell them not to live in a box, don't try to learn from others that you see wrong, what they do wrong, you learn from their mistakes.  I talked to them about every--about boys, birth control.  A lot of things I asked them first would their mothers mind if I would speak to them about some of the things that I did, but I was very concerned because I knew their mothers got lost.  No one helped their mothers.  Their mothers truly, there was a time in over '60 [1960], '70 [1970] they got lost.  Like I said, they didn't have the schools that I went to.  They didn't have to--they had to have security guards in the school.  They can talk back to the teacher anytime they want to in a classroom.  These are things that I was appalled at.
Story_ID: 93286
Speaker 1: Then I found out I had to bring them [her dance students at Beethoven Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] into my home.  That being over there is not enough, let's bring them into my home, and let them live in my home.  Now I don't mean all week but they would be here on the weekends.  Trying to teach them how to set a table, how to eat because they--their diet is something else, and you say eggs and bacon, sit down and eat them or you know let's have some (unclear), okay, well no.  So I got them to eat another kind of way, tried to--they knew how to keep things in order, you must--you got something out, you put it back.  That sounds immaterial but it is important because you can use it in your school work.  I know if I was more order--if I thought the way I do now, I would have probably enjoyed school more or got more out of it, and I also tried to teach them to read.  Now I love reading, reading is--reading is their way out.  Reading is one of their ways out of their lifestyle, and they don't see enough of it cause they don't see it in their home.  They hear that--you asked me did I see and hear music.  No the music that they hear, and then they hear the telephone and they're on the phone so they don't see those things and hear them.  So when they come in here, it's quiet time.  It's here for, I don't know, whatever they want to do.  If they want to watch television they could.  I take them in the back yard to teach them how to play tennis.  Take them out the back yard to teach them to ice skate, just not to perfect them, but to expose them, to let them know, also to see a husband, a black man treat a black woman with respect and dignity.  Most of these children didn't have fathers, or their fathers were in jail, or their mothers stabbed their boyfriends.  I could give you--I could write a book on their lifestyle.  One little girl who we just performed, she answered the phone--they were here, dad bought them after they performed downtown.  There was a message on the phone that her sister who is twenty-four, just stabbed--no, just shot herself, and left four of her children with her mother who had eight.  These things and then the other child that I told you that the mother--the two children came by here, they were devastated because their mother had just stabbed their boyfriend out of--she was--she was protecting herself so it was self-defense.  So I shelter these children.  When the children have these experiences, especially when the stab--I did not go back--I didn't discuss these incidents-- incidents with them.  I sorta tried to embrace them and care for them, and like I said I was very happy for them to see my family.  They knew--they were as close to my children as they were to their family.  My children--they were just--when my husband would come in or my children would come in they would say, oh here's Liza, here's Savara.  They would be very happy.
Story_ID: 93287
Speaker 1: So I just wished I could have been with them [her dance students at Beethoven Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] longer or I wished I would have had of--the school wants me to continue to teach over there.  I would like to get--I would like to be with the mothers--I would like to have something with the mothers for them to have an introduction, how they can improve their children's quality of life.  How they can improve their life, and when you--and I found this out when I was in the night clubs in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  When you take care of yourself mentally and physically, you take care of a lot, because what is that word "you say no."  I went--I met many a person that came to the night club that want to date you and you know it's just an overnight--a distant quick date.  "No thank you, don't need the date, goodbye, see you later".  If these girls could learn that, because their bodies are abused.  We, my husband use to say when I was teaching, he said "Mildred, you cannot fix these children and you can't change it; and he said, from what I see the Afro-American men are not treating the women with enough respect so they in return retaliate or react to the men. They talk to the men.  The men talk down to them.  So what do you do?  You talk back to them.  So it's sort of a vicious cycle.  So I would always try to tell the children if anything unpleasant happen, you look at the individual and say, "pardon me, I'm sorry and don't touch".  You don't have to go into a whole lot of dialogue.  It's very simple and quite direct, and then you know one thing, they think--you think a lot of yourself.  So yes, I would like--wouldn't mind going back over, but I'd like to get back with the mothers because they need to be more connected with their bodies and what their bodies can do for them, health wise, cause all those things that makes them a better person, cause the mothers that did well with their children are the mothers that got out of there, also ended up working, getting jobs, but these were the mothers that were the mothers that were very strong individuals, and I speak to them today.  One just called me the other day, her daughter is going--and she said, do keep in touch with my daughter.  I had her since she was eight and she's going to college, but the mother said, "Mildred you can say anything to Genoa because I know what you say would be what I say to her".  So, I--and another little girl who I have, I don't know if I should be personally telling you about these children like this, but I'm so proud of them because of what they've experienced.  This little girl, one year when she was about 12 years old, 13; she must have lived in four different places in Chicago [Illinois], moved from one place--four or five--five of them of them were (unclear)--her brother went to jail.
Story_ID: 93288
Speaker 1: Okay so you were involved with--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: [Beethoven Elementary School at] Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], for--?
Speaker 2: Yes, probably until '85 [1985] [sic, 1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until I went to (unclear)--then I went to Africa, came back and then my daughter said she was going to get married, and this--everything, then I found out my husband [Edward Pedro Cruzat] had gotten sick with pulmonary fibrosis and was gonna take his life.  He had a couple of years to live, yeah so, but I so I said well maybe I need to take some of some time off and then he passed in 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he lived longer than they thought.
Speaker 2: No, they said, they gave him five years to live, and that's what he had, five years. Isn't that interesting, for someone to tell you that?  And he was a physician so he knew a lot about medicine and so he was still trying to find out the cause, where it came from, what--they still, that's where the pulmonary fibrosis, they don't know where it, how it happens, where it happens, and where it's from, and I plan to go back to the doctors to find out and to give them more data, because I found out that a couple of his sisters had--a couple of his brothers had problems with their lungs, or breathing and I'm thinking they lived in Alton, Illinois when they were kids and could it have been the environment, could it have been that?  But I haven't gone back because it's been hard for me to deal with, so but when I can--when (unclear) talk to the physician, I plan to say something to them because they did not--to me I sat with him a lot of times.  They didn't ask questions, they didn't ask which was very strange to me.  His background, that much, at least when I was with him I didn't see that.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So I'm looking at it and I'm questioning it, and I'm thinking more about it because I found a brother had the pulmonary fibrosis and another sister died of lung problems, so there must be something (unclear).
Speaker 1: More (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, or hereditary but they say they don't have no idea, but anyway, but my husband lived well.  He played tennis maybe up until like six months before he died or something, he had a very good attitude, oh, he was life, life.  He was fun, funny in life, like a--.
Speaker 1: So you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And very intelligent, very bright.
Story_ID: 93289
Speaker 1: You got two daughters and a son?
Speaker 2: Two daughters and a son and no one's a doctor, no one's even (unclear) no one's close.
Speaker 1: Your son [Edward Pedro Cruzat, Jr.] was a speed skating champion right?
Speaker 2: I think he's just now beginning to realize his potential of whatever he did, because I think (laughter) he resented or it upset him with me taking him to these--he was competing all the time.  He was competing always with someone with tennis and always someone with skating, and he was the only and most cases he was the only black one doing this, so it was nothing he embraced, he preferred being around his buddies.
Speaker 1: Okay and you have a daughter, one daughter is involved in television and--?
Speaker 2: Liza [Cruzat-Brooks], she's a model and, she worked for 190 North, she was working--Janet Davies.  I won't mention that on this--yeah she worked for Janet Davies.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Yeah she worked for Janet, she was very good and I don't know why she's not still on 190 North.  She--she, if I showed you any of her tapes you could see, you would wonder why what was the reason for her not them not continuing with her?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway but right now she's enjoying raising her--she's spending good quality time with her children.  She's trying to be a mother-mother right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's really trying to be a good mother and her husband is a--with telephones, computers and he's --he once had MCI, he must have had four-- he had five stores with MCI, now he has another company but, so she--he's--so she's trying to be this good housewife or a good wife, but it'll be interesting what she does because she's--she too has been exposed to the theater and everything.
Speaker 1: Is your--is your?
Speaker 2: And she's done some acting in Chicago [Illinois].  She's done [William] Shakespeare; she's done some Shakespeare work.
Speaker 1: Is your third daughter involved (unclear)
Speaker 2: My older daughter [Sevara Pia Cruzat] she is a social worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's working at George Washington University, with a (unclear) on her shoulder.
Speaker 1: In D.C. in Washington?
Speaker 2: In D.C. mmhmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93290
Speaker 1: Now tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the Black community today?  We always ask this question.
Speaker 2: I hope for so much, because what I hope for was for like thirty years ago remember, and I said what--and then I came back here and went to Robert Taylor [Homes in Chicago, Illinois].  What happened?  I would like, I would hope to see us being more unified, be more connected with one another, not say so much about black, African American men, but do it.  Be proud of--I don't care if you're black, green or blue, but be proud; be--have some kind of dignity and character about us and our lifestyle is so different now.  What they show in the movies is not good quality.  Oh, I will say this.  My sister [Sevara Freeman] was married--is married to [Albert] Al Freeman, Jr. who--.
Speaker 1: He's a great actor.
Speaker 2: Great actor, okay.
Speaker 1: He's a member of the Negro Ensemble Company in, I mean (unclear).
Speaker 2: I truly--I saw him from scratch when he-- another person--he was self-taught.  He played the piano, listen the talent that he had was phenomenal.  I went to several awards that he went to.  He was up for something with--he got an award for "One Life to Live", okay?  Okay he did well, but a movie he did before--I don't know what (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: I know what you mean because he did get an award for a movie (unclear).
Speaker 2: He did a movie but he did not get the award, Peter Ustinov got the award [the Emmy Award for Outstanding Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in 1970. Freeman was nominated for "My Sweet Charlie"].  He was with--oh goodness I said it all the time--anyway he was up but he didn't get it because I know there was no chance of him getting an award for a movie at that time.  That was in '70 [1970], and the truth--what he's--he's done plays by James Baldwin, he's done questionable work, but everything--when he finally did the theater--did the T.V. he wasn't terribly happy because he really liked theater and he liked what he could get from it, what he could do.  But anyway, he did--he was excellent at what he did.
Speaker 1: He played Elijah Muhammad in "Malcolm X" in the Spike Lee movie.
Speaker 2: Yes he did and he was very good, yes he did.  So I still am very fond of him and I see him occasionally, but yes I would like to see a better quality for us to be--I'm just disappointed.  Like I said what I'd like to see I don't know what can be done because our children, the quality of theater or movies is not good.  I saw a movie that I thought was good the other day.  Was it "All About Fisher", with Denzel Washington?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Antwone Fisher.
Speaker 2: Antoine Fisher.
Speaker 1: Antwone Fisher, I don't know, like I said I just saw Antwone Fisher.  He [Denzel Washington] directed this and was in it and I said this is a good movie.  You don't see that, I mean they don't try to let--now I don't know whose fault that is, us or them?  But I know we need to have more to say about good quality things that we see.  We need to be exposing our children to these things, but it's so difficult because what they see on television, the music.  I have nothing against rap music, but let me tell you, I wouldn't know one tune that (unclear) of rap music, I can't tell you some tunes I've heard from other singers, even from Diana Ross, anybody, just singers of five years ago, but some of the songs today are not recognizable, but yes I would like to see us be behind people.
Story_ID: 93291
Speaker 1: This fellow [HM President Barack] Obama who's going to be running for [U.S. Senate]-- yes--.
Speaker 2: Barack Obama.
Speaker 1: Barack Obama, I would like to see us get behind him a hundred percent.  Support him a hundred percent and let us be known and let us be heard and let them know we have something to offer.  We--that, don't take us for granted, that we have value and we have quality.  When we start doing that it tells them, they know, they know because they know they have to respect to you when we start doing movies, but it's hard to do because today what sells is trash (laughter), its things that sell.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Things that make money.
Story_ID: 93292
Speaker 1: Ma'am, when you look back on what you have done and some of the things that you've done in life, I mean what do you see as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: I hope it's--I think the children see that about bettering themselves.  I tried to better people, trying to make themselves feel better.  And again, when you feel better you can have a clearer look at how you're going to accomplish something.  You make better choices and when you make better choices you make better choices for yourself and for your family, and you get the right people as a leader for yourself.  To me you get a good leader like [President Bill] Clinton.  I--who leads--who can lead you and help you, I'm looking out, so and also a legacy about--cause everyone asks me what do you do.  They look at my body.  What do I do?  It's about me, again the non-smoking, the non-drinking, you think of taking care of this piece of property you have and we need--we have problems with high blood pressure, sugar/ diabetes, we have--those are things that are killing our men and killing our women, and I would like to let them know that they could live a better life and they could give their children a better life, a life where the child can enjoy it, not where they have to--we can't sit on our porches, ridiculous.  I told you we played in an alley.  We are to enjoy who we are and respect who we are and when that--it takes us a long way and to listen to the people like Cornell West, what he has to say.  [HM] Harry Belafonte has a lot of--he's very knowledgeable.  Harriet Tubman, if you've read about what she went through.  Those are things that people have done something and contributed something, really, really been special, outstanding people.  Of course you know I could go on and on with a list of people who have been--Ron Brown who did a lot for blacks before he got killed he and could have been a person, and it's so sad that our people, our young black men.  Ron Brown is dead, [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington died at a bad time, but we need somebody, we need somebody, I don't-- female or male to speak up and speak out, and that's why to--because I think our black men are cheated.
Story_ID: 93293
Speaker 1: Here's, this is our last question; it's similar to legacy but slightly different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm very sure everyone will remember me as the very active, person with an attitude.  I didn't know that, I hate to say that cause--but an attitude, also a legacy of how to have--be connected with your family, having good family connections, having love in the family and if, again if you have that feeling of that you're taking care of your body and that what everyone in my company says, oh, here she comes, she so lively, she's so happy.  She looks like she enjoying it but you have to take care of, you have to mentally and physically take care of yourself in order to give, reach out to other people to make them enjoy what is here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd like to be someone who is remembered for having that message?
Speaker 2: Yes, to--yes and to do (unclear) as I told you to do something, to make something of what we can do to improve black/Afro-American people because it seems to be still a struggle for us, but yes, that to be proud, and when you're proud and to learn as much, read as much as you can about, not just about us, but about things in general, people in general.  Don't learn and read just about yourself, read about history.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Story_ID: 93294
Speaker 1: Cruzat.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sister.
Speaker 1: That's your husband's [Edward Pedro Cruzat] sister?
Speaker 2: Sister, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next (unclear).
Speaker 1: My grandmother who I'm named after.  Her name is [Mildred Shelby] Millie Richerson and she was from Detroit [Michigan], by the way of --
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, she's part of the Shelby family.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, wait one second Larry, hold on.  Can you pull that easel straight toward the camera about the foot, okay.
Speaker 1: The phone's ringing (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Savara and Al Freeman, my sister Savara Freeman and my brother-in-law Al Freeman.
Speaker 1: Al Freeman, Jr.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Al Freeman Jr., thank you.  Ted and Millie Cruzat.  We're in Key West, Florida to play a tennis tournament.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay about what year, approximately if you can remember.
Speaker 1: Probably about 197- about '78 [1978], yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, goodness.  This is in California.  His sister's on this picture.  His sister is here in the front, his oldest sister and he's sitting right, my husband is sitting next to her.  We're in, oh it's Al Freeman on there too and my sister, Savara.  We are out in California at one of the clubs, I think listening to [HM] Dionne Warrick.  We went to her concert.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Millie Cruzat in her--this is (unclear) my hairstyle and how it use to wear it back all the time.  Pulled back and ready to dance or whatever, and this was taken in 1975 I think, yeah something like that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Alright, next.
Speaker 1: Family, including my granddaughter Shauna.  Do I mention everyone?  Liza [Cruzat-Brooks] is holding Shaun, Edward [Pedro Cruzat, Jr.], Sevara and Ted.  We're at a wedding.  This is six years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, no (laughter).  Okay, all glasses!  This is me on the tennis court.  I probably got through playing a match in 1965, 1968--let me put it that, no 1972 okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, this in probably 1960s, Ted and Mildred.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This was done, oh yeah, I got the short dress.  Okay, that's probably in 1966 or 8 [1968].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay was this in regard to a particular (simultaneous) event or--?
Speaker 1: Yes, I--doing a fundraiser for a movie.  I guess it's--what is that movie?
Speaker 2: That's the "Lion in Winter"
Speaker 1: A "Lion in Winter" I guess it is.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: With good ole Peter O'Toole.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay, this was done two years ago, and they used for Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] magazine for Quaker Oats, ad for Quaker Oats, two years ago [2001].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Tennis, in the late '60s [1960] or '70s [1970].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oops, now that is about 19--that's probably in 1965 my daughter, my youngest child [Liza Cruzat-Brooks] and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oops, no that's me and which no one ever takes me to be.  I was sitting on my dad's [Sevar Clemon] lap, okay that's 1930, like 1931.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Could you just identify and name your other (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry there Liza, sorry (unclear) know my grandchildren.  This is my sister Savara [Freeman]; she is named after my father.  Bella [Sprott] is next to the oldest, Mary Ann [Bailer], my oldest sister and I'm sitting on my dad's lap, Sevar.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, my husband's--these are the young men that sat--that stood up at my husband's, at our wedding, Dr. Bick, Dr. Bind, he's from St. Louis [Missouri], his brother Roscoe, Dr. Leonard Reed from East St. Louis [Illinois], Dr. Hickman, my ex-brother-in-law who is a lawyer, Kermit Bailer, Fritz, Jimmie Fritz, and John Edwards who lives in Hawaii, Dr. Edwards and Dr. Sprott [ph.] who just passed this past six months.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, alright next.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Mildred and her father, my father Sever Clemon.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, should go ahead, I know it's on the questionnaire, but go ahead and spell your father's name.
Speaker 1: Oh, S-E-V-A-R.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And we were married in was it '55 [1955], 1955 [sic, 1954].
Speaker 2: Last name is Cle--.
Speaker 1: Clemon.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Wow! Okay, this goes back when--that was about 17 or 18 years old so what is that 1940 something?  That's my sister Sevara and me and I can't tell you who the young men are.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What was this occasion?
Speaker 1: My sister giving some kind of dance recital or something.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my son Edward when he was a year old.  This Edward Cruzat II.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, and oh goodness this one, they asked me to model for a show so this was done--.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) tilt forward on the whole stand Larry, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That was probably done 1960, about 1960 I guess.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what was this (unclear).
Speaker 2: A fashion show, a church gathering.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a show in St. Louis [Missouri], a T.V.  [Jesse] "Spider" Burks was doing the first black/Afro-American T.V. show and that is me.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please.
Speaker 2: And that--that's--.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: Another fashion show I was asked to be in, and I don't know what year that is.  That was--
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: That could have been in '60 [1960] year because of this dress '60 [1960].  That could have been in where is it--Texas, Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: In--oh, well--this is, that's September 11, 1955 [sic, 1954].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: Same date.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I got married; we were invited on this man, Dr. Thompson's boat so that's 1955 [sic, 1954].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, my husband and his friends, medical.  This was in probably 1960, 1962, 1968, 1965?  That's 1960, I can't (unclear)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That was me.  That was before I had my daughter, 1965-1957 [sic, her daughter was born in 1956].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: I'm doing pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're doing pretty good (unclear).
Speaker 1: 19--that's me, Dr. Russell, Dr. Russell from St. Louis [Missouri] and Anita Jones lives in Palm Springs, California.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was my first composite.  That was in 1980.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Ted and I.  I don't know what--.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 1: 1968.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you remember what event or occasion this might have been?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm trying--I think that's out in California cause that necklace I had on I bought it out there, that's some place in--probably, yeah that was in California.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know what the occasion is.
Speaker 2: This is in Larry Steele's Smart Affair, Oh, 1952 (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes he is, that was (unclear) and I was supposed to have scanty costume on and it doesn't even--.
Speaker 2: It doesn't approach scanty these days.
Speaker 1: No, no and it was vulgar, it was really vulgar and people were talking, you know you're in nightgown--you were--
Story_ID: 93295
Speaker 1: Millie [herself] with my cousin.  I wish you could see my cousin because he's a blond and they cut him off, the top of him (laughter) and I was four years old, four or five, about five years old, so that's about 1932, 1933 or something?
Speaker 2: My son's a blonde.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: His son is?
Speaker 1: My son is.  It's scary (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I asked did you marry--did you marry an African American woman?  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's darker than me.  She's darker than you she's darker; well she's certainly darker than Scott.
Speaker 2: Okay, Joseph Holmes [Dance Theatre in Chicago, Illinois], boom, boom, boom--1980.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a quite, this is a very interesting.  This is a movie--this is in the backyard of our building 601.  It is--when they--this is a group that had a tennis--what are they called, the American Tennis Association we belonged to, and the kids went various places to go to--to compete in tennis and I-my son is here in the front, Edward, my daughter, Liza and my husband [Edward Pedro Cruzat], where is he?  The greatest, the ardent tennis--there he is, right up there okay, and here--there I am, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Now we go from a big one to a little one.
Speaker 1: Okay, my daughter [Liza Cruzat Brooks] with her two charming little girls, Carlie and Aliya, A-L-I-Y-A.  Aliya is three and Carlie is nine months.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Alright, more grandchildren, and Carlie and Liza [sic, Aliya] and my granddaughter Shauna, she's twelve.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay is that it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think so.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry; this was the first year I taught over at the school which Beethoven Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], children who had no conception of ballet, classical music or ballet shoes.  This was like in 1985.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: [Tape briefly blacks out]
Speaker 2: United Way for the children at Beethoven Elementary School, they performed for them.  This was probably in 1993.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Should I change it?  The other one?  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I don't know how you (unclear).  That had to sit there for a couple of--that had to sit for some time.
Speaker 2: Little bubbles--.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's--again they're for United Way, the kids from Beethoven Elementary School, children are from eight to about 12 years old.
