Story_ID: 443875
Speaker 1: Today I'm interviewing Mr. Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis].  My name is Jacques Lesure.  I'm the interviewer; the videographer is Scott Stearns.  Could you please, sir, state your name and spell your name completely with the middle name.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Willie D. Davis.  That's W-I-L-L-I-E, then D, with no more of a middle name than D, and Davis, D-A-V-I-S, and that was my given name.  And when I asked my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] a couple of times whether, does Willie have any more letters than--she said, "No, that's why."  So I very quickly moved on.
Speaker 1: Could you state your birth date and your location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Lisbon, L-I-S-B-O-N, Louisiana, and it was in 1934.  And it was really an occasion where my mother, once she was pregnant with me, she actually moved back and lived with my grandparents [Ada Allen and Amos Allen] until I was born because my dad [David Davis] was, at that time, more or less a pick-up worker, if you will, with the oil industry and other things but never had a consistent job, never was really sure what he would do from month to month.
Speaker 1: What was the actual date of your birth?
Speaker 2: It was July 24th.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-four [1934].
Speaker 1: And now the big question is, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, today's date is the 9th of July [July 9, 2007], and, I think about well, it's the 9th so, in about--what is the date?  About fourteen days or something, I will be looking at another birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we currently, the location that we are at currently?
Speaker 2: We're at my office in Culver City, C-U-L-V-E-R, Culver City, California, and, it's a business community, very entrepreneurial in many ways, and I've only lived here--we only moved here, I should say, about at the first of the year.  Before that, we had spent about twenty-one years at 161 North La Brea [Avenue], which was in Inglewood [California].
Speaker 1: Mr. Davis, what is your current occupation?
Speaker 2: I am president and operator of five radio stations, three in Wisconsin and two in California.
Story_ID: 443876
Speaker 1: Okay, now my next group of questions, we call these our People magazine questions that we like to have to open up our interviews.  And it's just some real basic things I'm going to ask you. Like, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food, I kind of change from time to time but I'm basically a steak guy.  Steak and pork chops.  And I'm a leafy vegetable guy.  So, I would probably say right now, probably steak is my favorite and with a couple of condiments to that would be collards, snap--you know any kind of beans, string beans and things like that.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting I don't know whether I've ever thought about what is my favorite time of year.  I know what it was when I lived in the Midwest (laughter)--it was the spring and summer and after a few months in Green Bay [Wisconsin], winter became one of my less favorites.  I guess it would be spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I probably prefer and normally probably, blue (pause) and green.
Speaker 1: Now, you've been a lot of places.  What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: You know, I like Hawaii and also like the Virgin Islands, and I probably prefer the Virgin Islands because it's a little closer, the flying kind of beats me up to Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a favorite phrase or saying that stands out for you, that you have, that you go by.  Your favorite saying, favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: You know, I've often used this expression in trying to make a point to my people or just in general.  Early starts beats fast running.  And that was in reference to an experience that came out of my high school coach.  I was--every time you were late, there was a little price to pay to practice and I was late a few times and he introduced me to what he called the board of education, (laughter) it was about that long and he would manage to have you bend over and he would help you out with a few whacks with the board.  And finally one day, I--boy this thing was hurting more and more--and finally one day after I'd had my little whacks, he--I looked at him and I said, "Coach, you know, there's gotta be another way to," I said, "this thing hurts."  And he said, "Yeah I know, it hurts."  But, I said, "Coach, this thing really hurts."  And he said, "Well, let me tell you.  What you should know, instead of sitting around, being in the locker room talking and other things, and making yourself late.  What you ought to know is that early starts beats fast running."  He said, "I, we're out here and then I see you coming around the corner and you're running and everything."  He said, "Just think if you'd started early.  You probably would've avoided the board and you wouldn't have even had to run."  So I've always remembered that and I have actually had that as a part of my life.  When I was in the beverage business, I went in early and this business, well, in the radio business, there's not a whole lot of requirement, typically, for the same kinds of reasons.  But I even come in early today because there's something about early start beat fast running.
Story_ID: 443877
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your mother a little bit.  Let's go through this. What was her name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, let me very quickly say that you have asked me to talk about, probably, the most important person in my life.  So, her name was Nodie, N-O-D-I-E, Bell, B-E-L-L, and her married name was Archie, A-R-C-H-I-E, and her maiden name was Allen, A-L-L-E-N [Nodie Allen Archie].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Do you know the city?
Speaker 2: Right near Lisbon [Louisiana], in fact, my grandparents [Ada Allen and Amos Allen] lived there for years.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?  Say again?
Speaker 2: Pretty much the same way.  She moved around, especially when she got married and things like that.  But never left Louisiana until later and after my sister [Lurenia Davis Bratton] was born, eight years later, she finally left Louisiana.  Moved to Texarkana, but she played high school basketball and you know, one thing that she used to say, if she had really been given an opportunity, she probably would have excelled even at the college level at basketball playing.  She was all-state and all the other honors that you can, and very competitive, was competitive from the get go.
Speaker 1: What do you know, in addition to that, about her growing up, and her childhood and background?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was one of eleven children, so I think I could capture much of what she talked about over the years was never enough.  Never enough to, maybe the one thing that she regretted, is that, you know, with eleven kids and she was about in the middle, so, she didn't go to college, she didn't--there were just so many things that--there was just not enough.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother as a person from your view as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother, an unbelievably religious and devoted person, I mean, and just--she worked her whole life being credible.  If she gave you her word, it was like gold. And my mother, when she passed away, it was one of the toughest moments in my life.  Because it was almost like that rock had disappeared, that when I was frustrated, when I would think of things, I would always brush them off on my mother.  And I--there was one experience that happened with her that I will always, I will carry to my grave with me and that's, you know, like young kids who play around in the open fields and sandlot football.  And I remember one day we were playing down at just a sandlot field, and you know, young kids, they brag about everything, you know, and finally got around to, my dad could whip your dad, so, you know, I mean, probably had no real significance beyond bragging rights for some.  And what I remember most, when they got to me, the first thing I heard, "Well Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] doesn't have a dad."  And it was, it was tough, it was tough because it's almost like, I couldn't defend myself.  So I remember as I went home, almost in tears, I went home and told my mother.  And she said to me, "Come on in here and don't you worry because tell 'em, your mother can whip their mother."  (Laughter) And I never thought about it and mothers were not introduced into the conversation but I said, always said, if we go back there again, I'm gonna be very sure that my mother can whip anyone's mother that was a part of that group and that was just, I mean, she always had an answer and a purpose and a reason, you name it, she was that pillar of strength in my life.
Story_ID: 443878
Speaker 1: You mentioned her being devoutly religious, what religion was she?
Speaker 2: She's a Methodist and went to church every Sunday unless they were out of town or something like that, and you know, in fact, it was Miles Chapel [Miles Chapel Christian Methodist Episcopal Church] was the church in Texarkana [Arkansas], and one of the things I feel very good about, my mother was just very identified and was very devoted.  And when she passed away, I now have a special room that I had built at the college and in fact when I was last in Texarkana, they just informed me that they have even refurbished, and I knew that they were doing something, some additional improvements and making the building even larger.  So, the name Nodie Bell [Nodie Allen Archie] lives on and it should.
Speaker 1: Did she share any special stories with you about her childhood in particular, growing up?  Did she give you any insights into her, you know, special stories that might stand out?
Speaker 2: Well, not really, but she always talked about if she had been given a chance, what she thought she could have accomplished and I never will forget when my mother was talking to me, and later on as I got older, I mean, her one sense was always that we were gonna go to college, we were gonna do all those things because she thought it was so important to have an education.  And she said, "If it's the last thing I do, I want to see the three of you go to college," and I can tell you today, the three of us went to college. In fact, I think even the three of us have worked--I have my master's degree and my brother [Alcus Davis] has his master's and my sister [Lurenia Davis Bratton], I believe, has special training towards her master's.  And I would say each one of us was driven a little bit, at least, by--but with me, it was huge because I was the oldest, I think I was the focus of my mother a lot.  She would talk to me in everything I started to do. And it was really interesting because I was the oldest of three kids, my mother was not married for a while, and she worked at a--she started out as a almost a helper in the kitchen at the Texarkana Country Club [Texarkana, Arkansas] and she, when she retired, she was absolutely the head cook at Texarkana Country Club.  And she used to talk to me about how she thought that she was able to elevate herself to that point, and she'd just, challenge me and she said, you know, "I want you to be better positioned in life than your father [David Davis]."  And it was really interesting because I don't think I truly appreciated that until later on my father's dying bed, I think the realization of how many things had impacted his life and how many things.  Because I was very estranged from my father for a long time, the fact that he just walked out, as I saw it, on my mother.  And I was believing that it hurt her in some ways to the point she was bound and determined that we were better off than our father.
Story_ID: 443879
Speaker 1: It was really interesting because, in my hometown there in Texarkana, they had a young man, never will forget his name, was Kosh [ph.], the name, he lives out in California now. But he got the nerves severed in his right shoulder.  So everything from then on, for the rest of high school, through college and everything else, he had to learn how to do it left-handed and everything.  But he went on to college and everything else.  But my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] didn't want me to play football because she was absolutely of the--of course, she was concerned 'cause you could get hurt and I--so I went along with her until my junior year [at Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas] and (laughter) every year--an athlete of any dimension in Texas and particularly in Texarkana at that time, you had to play sports in some ways.  You know, it was the girls and everything else that just put pressure on you.  And I never will forget the night I came--I had been practicing with the team and I, and we were to go out of town to play a game and I told the coach that my mother didn't know I was playing and I couldn't, and he said, "Oh my goodness."  So he went over and he spent the better part of an afternoon talking with my mother and her last word to him at that time was: "I just don't want my son to play, it's too dangerous."  And when I found out that happened, I was so distraught, I went home and I told my mother, I said, "Mom, if you don't let me play, I'm gonna leave home."  And I think she was so touched by that, until immediately, she looked at me and she said, "Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], if it means that much to you," she says, "you go on," says, "because I don't want you to leave home," she says, "but I will say that if you get hurt, don't come looking to me."  And I, so, that was kind of--I was, "Okay Mom."  And so, I--you know, I had played with, around with most of these guys, and since, I don't know when, the first year, I'm starting on the offense and defensive team and made all-state and everything else, so now I'm really feeling good.  And I played the entire season. The next year, I'm playing in Texarkana because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we'll go forward more, a little more in detail during those early years, but--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 443880
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  You said you were estranged from your father but let's get a little information about him.  What was his name, your father's name?
Speaker 2: His name was David Davis, and I don't know whether he ever had a middle name.  He went by the initials, D.D., and--you know the reason why I said I thought that something came to a point of understanding on his deathbed, I remember.  Because he knew this had always bothered me, and he said to me, in tears, he said, "I probably and we can't do anything to change what has happened," he said, "but I'm gonna tell you," he said, "I left for a reason."  He said, "I left because I didn't feel like--that I could live a life of pride and a feeling like a real father if I didn't have a job and if I couldn't, you know, take care of you guys."  So, when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was he born?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisiana too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, they were married, when they were both about nineteen or twenty.
Speaker 1: Please continue with his telling you about his background and that slight revelation that you had at that time.  Please tell me more about that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, every time I would kind of look at a crisis in our life with my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] and, you know, the lack of a father.  You know, I would say, you know, why did my dad have to go and when he--I don't know whether completely in my mind, I don't know whether it released him from all the expectations that I felt that he should've accepted the responsibility for but I think maybe even in my older life, I know what it is to have the pride and the feeling of accomplishment and doing things as you're supposed to.  And when he told me that he just absolutely could not and by the way, he actually moved away from Louisiana and went, came to California and he ended up in the [U.S.] Merchant Marine and other things.  But the most interesting thing, and I think the thing was so difficult for me.  We never knew where he was until maybe sixteen to twenty years later, and that bothered me.  I mean, because he, in my head, abandoned us for whatever reason.  And I--and when I had the beverage company, my dad worked for me for about almost ten years.  And, it was really interesting because I remembered the day, it was something that he was supposed to have done and I remember, I called him in the office and he knew I was a little hot.  And I started off by telling him, I said, "You're my father, there's no question but I'm gonna tell you one thing. I don't ever wanna hear that you are guilty of what you're charged of right now again."  And he was--I tell you I never had to say another harsh thing to my father.  And yet I never told him that I really forgave him until he was in the hospital on his dying bed.  And I told him, I said, "I'm gonna tell you something because I wanna feel better and hopefully it makes you feel better."  I said, "It's been difficult, it's been tough," I said, "but I forgive you."
Story_ID: 443881
Speaker 1: We were discussing your father [David Davis] working for you at the time period, there's been some reconciliation between you all, obviously because he's working for you now.  Were there any glorious moments or anything there during that time period that helped you get closer to your father, that gave you this forgiveness for him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that my father did everything and beyond that probably an employee could do for anyone and I think that since he was my father, that it probably even had the bloodline and everything else in it.  But (pause) what I would think of every time that he did something very nice, it would almost take me back to my situation with my mother [Nodie Allen Archie].  So, it could never really be complete victory because I just was not forgiving him for in total, until as I said, on his dying bed did that occur.  But you know, it's interesting.  He became so devoted and so dedicated to the company and me in some ways, that he all but became my right arm.  And he was the guy that ran the errands, he did everything.  And I remember that the one thing that he said that it still resonates into this day.  And that was a question as to whether he had delivered something that he was supposed to, and this was with Edna Garnett [ph.], a person who had been with me, who has now been with me for thirty-seven years but before that had been, I don't know, fifteen years at that time, at least.  And she was, it was almost like, he was saying that it had not happened the way it was and she had a position, the other position.  And I don't know whether I ever completely resolved it but I know what he said.  He said, "You know, I don't wanna disappoint my son."  He says, "So I'm gonna tell you from now on, any time you have something for me to do, write it down."  And I tell you, that expression, write it down, resonated across our entire company, for a long time. The rest of the time I was in the business, you know, you'd hear people saying, write it down.  And he really was the--he was the inventor of that write it down because he felt that it would help to eliminate any further problem.
Story_ID: 443882
Speaker 1: I want to move on a little bit and talk about your grandparents on your mother's [Nodie Allen Archie] side.  Let's talk about them, what did you, what can you tell me about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting because many times, and until I was probably in my late teens, I would return in the summer to Louisiana and spend the time with my grandparents.  And--
Speaker 1: These are your mother's grand- your mother's parents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These were my mother's grandparents. And they were farmers--
Speaker 1: --parents.
Speaker 2: These were her parents.  And kind of semi-retired at that time.  But my grandfather was like a lay minister and he and my grandmother went to church every Sunday.  So you can see where part of the religious conviction that come from, with my mother.
Speaker 1: Where they also Methodist, also?
Speaker 2: They were also Methodist, yes.  And, my grandfather probably had the reputation. If Amos Allen said it, it's gold, I mean, you can believe it, you can depend on it, you can do--and he enforced that kind of (pause) life expectancy, that kind of obligation, that kind of commitment with us.  And if you wanted to get in trouble with him, you act irresponsibly, you do something crazy, and you had just that, you had trouble.
Speaker 1: So, his name was Amos Allen?
Speaker 2: Amos Allen.
Speaker 1: And his wife, do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Ada, A-D-A, Allen.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, they were farmers, can you tell us more about them?
Speaker 2: Well, obviously, sharecroppers, who worked kind of every day of their life, up to a point, where they were basically no longer could work, they continued to live there.  And much of what probably was taking place was supported by some of the other family.  But it was really interesting, they were allowed to live there once they were no longer farming and this was in Lisbon, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Were there any special stories or anything they ever told you?  Anything that stands out in your mind right now?
Speaker 2: You know, not really.  I'm sure if I thought about it long enough, I could probably go into--but my life with my grandfather was very simple.  He would take us hunting in the, you know, in the woods and he had all these theories about how you would manage to hide yourself and do everything.  And you know how kids are, you know, just when a squirrel or something would present itself and you were expected to be absolutely quiet, something would bite you or something, you'd end up with some noise and he would make sure it took you a little while to get over the fact that you had disrupted things.  But he was someone that I enjoyed because of the honesty and the straightforwardness that he dealt with.  With his family, with others, he'd just--I mean, I always believed in my grandfather.
Story_ID: 443883
Speaker 1: Now, these are your maternal grandparents [Ada Allen and Amos Allen].  How about your paternal grandparents, your father's parents?  Do you know anything about them, or did you spend any time--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I did.  Now my father [David Davis] was really interesting.  I talked about my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] being one of eleven. And with my father, he was one of two, but the second person was actually his half-sister.  He--it was really interesting too, his--there was one side of his family that was pretty well off.  I mean, how they ever got to be, don't ask me, but I just know that they were.  And I think that this could have been part of the reason why my father even felt worse about his situation because--and in truth, in Louisiana, as I look back on it today and I say, what an interesting place in the world.  He had interracial situations in his family.  I mean, there were uncles and things like that, that were half black, half white and they knew it.  And it was really interesting.  They wouldn't recognize or talk to each other on one side and the other side strictly knew, and they lived every day basically in the same community.  One across town on Oak [ph.] here, and one in black, one in white.  And I can tell you to this day, I was never able to sort it out as to how these things--you just knew, even from color to everything else and almost the resources--you just knew that one part of the family was basically part white.
Speaker 1: And were the grandparents like that, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandparents--it was really interesting because he was black--he must have been 6'9" or taller. And what I remember, the little joke around the street used to be Norman, his name was Norman Davis [ph.], says he was so tall, he would paint his house without a ladder. (Laughter) And there's a little bit of exaggeration there but, I tell you, at the time, he was one of the tallest people that I had seen.  And you know, it was really interesting because pretty much all of this was taking place in Louisiana, in a place called Friendship [Louisiana], and the interesting thing about the place is that's where, and to this day, Karl Malone and I are supposedly relatives.  I've talked to Karl a couple times when I've seen him out here and we probably recognize that it's probably true but never did much to develop or take it any farther.  And, I think, when he left, I just did nothing to follow up.
Story_ID: 443884
Speaker 1: Let's move forward into your early years, your own personal early years.  Now, we know that you were born July the 24th in Lisbon, Louisiana.  When--did you grow up there or did you move away and grow up, really, in somewhere else?
Speaker 2: No, I grew up mainly in Texarkana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I went to Texarkana when I was, (pause) when I was in the fourth or fifth grade.  I don't remember exactly but that's my family, my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] had moved to Texarkana and I moved to Texarkana because my mother--it was really interesting because I was staying with my grandparents [Ada Allen and Amos Allen] for a while and my mother--her position was, I had to live with her.  I was her responsibility, she brought in the world and I had to live with her.
Speaker 1: Do you have memories of Louisiana, growing up, at all, those years, before the fourth grade?  'Cause there are some years before that. Do you have memories of Louisiana?
Speaker 2: You know, I do and I--but they are very vague in my life.  I remember almost like standing outside, and how I would watch animals and things and how fearful I was sometimes, how if you didn't manage to observe everything correctly.  Sometimes you could get cut off from the house by a cow or something like that (laughter).  And then, that was scary time.  But I--well, then I was the only grandchild living with my grandparents and everybody else, so it was almost like a child living with two older adults that wanted very much you to be home before dark.  All those things, but there was nothing unusual that I actually remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved to Texarkana around the fourth grade.  At this time, what--were there other siblings?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, I believe that both my sister--I mean, I think my sister had been born, and, but I know my brother had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her name, your sister's name is?
Speaker 2: Is Lurenia, was, Bratton [Lurenia Davis Bratton] now, it was obviously, at that time, it was Allen, or Davis rather.
Speaker 1: And Lurenia was your sister and you have another brother, you were telling me?
Speaker 2: And I had a brother that's between the two of us and his name is Alcus, A-L-C-U-S, Alcus Davis.
Story_ID: 443885
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your earliest memory, growing up in Texarkana?  What can you remember, the earliest thing?  Or things?
Speaker 2: What I remember as much as anything is that how kids would tend to wanna bully you, if you didn't have a bigger brother or somebody who could take care of you.  And I remember, you know, I'd be coming from school and sometimes running and scared to death and other kids that was kind of bullies.  And I--it was very tough for me for a few years until I made friends, got to know other kids, where you could kind of have your own little, build your own little protective force.  And what I remember is probably significant to me today is that it's probably where I made my first decision of what I wanted to be or what I wanted to do when I grew up.  And I used to work for, in the evening and later on in the morning on especially weekend, on Saturday and Sunday.  I used to work at a, for a market, a small market, and doing, you know, every little possible job that they wanted done but not necessarily the main job.  And I remember that the thing that stood out in my mind more than anything that I'm looking at people coming in, obviously they had been to work in construction or something, and they walk in and they're spending their money and I'm saying, "Wow, this has got to be okay.  Here's a guy and he's put all this stuff out here, they come and spend all their money."  So, that was kind of fascinating to me.  I said, you know, I would really like to do that one day.  I'd like to be an entrepreneur or I'd like to be someone who could have a chance to make money.  And that's, that was probably--even though I was convinced along the way to pursue some other pursuits, I never mentally moved away from the idea of one day being an entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 443886
Speaker 1: What was family life like growing up, your family life, you know, holidays, the things that happened, occurred around that time period (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, you know, we're probably at the point where I should enter the fact of a stepfather because my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] got remarried in Texarkana to a gentleman by the name of Edward Archie (pause).  And a very wonderful guy.  In many ways--he never quite adopted us, probably for reasons that I don't know, it could very well been my mother didn't want him to.  But he was never--a wonderful guy, treated us well, but in many ways, I never developed a feeling of him as anything but a stepfather.  And obviously, they ran the household so he was helpful and I always have said, to this day--you know, a lot of time they talk about when you're growing up whether you eat well.  My mother working at the country club [Texarkana Country Club, Texarkana, Arkansas], that was one great advantage, every time they, every day she went to work she would bring back some food left over from the day at the country club.  And so I probably ate better growing up than most kids (laughter).  I remember something, as if it was almost yesterday, and this kind of goes back to your friends, they get the bicycle, they get the--and I remember I went home and I said to my mother, "I wanna get a bicycle." And my stepdad heard it and before, they probably didn't even have a chance to--he goes, "That boy can't, he can't, we can't afford him getting a bicycle."  And I--and so my mother obviously told me later, "Well, you just gotta wait, hon.  I know other kids have bicycles and one day, you'll get a bicycle."  So, I think it was, as I look back today, and even those times in between, it wasn't that they probably couldn't afford to get me a bicycle.  I don't think--I--the interest never developed enough that said, "Let's get him a bicycle," with my stepdad, and in some ways, there were a couple events like that that almost created unforgivable situations.  I--he was nice and I really think later in life, I probably did more for him than he ever did for me in younger life.  But I did it as much because of him being married to my mother.
Story_ID: 443887
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what street you lived on?  Or where did you--on what street did you grow up in Texarkana [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: I live on a street called Ash, A-S-H. And it was really interesting because Texarkana if you--and I'm thinking back a little bit.  Ash Street was--I lived at 810 Ash.  The next street north of me was like almost a state line street.  I'm trying to think, it was a street that went all across town pretty much, and it was really interesting because on one side of the street they were all black and on the other side of the street it was all white.  And what I still think about is how you manage to manipulate all that.  You knew that people didn't want you to walk on their lawn.  You knew that you couldn't play in some ways with the--when you were in that white territory.  And it was never ugly, never really anything beyond just that attitude and that environment that says, you shouldn't do it.  And I'm sure there'd been somebody along the line that created some real examples of why you shouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So, your block, could you recall the person next door or the people across the street, anybody in particular in your block that might stand out?  Of the neighbors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, as you asked me that, I reflected on a person that probably impressed me.  The name was Mrs. Seymour [ph.] and (laughter) I think maybe I remember her because she used to give shots.  To all the kids, you know, every year.  And I can--and I have never to this late date, even become close to being a friend of needles (laughter).  So I can always see her with and I'd think, oh my goodness, here's Ms. Seymour again.  And she was just as dedicated as any person I--and probably one of the few black people in town that had such a job at that time.
Story_ID: 443888
Speaker 1: Do you recall any sights, sounds or smells, you know, growing up sometimes those things will--you know, anything that stood out in your mind.  A visual, or a sound or a smell of the neighborhood or anything that might give you some memories?
Speaker 2: No, you know, I--it's interesting, the sound part is probably more.  There was a tavern on the corner, and we lived about middle of the block.  There was a tavern across the street and on the corner from us.  And, you know, I can think back even now to the sound on a Saturday night.  Things, cursing, to, you know, somebody having too much.  And it was really interesting because when I was in, when I was a beer distributor here in California, I used to think about that, and I used to say, wow, you know it's so strange that you're in the business now that in some ways promote what, at one time, was very distasteful for you.  With the people keeping you awake and sometimes they would have fights that would break all the way over to in front of your house.  But that--there was no--that was that sound.  But there was no smell or anything in particular that caught my attention.  It was interesting because, as you know, Texarkana is split.  Half of the town approximately is in Arkansas, half is in Texas.  In fact, that's part of the name, Texarkana.  And I lived about a block and a half or maybe two blocks at the most from the state line.  So it was always interesting because you could get in trouble. When I was growing up there, if you got in trouble in Texas and you managed to get to Arkansas, then the police, they would not chase you any farther than the state line.  And you can imagine how long that lasted, I mean.  Now they have that, what do they call it, in hot pursuit.  They can go wherever you go when they end up pursuing you.  But at that time, it was really strange because you'd hear cars accelerating and stopping and everything else.  Because at that time, that law existed.
Story_ID: 443889
Speaker 1: At this point I'd like to talk about your elementary school experience.  What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, believe it or not, I can't remember the name of the first elementary school.  I was just sitting here trying to remember.  But it was non-distinguished necessarily.  It was an elementary school that was okay.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that you recall in elementary, any that influenced you in anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were.  There were teachers there that I--Miss Jones [ph.].  A Miss Carter [ph.], and there were several people that I just feel bad the name doesn't pop out at me right now.  But you know what I remember more about elementary school, it was an experience that--as I say, I go to Texarkana when I was in like the fourth grade.  Now I'm maybe in the sixth, about ready to go on to the middle school page, and middle school.  And I remember just as I was in the process of moving from elementary school into the grade school situation, we moved from the Texas side of Texarkana to the Arkansas.  And I remember the first day, and I remember my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] had walked me to school and I felt absolutely confident that I knew exactly I would get on.  And you know how you can get so excited about things, and you'd go into these little stores and you could buy your little favorite pop top, or whatever candy of some type.  And I remember that I had gone into the store and I was so focused on what I was buying in the store that when I came out, I made the wrong turn and went the wrong--.  And at one point when I look up, I am lost.  Everything I'm looking at is new and I remember the first thing I thought about, what if I can't find my way and what if they can't find me.  Then, you know, what's gonna be this outcome?  And I remember I was almost in a state of panic.  And I see this one guy coming up the street and I'm crying, and he sees that I'm crying and he says, "What's wrong?"  And I told him that I was lost and I told him that I would give him this candy bar if he would take me home (laughter).  And he looked at me and said, "No, I don't want your--," he said, "no, you can keep the candy." He said, "But I'm gonna see if I can help you find your way home."  Well, by then I had probably been gone long enough that home, they knew something.  So, as he's walking me back, so he could--he wanted to know where you're coming from, my store and everything.  So, as we're walking back, I see my mother, and she, of course, you know, she wanted to know what in the world and all like this, and I told her that I had offered this guy my candy.  And she said, "Well, just next, pay attention next time when you, because you may not be as lucky that somebody would take the interest."  And to this day, probably, if you were going someplace with me, the first thing, you would see me trying to make some account of where we are, and what's the streets there.  Because there's nothing, I'm convinced, there's nothing more disconcerting than being lost.  And being lost as a kid.  You know, I mean, it's absolutely devastating.
Story_ID: 443890
Speaker 1: So, what kind of a student were you, in school, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) You know, it's interesting because we were talking about elementary school and we were talking about--I would say there are so many things that come out about you in effort.  You know, that's probably was the first time that I'd shown signs of being an athlete.  They put you out on the playground at the elementary school, and they have you running and maybe you end up playing a little sport or something like football or something.  And the next thing, people would say, "Oh, you're faster than anybody," you know.  And I remember that because that was something that kind of followed me for the rest of my life into middle school and on.  I mean, it was always my speed.  And when I--just to jump forward for a minute--when I went to the Cleveland Browns, I was the fastest lineman they had in camp.  And it probably worked to my overall, making the team and other things.  But in elementary school was when I first discovered that I had this speed and what they almost call like catlike agility.  And that's something that you're probably born with, and boy, was I ever blessed in that sense.  Because I never had anyone to take any special efforts to train me.  It just kind of--until I got into high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: So, what kind of child were you?  You've been talking about your school and your athleticism.  What kind of a--were you well mannered, were you rambunctious or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) let me just say, yes.  Because you know, if I did something or said something or in some way was disrespectful to an older person, I mean, they'd tell my mom [Nodie Allen Archie] and there was whipping time.  I mean, she just absolutely would not tolerate anything from me that was disrespectful towards others.  So I grew up almost just being polite to people because that was the only way I knew that would--that didn't, I mean, get me in trouble.
Story_ID: 443891
Speaker 1: So you're in elementary school now, you've noticed that people are saying that you have this agility and speed.  At that point, you mentioned that possibly that was the time that you realized what it is you wanted to do.  Did you say at that time or have dreams of being a professional athlete at that time?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.  I'm just thinking of trying to get through that grade, into the next grade and all.  And it was at least in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas], my second year in high school, I started to think about, yeah, well maybe I can go to college and maybe I can do these things.  But in elementary school, I was, it was like this challenge of getting it.  And you were talking about, my grades were anywhere from average to above average.  I probably maybe had a B average through most of my elementary and grade levels of all types, including high school.
Speaker 1: So, you previously mentioned that during this time you were working at the store.  And that possibly entrepreneurial aspirations had begun also.  Is this true for this time period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because this was--it was so crazy that this thing would resonate so strongly with me.  When I would think for a minute about what I wanted to do or what I wanted to be when I grew up, I would go back and start thinking about well, what a great experience this was and how wonderful--in fact, I used to remember, used to--, "Boy, this guy's got it made," I used to say it.  Because, you know, I think I was not considering how much work he had to do to be prepared to serve the customer.  I was looking at the customer going out working at these other jobs that I saw, many times, much more difficult than their coming and spending their money with this guy.  So I, as I moved on in life, I learned to appreciate that serving the customer was probably as much of a challenge for him as it was for the guys going out working in the other jobs.
Story_ID: 443892
Speaker 1: So, now you've said that your mom [Nodie Allen Archie] had been very religious and she was attending the Methodist church.  Was that the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, was it the A.M.E. church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you attend?  Was it a family rule that all the children must go to church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That was absolutely the case.  And when we talk a little bit about me choosing the college, I have a very specific story that kind of transcends all of that.
Speaker 1: Well you can tell us a bit now about your church experience if you'd like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was really interesting because (pause) I sometimes ask myself.  Did I go to church out of a commitment and a purpose and everything else?  Or did I go because that was the only thing my mother would tolerate from me?  And boy, I'm glad today because I go to church every Sunday here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now.  And I say to myself, it's been one of the great things in my life is to have religion and to believe.  But anyway, when I was graduating, when I graduated, graduating from high school, well, the coach from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] came up to recruit me.  And I didn't know it but obviously somebody had told him at that point, you know the way these coaches get information on the athlete and the family, that my mother was very religious.  And he comes up, and my mother had said that she would not play any role in making the decision of where I would go to college because by then, I'm getting a lot of offers from the black colleges [HBCUs] and everything else.  And she was working that day when Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson] came to the camp 'cause I was at Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas].  And she invited him to have dinner at our house that night because she couldn't see him during the day.  Well, he did, and I will say Coach Robinson had a good meal, for sure that night (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 443893
Speaker 1: Now I wanna move from elementary school through the junior high experience.  You're getting older now.  You're going into a different level of education.  Tell me a bit about junior high.  What was the name of your school and who were your friends around there?  What did you do in junior high school?
Speaker 2: I, in junior high school, I found myself making friends and doing things maybe more driven by others than even by my own choice sometimes.  I would, you know, as I said, I wanted to--developed some friends that you'd kind of have there for reasons that it was better for three or four of you to be together coming home than it was for you to be alone.  So, I think I had no special purpose much beyond that.  I was very focused on satisfying my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] and I tried very hard to do nothing that would upset her.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: I knew you'd ask me.  And I, you know, it's so crazy that I don't remember my elementary or junior high school names.
Speaker 1: Were there any friends there in junior high that you can recall, that we might know, anybody that came out of there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of my best friends is a guy named of Ed Finn [Edwin Finn] and I can, he's in Texarkana, he still lives there.  And we were pretty much together through the whole thing.  From elementary through the twelfth grade there.  And I know he would know, so why don't I call you later.
Speaker 1: We can talk about it.  Did Ed Finn go into something, like in professional sports or anything since you all had similar--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, Ed didn't and it was really interesting because he was on the football team that won the state championship, and he was a very good player.  And Ed's mother was a high school principal.  So Ed was almost in the same predicament--I mean he didn't have too many choices either. And maybe that was the commonality that we--that we kind of did.  But Ed, he went to Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], graduated and he has lived there in Texarkana and had a very successful life working in business and teaching school a little.  I say, what is so interesting about today, what shows you what the years bring.  You know, the last time, last two or three times Ed and I spoke, we were talking about somebody who had passed away that were a part of our class or something like that.  But we have remained close.  It was really interesting because there were four of us on the high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas] team that teams were interested in, and many times they came with the idea of recruiting the four of us.  And I re- I will never forget when Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson] came that day.  Right away, he was all four of us--
Story_ID: 443894
Speaker 1: So, now you mentioned junior high school. So you said that wasn't anything that was really super huge for you there.  Of course, Ed Finn [Edwin Finn] was there with you and a few, maybe other friends of yours that you might recall at a later time.  So, let's move through the high school.  Let's go on into high school.  Do you recall the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas].  I'm gonna regret--I could kick myself someplace for not remembering those elementary schools.
Speaker 1: Now, Washington High School.  This is in Texarkana [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there?  Now, of course were there any teachers there--now you're becoming more and more open to things, you're getting older.  Who were some of your teachers and some of your friends, there?  Who most really influenced you?
Speaker 2: Some of the most impressionable people to this day that--my math teacher there, Miss Grant.  Was just absolutely outstanding.  My college [sic.] coach, Ed Nathan Jones [Nathan Edward Jones], was a great science teacher and was an outstanding coach.  There were a number of people that impacted my life.  Even the high school principal, Mosley [Mott H. Mosley], he was a principal that could make you believe that life was worth living.
Speaker 1: So, the faculty and staff were very influential to you, and you have fond memories of those people.  How about the four, or the other three people who were on your team?  Ed Finn being one of them, there were two others.  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was Eugene Marshall [ph.], and there was Johnnie Walker [ph.], and there was Louis Allen [ph.].
Speaker 1: Did they go on to play sports, any of those people?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, yeah they did.  The three of them took the scholarship to Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and I was the only one that went to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And that's why it was so strange.  I was telling you, when the coach came and he had spent the day recruiting and all at once he was at my house.  And he had probably talked himself out.  And he looked at my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] and says, "I'll just have to tell you one thing because I'm always honest with parents.  If Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] goes to Grambling, he has to go to church."  I'll tell you and my mother jumped up from the table and (laughter), "Oh my god, you gotta go to Grambling."  And so that's why I said this religious thing had resonated in--obviously I found out later that someone had told Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson] that my mother was very religious.  And he laughed about that until the last conversation that I had with Coach Robinson.  He laughed about recruiting me on that basis.
Story_ID: 443895
Speaker 1: Now, how did you spend your time as a high school student?  I mean, you know, curricula, the things you did in school, your homework and also your extracurricular activities?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: You know, it was interesting because I was saying that my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] was, by the time that she retired, she was--well, along the way, you know, these things probably work more in the South than any other place.  I used to work at the Texarkana Country Club [Texarkana, Arkansas] behind the bar as a eight- seventeen and eighteen year old guy.  And as you well know, it was probably illegal and everything else.  But I worked before that in the locker rooms and everything else at the country club.  And it almost became, it became a place where I could earn enough money to--that I could afford the bicycle or the other things that I couldn't before.  And so, it took away all of my time, I was always, I never had a lot of leisure time.  I was either probably doing something at school or I was at the country club.
Speaker 1: So, it was school and possibly your part-time employment also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Working.  Okay, now we're moving through the high school time and at this point are you considering your career, your future?  What are you thinking that you wanted to be at this time?  Are you really looking at the oncoming adulthood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm probably (pause) maybe even unconsciously doing that but don't realize it until later that that's what I was doing.  I, there was very definite when I spoke with the counselor at Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas] about what I wanted to do in college.  I said, "I wanna go, I wanna major in business."  Well, she probably had questions then that she didn't raise but maybe it was as much not to disturb my interest in other thing.  Because when I got to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and I told the counselor that I was gonna major in business, she looked me directly in the eye and says, "No."  So, I'm probably for the first time, I'm going, well that's--.  She said, "You got to major in something where you can get a job when you graduate."  She said, "You're not going to get hired in business."
Story_ID: 443896
Speaker 1: --Well, we're going to move forward to the Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] experience real soon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I want to spend a little more time in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas] with those teachers.  Now you're on a team now also.  You're on a team and this is the team, one of the winningest teams in Texarkana?  Are you all really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aw yeah, yeah we--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the team?
Speaker 2: The Washington High Lions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had won the state championship, I mean, not me on those teams. But we had won about five or six state championships.  And we had won the one, we won one state championship and played in two championships when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're playing football.  Your conscious mind is playing football but subconsciously, it seems like you wanted to be a businessman also.  So you have two things going at the same time.  So how are you reckoning with that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the athletic thing absolutely dominated my basic thoughts and my, probably, plans and everything else.  I was, you know, I will tell you this.  My trophy that I got in high school, my state championship trophy, I have held it out until, even now, as being one of the most important things in my life.  It was the holding that trophy was the first time in my life I had recognition that I did this, I could do this as well as anyone else.  And it was a symbol to me that I could do it.  And it was, I cannot tell you even now, there's almost a funny feeling as thinking back to how much that trophy meant to me.  And saying, "Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], you can do it, you can do it as well as anybody."  And this is an example.
Story_ID: 443897
Speaker 1: Now here we are.  We're in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas].  You're being an athlete, I'm sure, one of the star athletes of the school.  And you're going into your junior, your senior year.  It's time to decide about college. So that decision was already made.  You were going to college. That was a decision, correct?
Speaker 2: That was a decision and something that I felt that if I did not honor that, my mother [Nodie Allen Archie], I would have--the first person I would have deal--to have dealt with would have been my mother.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know where you wanted to go?  Are offers coming in left and right now?
Speaker 2: No, after my first year, because my first year, I made all-state.  My second year, I was, by now, you've been out there, your name and everything else, it's probably a little bit more known.  Sure, that was when I started to get the offers.  And as you, as I look back on this thing, as you can imagine, there are four of us and in many ways, we're saying, we're gonna go together, we're gonna hang together, you know--
Speaker 1: Were you all linemen?
Speaker 2: No.  There was a back, Johnnie Walker [ph.], he was a back, a quarterback.  And you're saying, well, we gonna hang together, and you're thinking about things as much as anything.  And everybody was recruiting, kind of all of us at the, "You come and you can be the heart of our team," and everything else.  And it was really interesting, I had very much said that I was gonna go wherever the other guys would go.  And I had never, it was funny, I had never--I had a cousin that I didn't even know about who went to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] but I had never been on campus or near Grambling.  I knew of Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson] pretty much within the last year that I had heard a little bit about Grambling because he had actually, he had written us.  That was one of the things.  And you know what, but I had not developed any preference whatever, whatever, about going to Grambling.  And all at once, with my mother's display of, "Oh, you gotta go to Grambling," I mean all at once, now, I'm living with a decision almost made by my mother even though she said that she would not try to determine which school I attended.  And then when I found out the other three guys were going to Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], there was a moment when I said, "Oh my god, why, why, why am I left with this thing of fulfilling what my mother's desire was for me?"  And was I going to stick with it?  And I, the answer obviously was, yes, I did stick with it.  I went to Grambling and I'm a freshman and everything else and I left school.  I caught a milk truck out of there one day and they caught, the coaches actually caught me in Shreveport [Louisiana] trying to get from Shreveport to Texarkana [Arkansas].
Story_ID: 443898
Speaker 1: Let's back up.  We'll go into that little experience in a moment.  But let's talk about the day that you're in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas] and you find out that Coach Robinson, Eddie Robinson.  Now, did you know his greatness, was he as great at that point, was his--or was he just a regular coach that everybody knew about?
Speaker 2: You know, he was a coach that everybody knew.  As you know, Coach Robinson was fifty-three years at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and he had lived with every aspect of Grambling in an athletic way.  He had been basketball coach, he had been part baseball coach at one time and of course, the football coach.  He had a couple teams that--the team that "Tank" Younger was on that went to--
Speaker 1: Paul Younger?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Paul "Tank" Younger that went to a championship.  I would say I recognized his name and more I'm hearing more about Coach Robinson almost every day.  Where even other coaches.  I remember one coach said to me, "I know that Coach Robinson had been to see you guys.  I hope you haven't."  I'm hearing things like that.
Speaker 1: So, in those days, the coach came to the home and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: --and interacted with the parents.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about that day that occurred with Coach Robinson in your home?
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: --I'm thinking, as much as anything, will he be able to get the other three guys to think about Grambling?  And this is even before the conversation had been with my mother [Nodie Allen Archie].  I'm hearing her talk about, I mean, I'm hearing him talk about the Grambling experience and et cetera, et cetera. And my mother, not ever having gone to college or anything, I think that she had an appreciation but maybe very little understanding of how the whole thing worked.  And she was saying, "Yeah, Coach. Yeah, I--okay, Coach."  But she really didn't much have much of a sense of where she should try to influence me to go until he came up with this thing about going to church.  And the moment that happened, it really intensified my sit- are those other guys gonna go?  Because I remember I asked coach even before the--I said, "Coach, did--," he said, "Well, nobody has said for sure."  So, it's like, I felt just that night, I had said for sure.  And just as much to my mother as anything.  So, I go to school the next day and, I believe that was on Thursday, either a Thursday or Friday, but I remember I see the guys the next day.  And I said, "Where are you guys going, are you going to Grambling?"  And it was really interesting because several of the--Walker's [Johnnie Walker (ph.)] father and he had had a real--but they knew about Arkansas [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], they didn't know about Grambling.
Speaker 1: What was Arkansas' standing or rating, athletically, at that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, they were about the same.  They were in that Southwest Conference [sic. Southwestern Athletic Conference] and they maybe had one champ- but this was one of the big pictures the guy was saying that they were gonna turn the program around and you were gonna to have a chance (laughter) to be a part of it.
Speaker 1: So, you had Grambling, Arkansas, who were some of the other teams that were in that conference?
Speaker 2: Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], Texas College [Tyler, Texas], I would say to you, seriously, within a--this was probably in April, in May, when this was happening--I'd say before I took off to Grambling in August or thereabout, I had heard probably from every black college [HBCU] in the country.  I mean, in the South, well, they're all in the South anyway.  And it was really interesting because some, now like Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], I knew something about.  Many of 'em, I didn't even know.
Story_ID: 443899
Speaker 1: So Coach Robinson's [Eddie Robinson] at your house.  Your mom's [Nodie Allen Archie] excited now because he told her you'd be going to church every day and now.  So, you find out your friends are going somewhere else.  It's May or June, so you're getting ready to graduate from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas].  Now, the onset of you're actually leaving.  What's transpiring between now and getting ready to go away to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm considering I'm the only one and I was thinking, as you walked through that explanation again, what if my mother had said, what if coach had said, if I go to Grambling I'm going to get an education. (Laughter) I think that would have been almost foreign to her compared to going to church.  Going to church bridged all of the gaps, and it's like now, I'm going to Grambling, but it's also I'm going to Grambling because of church.  Not so much that they pursue the education, but it was more about church.
Speaker 1: So, it's safe to say that as things are progressing, that you're having mixed emotions?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And I think that's why I left campus. Because, and this'll show you sometime how, the first night I was at Grambling, in some ways was the longest night of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--
Speaker 1: --talk about that.
Speaker 2: It was the first time I had ever stayed away from either relatives or something overnight.
Speaker 1: Let's discuss that.  Prior to that, so now you've got your trunk and all your stuff together and you, and your mom drove you there?  How did you get to Grambling, how did you get to where you were going?
Speaker 2: I think my mother and my stepdad [Edward Archie] drove me there, yes.
Speaker 1: So you got all your things together and now Willie's [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] going to Grambling.  They go, they take you, they've seen the campus?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You see it for the first time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have any pre-visits before then?
Speaker 2: I had no pre-visits.  And the coach had invited me but I was kind of, as I said, I had a good part-time job at the time.  And I was almost too busy to go if you really wanna know the facts.  But we go there and I remember, if I'm not mistaken, I could be, that might have been the first time I had been on a college campus.  I mean, involved, maybe if I'd have been before, it was just--but this was the first time that I had been on a college campus.
Speaker 1: So, we have two firsts.  We have first time on a campus and first time away from relatives.  Your first overnight solo stay, correct?
Speaker 2: That is correct, and I'm thinking it's really--and I'm the only--and it's really interesting because my two roommates, they were from New Orleans [Louisiana].  So, there was kind of some camaraderie there.  And it's almost like, every other situation that--where there were individuals from the same city or something the same.  So there was kind of like a camaraderie.  I felt that I didn't know another person from anywhere.  And I remember that night and my roommates are having fun in the room and everything.  And I'm trying to think, gee, you know, what is it gonna be for me?  And I remember when I went to sleep that night, I--or when I tried to go to sleep, I just couldn't fancy myself ever making, ever bridging that gap to where I had friends, having fun and everything else.  And I go, if I was at Arkansas A&M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], I said, at least I'd be there with three other guys.  You know, like these guys, I would know somebody.  So at least we'd have a friendship, it'd be collegial.
Story_ID: 443900
Speaker 1: --When I left Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] later that week on the milk run to Shreveport [Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it was later that week that that actually occurred?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Before we get to that, was Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson], had you seen him yet?  Had you met him?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, this was maybe like on a Saturday.  And I see Coach and so, it's the following Friday, I believe, that I take the milk truck.  So, I'd been there a whole week.  In fact, it was really interesting because I remember seeing the milk truck and asked the question about where they were from and it's Shreveport, so.  And that starting to play in my plan, I'm gonna, that's how I'm gonna get out of here.  And I just, I don't know.
Speaker 2: So, about a week passed.  Had you been working out with the team?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  And you know, it's interesting in a situation like that because everybody is trying to reach out to you, and the coaching staff.  And everybody else, you almost feel a competitiveness about.  You get out and you kind of get your running and you're the fastest lineman they've got.  And you got them, woo, you know, who's he?  So, never necessarily with a positive, it's just like, you know, almost like I dare somebody to come in and do that.  So, the first reaction was not to think of this thing as being friendly.  Not to be engaging from the standpoint of inviting you in.  It was foreign feeling.
Speaker 2: How about Coach Robinson?
Speaker 1: Oh, Coach Robinson.  That's one of the things, God bless his soul.  You know, I said, here's a man that, maybe in some ways, his greatest contribution to black colleges [HBCUs] and black athletes was his absolute commitment to make you feel at home, to make you feel like you could get your education, that you could go forward in life and be somebody as he would say.  And so, he was definitely, every night he was coming through the dormitory after practice and everything else, saying, "Hey, how you doing?"  And actually I didn't let on to him that I was struggling.  Which is kind of interesting because probably if I'd said something, he never would have let me leave campus because he'd had--.  But I don't know, it was a struggle that I was having that I just didn't invite anybody else.  I didn't even call my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] and tell her I was coming home.
Speaker 2: I've heard others say that Coach Robinson was almost fatherly.  Would you--
Speaker 1: No question in my mind.  You know, that's why I said, to me, considering all the other possibilities absolutely there's no question in my mind going to Grambling was absolutely the best decision for me.  And it was the best decision for me because of Coach Robinson and what he did for me in the final analysis to make me feel a great part of Grambling, to make me.  Coach Robinson became my second--became my father.  He absolutely made you feel like there was nothing too small or too big to take to him if you had a problem.  I mean, from then on, I tell you, I relied on Coach Robinson almost too much.
Story_ID: 443901
Speaker 1: So, here you are now.  You're on campus and as we would say, that you're having mixed emotions about it.  You're planning your, I'll call it, your escape.  So, you found a milk truck, you said.  Someone's that going to Shreveport [Louisiana] and you approach this person and ask to ride?  Or did you just hop in the back of it?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: No, I asked him if I could get a ride to Shreveport.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you met at a certain location whatever.
Speaker 2: Yes.  When he was leaving campus.
Speaker 1: Now, did the other students see you?  What happened with that?  How did they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I figured that's how the coaches got alerted that I--they saw me take my little grips out to the milk truck.
Speaker 1: So, how far did you make it off of campus?  Did you really get off of campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got all the way to Shreveport.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I got there, one of the assistant coaches was there at the bus station.
Speaker 1: He beat you there.
Speaker 2: He beat me there (laughter).  And he said, "Where you going, Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis]?"  And I said, "I wanna go home." (Laughter) And he says, "Willie, Coach [Eddie Robinson] said is there something wrong?"  I said, "No, I just wanna go home."  He said, "Well, you gotta do me a favor.  You gotta go back to campus and at least talk to Coach again."  I went back to campus and I talked with Coach Robinson.  And it was the most endearing conversation I ever had in my life.  He said to me everything about what I could be, what was important to me.  He even went--that was when I really--he talked to me about my family.  And he said, "What is it important for you to do with your family?"  And I told him about my promise I had to my mother [Nodie Allen Archie] and how I wanted to help her with my sister [Lurenia Davis Bratton] and brother [Alcus Davis].  And he says, "Willie, right now you can do that and you can do more.  By just staying here [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], getting an education.  And I promise you that you'll get a job and everything else."  He said, "I wanna see you every day for the next week or so until you're more comfortable."  'Cause by then I'm telling him that I just didn't feel at home there.  Everything was strange to me.  He understood and he told me, he said, "Look," he says, "Willie, we're depending on you being one of our great players."  I never forget when I got that, when at one of the banquets, he said, "A guy that had a tough time in some ways in his early beginnings here, but he turned out to be one of our greatest, if not greatest players."  And I never forget and I'm looking at him and he said to me, "And I mean every word of it," when he sat down.
Story_ID: 443902
Speaker 1: It was really interesting because I went from that, I started all the games as a freshman and played every game from that through a senior.  I became defensive captain my junior year and just--.  It was so interesting because the other thing he asked me, so it was pretty obvious that Coach Robinson [Eddie Robinson] had been through this before, he asked me, "Have you met any young lady yet?" (Laughter) And I said no.  And he said, "Well, you just got to make yourself at home here."  And he said, "Go over to the student center."  And the first night I went to the student center, I met a young lady that I dated for four years and even beyond named Pearl Andrews [ph.].  And she was absolutely--her name was Pearl Thompson [ph.] then, she's Pearl Andrews now.  She was--should have married her.  She was--we were almost like meant for each other. It was kind of crazy and I think we would have been--her family, it was one of these things that was interesting, her family felt that they had made a great sacrifice to send her to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And they wanted her to get out and work awhile before she got married.  Kind of repay us, if you will.  I was drafted by Cleveland [Cleveland Browns], then I go into the [U.S.] military, get out and we, the relationship just kind of broke down.  But maybe one of the first persons I truly loved, I mean, of the opposite sex.
Story_ID: 443903
Speaker 1: --Like to talk about, you're getting acclimated now to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  You're acclimated to what's going on, you're becoming one of the people.  You're one of the stars around there, you're captain of the defensive squad.  You're doing all these things, you and Pearl [Pearl Thompson Andrews (ph.)] are an item now at this point.  Things are going good for you.  You're getting towards your senior year.  Eddie Robinson is your coach, one of the greatest coaches of all time.  So, you're in a good place now.  Could you tell us, are there any anecdotes, any big things that--I'm sure he said many things.  Are there any one or two things that you can share that Eddie Robinson said that definitely made you see life as you see it now even?
Speaker 2: You know, you're right, and I wish that I could probably think of something very specific.  But he (pause), it's like the nicknames they gave me was kind of interesting.  Because I was Big Dave, I was the Bumper, I was names that had some significance from something that had happened on the football field.  But it was really interesting because I never left campus through summer school and everything else after my sophomore year.  When I came back my sophomore year, I stayed there the whole year round my junior year and then, of course, my senior year.  And what I say was so crazy about that.  I got, I fell in love with Grambling and the whole situation, so that I didn't even go home.  I mean, you know, even at the regular breaks and stay.  It was just, Grambling became one of the most endearing places that I'd ever been in my life.
Speaker 1: How'd your mother [Nodie Allen Archie] feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, she was--I would go home to see her sometimes on the weekends or whatever.  So it wasn't so much about seeing her.  That she probably could have felt any reason to feel slighted.  Because I would call her, I would talk to her, I would go home when I thought it was time for me to go.  So, it never interfered with our relationship at all.
Story_ID: 443540
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], the year is about 1956 now. You're getting ready to graduate from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], and there are offers coming around now.
Speaker 2: After one of the greatest games we probably ever played, we were crowned the mythical like champions of the country.  We beat Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] in what they call the Hollywood Bowl [sic. Orange Blossom Classic] or something down in Florida.  I never will forget this as long as I live.  The paper in Florida had the next day Paul Brown, the everything coach of the Cleveland Browns, came to Florida to see--or was in Florida and he came to see the game.  It said he came to see Willie Galimore and a guy by the name of Adolphus Frazier [Al Frazier], and he went away talking about Willie Davis and Ed Murray [Edward Murray], which was my teammate at Grambling.  I guess I had credit for about twenty-seven tackles that night and, you know, just one of those crazy nights where everything worked for me.  And probably was really my entree into the National Football League [NFL].
Speaker 1: So, did you flash back over your career at Grambling that night?  Did everything flash over for you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, yeah, I--well, what had been interesting is we stopped on the way down to Florida, and their running back, Adolphus Frazier, said, "Well, hey you guys."  We ate dinner on campus and he said, "Well, you guys, you better touch me now because you won't see me in the game."  You know, I'm always up for a challenge. And when he said--what I remember from that game probably will stick with me for as long as I--what I remember about that game.  I hit Frazier and knocked him out of his shoes, up out of his shoes.  And I looked at him and said, "Well, is this you?"  (Laughter) It was a night.  Murray ran for about three or four touchdowns and it was our great moment.  It's so interesting because as I've said to many people today, I have been very fortunate to play on teams that won the championship at every level I ever played, and the other one that I was either captain or defensive captain of every team, including the Green Bay Packers.
Speaker 1: Since junior high school?
Speaker 2: Since junior high.  I say it all the time, not to brag, but I say it as an example of leadership that I think I have been blessed with all my life.  Through every year in football and through today in dealing with the corporate world.
Story_ID: 443541
Speaker 1: So, in '56 [1956], you've won this big game, things are really great now and the Cleveland Browns coach [Paul Brown] was there.  He thought he came to see someone else but he left saying your name. You and Murray [Edward Murray].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's '56 [1956] and the draft's coming up now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I get drafted and what I was--at that time, if you were going on today's terms, you'd say what in the world--at that time they had thirty-plus drafts.  Now they have seven rounds of drafts.  I was the seventeenth draft choice for the Green Bay Packers [sic.].
Speaker 1: Close to the middle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Bart Starr, there are about three of us, that was taken in the seventeenth round that got announced as, well, that seventeenth round was special.  But, yeah, I was the seventeenth draft choice and it was really strange because I had a team pursuing me from Canada probably much more aggressively than the Browns.  But it was really interesting when I went to the coach [Eddie Robinson] and said, "Coach, here's the situation."  He said, "Oh, you got to go to Cleveland."  What it would mean to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and what it would mean to the school.  And the next day, I'm sitting in the president's office at Grambling, then Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones, and he's telling me I had to go to Cleveland.  So, I ended up at Cleveland and which was not--it was almost Grambling all over again.  I'm here with these guys from these big name schools and I'm listening every day to something that's kind of strange.  And I remember that I called the coach and he said, "Well, how is it going, Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis]?"  And I said, "Well, Coach, I don't know."  I said, "This is kind of a tough place."  And he said, "Well."  And I said, "You know what is so strange to me, Coach.  Kind of every day, people are saying to me, 'Where are you from?  And where's Grambling?'"  I said, "You know, I feel like I--."  He said, "Well,"  I never will forget what he told me and I'm just thankful of how it resonated with me.  He said, "Well, Willie."  He said, "You have shown 'em and you'll tell 'em and they won't forget it about what's Grambling."  So, it's every day almost I go on the field and I'm going out there with this purpose.  You'll know Grambling, you'll--and I won't have to tell you anymore and you won't forget it.
Speaker 1: So, it's '56 [1956], you got drafted with Bart Starr and some others in the seventeenth round.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was the feeling of being drafted then more a feeling of pride for Grambling?  Was it a monetary--were you happy to be a professional football player?  What was your--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no question there.  It was pride, just being drafted.  And it was equal pride of being drafted from Grambling.  I was the second player ever to be drafted from Grambling at that time.  Tank, Paul "Tank" Younger was the first.  And it's interesting because as I went on to other things, it was the first time ever for black colleges when I made, when I was inducted in the Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio].  I was the first player that was inducted and had attended a black college [HBCU].  So, my life has almost been like an unbelievable thing.  And God knows, I feel blessed, I feel lucky and I feel all those things.  But, behind it all, I have always had this unbelievable thirst, this determination.  And if you wanna engage me, just give me a chance to be competitive.  So, that's kind of my life in a small dimension.  I mean I will feel challenged by anything I'm remotely interested in and you challenge me to show that I can do it.
Story_ID: 443542
Speaker 1: The beauty of this is, '56 [1956], you're getting drafted by the Cleveland Browns, something else occurs with the [U.S.] Armed Forces.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm in Cleveland [Ohio] and I come off the camp- I'm off the training thing with and I'm with Paul, see, Paul Brown.  Well, the worst thing, I'm thinking, you're out of here for another reason.  And I go in and talk with him and he says, "Well, your board, your draft board has, I understand, has told you had to report."  And I said, "Yeah."  I don't know, I guess I was trying to forget it in some ways.  They were--and Paul Brown had tried himself to see what he could do.  And they said, "Absolutely no, he's got to go."  So, I went to, left camp to go into the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Was this a common occurrence at that time, that people--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you were being drafted.  I had been deferred twice while I was in college.
Speaker 1: So, this time it was time to go?
Speaker 2: That's exactly what the local board said.  That you have had two deferments, now you gotta go.  So, I said okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you go in.  Is it disappointment, are you really upset?  Were you able to play ball in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: I did.  I played one year, and it's really interesting because I played out at Colorado Springs [Colorado] at Fort Carson.  And here again, we win the service championship played at the Satellite Bowl.  And a teammate of mine was later a teammate of mine at Green Bay [Green Bay Packers] for eleven years.  It was Forrest Gregg, he was on the team and we were co-captains of the team.  So, it was fond memories of locking into that kind of situation.
Speaker 1: Now besides football, what else did you do in the Army?  Because you graduated with a degree from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] in--a B.S. in, what major, was your major?
Speaker 2: I was in math and industrial arts.
Speaker 1: So, you had that degree behind your name as you went into the Army.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what did you do in the Army besides football?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it's been so many years probably nobody even care.  But one of the things, that initially almost had some hiccups about it, was that I had been pulled out of my group at Fort Carson and I play- I mean Fort Ord [California], and I played two games there before they somehow rushed us out of there.  Because it kind of--somebody had complained that football players (laughter) were being pulled out and given special privileges if you will. So, I get out of Fort Ord almost overnight and I get shipped to Detroit [Michigan] to a missile outfit.  And I'm saying, well I don't know what I do from here or whatever.  And it just so happened a guy, a gentleman there, was a great Cleveland fan and ultimately they got me out to Colorado before the next season.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So, you got a chance to play football in the Army?
Speaker 2: Yes.	In '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Of course, they all knew you were a Cleveland Brown, so to speak right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So was there any other, besides the treatment of playing ball for them, was there any other view of you?  Or were you held out in higher esteem in the Army because of your--
Speaker 2: Well, it's really interesting because when you're in the service and if you're from a pro team, there's almost like, they think that you're almost something special.  And it was really, in many ways, I felt a sense of being more special in the service than maybe even some of the other places I'd been.  Because like I worked at a special service facility and half the people like they would come in there and, "Hey, I understand you're a professional player."  And I hadn't even played and I say, "No, I'm on the Cleveland team but--."  But there's a great respect from the military as it relates to football.  Sometimes, I think, it's because of how the game is played.  When the four of us went to Vietnam to visit the troops, I couldn't tell you--that was Johnny Unitas, Frank Gifford and Sam [Sam Huff].  I could not tell you how much the people seemed to appreciate us and how they just couldn't stop asking you questions--
Story_ID: 443543
Speaker 1: So, you do two years in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And those are two productive, didn't seem too challenged, it did seem like you had a decent time there.  Tell us about going back to Cleveland [Cleveland Browns].
Speaker 2: Well, I go back to Cleveland, and I am in training camp, and now I have bulked up from 220 [pounds] to about 245 [pounds] and truly probably had enhanced my chances of making the team by some extent.  I was still committed that this little guy from Grambling College [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] was going to make the Cleveland Browns.  And every day I went to practice, I probably thought about that a little bit. In everything I tried to do, I tried to do it a little bit better.  Because I said, to be equal wouldn't be good enough.  That in the final analysis I was going to have to be viewed as being better.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be about 1958 when you returned to Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], late '57 [1957]. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], so you--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I take that back.  It's in mid-'58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay, mid-'58 [1958].  So you stay in Cleveland [Ohio] for a while.  Now, and you're playing there, how's your seasons there in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Well, the first year I was there, we were, played the Giants [New York Giants] in a playoff game.  Cleveland was in a, very much of a transition.  They were in a transition from the Bill Willis to Marion Motley to Len Ford.  I mean, names that had clearly been the names as far as black athletes were concerned.  I found myself kind of odd.  You're on the team but you see a Marion Motley, you see a Lenny Ford, you see a Bill Willis and folks.  (Laughter) I never forgot, I'm saying mister in a way.  And they're, "Hey, don't say mister to me."  I'm going, "Well, you (unclear)."  It was a respect thing.  But I really felt special when I made the team.
Speaker 1: So, what position were you playing at that time?
Speaker 2: I was playing--and this was the other thing that even to this day a lot of people don't know.  Because you get traded, you see things like second year kind of nobody and if you will.  But you know the truth of it is, my first year, I started ten games for the Cleveland Browns a defensive end.  I went in, in the very first game of the season against Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh Steelers], I'll never forget, I went in the second quarter and played the rest of the game and started the next ten games.  What was also interesting about that, the next year I played half the season and then I started and played three games both ways, offense and defense.  It was just, it was, it almost seems unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Those are two very different positions.
Speaker 2: And you know, it was interesting, and I'll just say this very quickly.  The Cleveland Browns, they gave everybody this test every year and, whether you were offense or defense, you had to take this test.  That kind of was part of whether you made the team, if you will.  And I remember, I took this test and we go to the meeting, the next meeting.  Paul Brown said he wanted to see me.  Now every time the head coach wants to see you, you think it's--your first reaction is--he absolutely couldn't believe that I scored as well as I did on the test.  I had the second highest score on the test.  He was almost fascinated by that, almost to the very end.  And he started calling me UNIVAC [Universal Automatic Computer] (laughter).  That was the name that he--.  And that kind of--it was almost like every day something was happening to me that would make me a little more part of the team.  So, when I got traded to Green Bay [Green Bay Packers] in 1960, I was the most disappointed guy in the world.  Because I had been signed two weeks before that and had been told that I was gonna be the starting left offensive tackle for the Cleveland Browns.
Story_ID: 443544
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about 1960, the Green Bay Packers trade, what was the cause or the reason?  They just decided it as a business decision?
Speaker 2: Well, you know that's when Dallas [Dallas Cowboys] expanded.  Dallas took Nate Borden from Green Bay and they also took a guy by the name of Bill Howton [Billy Howton] from Cleveland [Cleveland Browns].  Well, supposedly, the trade was a need trade.  Green Bay needed a defensive end, Cleveland needed an offensive end.  So, I went from Cleveland to Green Bay for an offensive receiver called A.D. Williams.
Speaker 1: So, you went to--you're on your way now to Green Bay.  Now, seems like this is very uncanny, but now you get to be under the coaching of Vince Lombardi.  Considered one of the most prolific coaches ever in the history of modern football.
Speaker 2: You know I've said many times that I had to be the luckiest guy in the world because I had one of the greatest college coaches in Eddie Robinson, one of the greatest football technicians, strategists in Paul Brown, and one of the absolute best coaches in every aspects of the game, Vince Lombardi.
Speaker 1: Vince Lombardi, 1960, Green Bay Packers.  Can you tell us how this is occurring?  Now you're going to Green Bay, you're going to Wisconsin, from Cleveland, from Ohio.  The year is 1960.
Speaker 2: And I should tell you that part of the time that I was at Green--at Cleveland, they would say, if you kind of was goofing up a little bit, they would say, "Hey, we can always send you to Green Bay."  Green Bay was considered the Siberia of football.  Nobody wanted to go there.  It was almost like a terrible place to most of the people who were playing elsewhere, especially Cleveland.  And when I get traded there--this is early, I'd never dealt with business deals, I didn't know you do things like that.  All I know, I was crushed.  This was absolutely one of the most devastating.  I called Canada right away.  Because I heard that I had been traded on the radio station when I was driving from a substitute teaching position on the west side of Cleveland.  I should have known then the greatness of Coach Lombardi when I talked with him on the telephone.  Because he absolutely took me from believing that Green Bay was not necessarily the Siberia of football.  And that most of all, that we were going to win and we were gonna win and we were gonna win.
Story_ID: 443545
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's back up a moment if you don't mind.  You just said substitute teachers.  So, back in those days, players had to have two jobs sometimes?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I mean, you're talking a player like myself with eighty-five hundred bucks [dollars] or something for the season.  You had to have a second job.  If not, you surely couldn't save anything from year to year.  You had to have a second job.
Speaker 1: So, it's not like it is today?
Speaker 2: Aw, no.  And that's why I think so many players right now that are hurt and injured and everything.  That's why they're having a tough time right now accepting what exists in the league [National Football League] now.  Players are making the millions and the pension is over-funded and everything.  And yet you got a lot of players out here that's injured and everything else.  It's a sad thing.  And I think the thing that makes it sadder is the fact that this league was built partly on the shoulders of these individuals.
Story_ID: 443546
Speaker 1: Now, let's move forward to Green Bay [Green Bay Packers].  So, you talked to Vince Lombardi.  He kind of consoles you in the choices that this is not the worst place in the world.  And you're on your way now to Green Bay [Wisconsin].  You've decided now or are you still ambivalent about it?
Speaker 2: No, by the time that I got on the road driving.   Because this was like in July or early July and this is now in August that I'm starting to--never been to Wisconsin in my life.  And I'm driving down, never forget it, Highway 57 [Wisconsin Highway 57] and I see something coming acr- you know, you just look and you see something and it's moving.  And I notice it's a load of hay on a thing.  And I'm looking and the thing is coming and we are definitely seem like we--well just to have you know, this tractor, with all this hay on it, never stopped, came right across the road.  I ran off the road and everything else to miss it.  I said to myself, "Oh my god, going to Gr- and I'm on my way to Green Bay."  But I got there and I never will forget, Coach Lombardi he walked in and he looked at me and he said, "Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis]?"  And I said, "Yeah, Coach."  He said, "How much was your salary at Cleveland [Cleveland Browns] last year?  How much are they paying you?"  I said, "$8500, Coach."  And he said to me, "Well, you got a thousand dollars before you on the field."  And you know a thousand dollars in today's events would almost be like a tip or something.  And I remember looking at him and I'm saying here's a man giving me a thousand dollar increase.  And that was back when a thousand dollars was money.  And I'm saying, I've never played a down for him, I've never done one thing but he's telling me I got a thousand bucks [dollars] more.  I was about ready to say to him, "Where's the field, Coach?  Because you got me."  And from that moment, I was saying I was a Green Bay Packer to the hilt.
Speaker 1: Now you're there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Green Bay in 1960.  Now, the record stands for itself.  You were there twelve years.  And I know that it's going to be hard to put into a synopsis of everything but who were some of the players that were there that we might know while you were doing your--
Speaker 2: Let me say, I played twelve years but I was at Green Bay then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, they had something in the papers several years ago.  There were fourteen of us that played together for at least eight years, and which would be unheard of today.
Story_ID: 443904
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in Green Bay [Wisconsin] now under the great Vince Lombardi.  You're there, now can you give us some highlights or, maybe first of all, anecdotes of Vince Lombardi.  Anything that he did or said that really shaped you into your maturity as a player and a person?
Speaker 2: There are so many Lombardi quotes, starting with, "How you play this game is a reflection of how you'll live the rest of your life."  Something that resonates with me almost every day now in business.  And I think Coach Lombardi said this was the example that we had to somehow live through.  And, I tell you, that one in particular because he indeed hit something when he said the way you play this game is the way you'll live the rest of your life in some ways.  But the Green Bay Packer [Green Bay Packers] situation was just a great experience to me.  Today there're eight players off of that team that's in the Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio], and with Lombardi, nine people.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of those, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, it's Jimmy Taylor [Jim Taylor], Bart Starr, Forrest Gregg, Jim Ringo, Herb Adderley, Willie Wood, Ray Nitschke and Henry Jordan and--
Speaker 1: --and Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis].
Speaker 2: Yes, and Willie Davis.  One of the proudest moments of my life.  Never will forget it.  I'm in Canton, Ohio and I'm standing up there being introduced by Coach Eddie Robinson.  The situation was emotional, and I look out at my mother [Nodie Allen Archie].  It was the last event, big event she saw in my life. And I'm thinking and I remember I looked out and I said, "Mom, this is a long way from Texarkana, and no one ever assured us that we were on the right road, but today (laughter) it was the right road."  And at that, she blew up.  And you're up there and they've already taken bets on whether you can get through it without breaking down.  And I said, when I saw that, I said, "Aw, they got me."
Speaker 1: That's beautiful.
Speaker 2: But it was absolute one of the greatest moments in my life.  Being inducted into the Hall of Fame is a personal achievement but what I resonate well with is the six championship games we played at Green Bay, and we were five times world champions, including the last team that win three consecutive championships.  All of those things to me, I look at now and say, you know, and the thought that somehow in your mind the first thing Green Bay was gonna be was your downfall.  So, you never know in life, and I said, the best thing I've ever done in my life is to try to make the best out of every situation where you have an opportunity.  Because you never know.
Story_ID: 443905
Speaker 1: Now it seems to me that you were quite the multitasker prior to the word being popular.  You--while you were there getting championships and winning, you were also going to school at the same time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know I sometimes admit that but it almost is said, was he crazy?  Because I tell you, not only did I go to school but I chose to pursue my M.B.A. from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Who really, probably beyond Jay Berwanger, the first Heisman Trophy winner, they probably don't know much about football in today's world.  Yet I would say, once I kind of found my way there and very quickly decided that it probably was a mistake.  And I would say to you, the one thing that probably sustained, made me sustain myself at Chicago was one day I called Coach Lombardi [Vince Lombardi].  I had played in the all-star game out here and I got back to Chicago [Illinois] about three o'clock that morning.  I had an eight o'clock class because I always registered early.  And I go to that class and got to tell you, Jacques [Jacques Lesure], I never, I don't think I've ever sit through a class or lecture which I didn't understand anything the guy said.  And I remember when I got outta class and I went home and I said to Coach, "Coach, when I started out in football and everything else, I just, I didn't know that it was gonna turn out as well as it probably has.  And I didn't know this," and I said, "I think I'm gonna drop out of the University of Chicago."  So help me, there was about a ten minute silence and he said to me, "The Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] I know has never quit at anything, so help me."  When he said that, it's almost like I start scrambling for my books again.  Because I said, hey, I got to do it now.  I got to do it now.  And you know what was really interesting, I went from that point where I was probably almost a candidate for probably just sliding through and I, my last two quarters at the university, I was on the dean's list.  Which in my mi- to me personally, was one of the greatest achievements that I ever had equal to anything I ever did on the athletic field.
Speaker 1: Here's a defensive end for the Green Bay Packers walking around in the hallowed halls of the University of Chicago M.B.A. program.  University--in the M.B.A. program.  What was the tone like in the school as you went into your classes and your other professors?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And you know the way you describe it probably adds another dimension.  But it was so interesting because you're absolutely right, the Milton Friedmans [Milton Friedman], the George Stigler and people like this who were world known, and Ketchum [Marshall D. Ketchum], and in accounting.  It was really interesting and I'll always remember this.  Milton Friedman invited me to have lunch one day with the continuing education.  In fact, I had that privilege maybe a half dozen times.  What I remember most is that he--you go there and you had these placemats--and what I remember most he used the four placemats they had at the table and he was explaining to me a theory about why he thought the game could even have some other aspects to it.  I probably didn't understand it but it's Milton Friedman and he was just, he was almost a football nut.  And boy, what a--I mean, he could make you believe the world was bigger than you ever anticipated.
Story_ID: 443906
Speaker 1: Did you share any of his theories with the other players when you went back?  Some of the ideas and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, we were talking about it--you know, one of the names that I had when I retired, the name I still get is Dr. Feelgood.  While the players had attached the Dr. Feelgood for another reason, Coach Lombardi [Vince Lombardi] always thought it was related to the (laughter) university.  So, I can say to you that the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] today, today, as I look at seventy-three years old and I say what's been the most important thing to me over the last twenty, twenty-five years has been the fact that I did attend the university, that I do believe that if there's a fair chance of succeeding at anything that I choose to go into, I have a chance.  And I have found that to be very real and I wouldn't--you know, I'm asked a lot when I go out to speak to young people.  And they've ask me, well gee, if you were living your life what would you do different?  And I can tell you right now, I've thought about it and I've been very honest with them.  Some of the time, I've looked in their face, other times, I've said, "You know it might sound strange, but there's very little I would ever attempt to do different in my life."  Because I feel especially blessed and as I had the opportunity to be elected on boards and things, I've thought about.  Because people say, "Gee, why do you think Dow Chemical [Dow Chemical Company], why do you think American Express [American Express Company] or Fireman's Fund [Fireman's Fund Insurance Company]--?"  And you know, I said, well, you know what they're thinking.  It's the athletic ring, the Green Bay [Green Bay Packers].  I sometimes, I just say, "Well, I did also get my M.B.A. from the University of Chicago."  I remember when I was on the Schlitz [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] board and I looked and I'm sitting in the room with thirteen people.  And I go out and somebody says, "Why do you think they elected you on the board?"  And I said, "Well, I don't know." I said, "But you know if you really look, I have a more substantial degree than anybody in the room."  I don't try to use it in any way beyond what, hopefully, is--I'm just being honest with myself.
Story_ID: 443907
Speaker 1: So, in '68 [1968], you got your M.B.A. from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  You're still, and you're one year out of retirement from the Green Bay Packers.  What, are you thinking about retiring at this point now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played another year because my old coach, Phil Bengtson, got elevated to head coach and he asked me to play another year.  And I felt a real obligation to do that.  Actually I played '69 [1969] and retired in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, you had, at that point, had you--what business venture did you have going?  What kind, as we say, simultaneously while this was all occurring.  You're getting ready to retire, you're getting your M.B.A.  I recall that you had some business venture that you had started.
Speaker 2: You know what happened.  Back in Cleveland [Ohio], believe it or not, I worked for a brewery in the offseason in the State of Ohio.  They were so pleased with my work that they told a guy at Schlitz [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] about it.  So, I got offered a job at Schlitz in '63 [1963] and moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And that's when I started to go to the University of Chicago.  It was, what was interesting about it too, is that Schlitz put me on their year-round payroll and it paid a minimal sum but it was probably the difference in my being able to go to school and not having to spend that time in a second job.
Speaker 1: So, you worked at Schlitz and when you retired, you're now going into a new direction with them.  What reason was--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  When I had announced a week, two weeks the year was over that '69 [1969] was going to be my last season.  Well, I got a call the week later from Schlitz saying, when I was part of a study group with the branches and everything trying to determine what the company should do, I made some reference that if Watts [Los Angeles, California] was ever, the branch they had there, that was for sale, I would be.  I'll tell you right now, I was kidding, and as you can imagine Watts was probably considered the most undesirable place.  They asked me, was I serious?  And I was really taken back for a minute and I guess I said, "Well, I don't know."  They said, "Why don't you come in and talk to us about it?"  And I never will forget this as long as I live, the chairman of Schlitz at that time, Bob Uihlein [Robert Uihlein, Jr.] had said to me, "Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], if you want to do it, we're really thinking about offering you the opportunity."  And he said, "I tell you one other thing."  He said, "If you go there and the company is--and it doesn't work out for you," he says, "we'll buy it back and you can come back to work for the company."  Well, with that, it was almost like, "Yeah, here I come."  It's really interesting because I came out and took what was then one of ten wholesalerships in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] area and kind of Orange County [California].  And I (pause), I went from probably the lowest level as I think, probably.  But anyway, when I sold out of the business in '88 [1988], I was the largest Schlitz distributor on the West Coast.
Speaker 1: So, from '70 [1970] to '88 [1988] or '69 [1969] to '88 [1988]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you went from the lowest numbers to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the highest numbers.
Speaker 1: --to the highest numbers on the West Coast, in general.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: With your own bottling business.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 443908
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And during the '70s [1970s], you were also a color commentator, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I worked for NBC for actually seven seasons, well, football seasons.  It was a great experience for me but, frankly, it was really interesting because as you look today, many times you'll see guys who's been out five or six years.  They get kind of moved out and they move a new face in or something.  But it just all tended to coincide pretty well with me because by then I was on about a half dozen boards, I was getting asked almost--and it was more exciting for me to run my own beverage business, distribution company and to serve on these boards.  And I'll nev- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of those boards, if you don't mind?  Like the first one, I think you said that Fireman's Fund [Fireman's Fund Insurance Company] was the first one?
Speaker 2: Fireman's Fund was the first one.  I think Mattel toys [Mattel, Inc.] was second, Schlitz Brewing Company [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company], Kmart [Kmart Corporation], Dow Chemical Company, Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation], (pause) We Energies [Wisconsin Energy Corporation], that's in Wisconsin.  I was on the Strong Fund [Strong Opportunity Fund II, Inc.] board.  I was on--there were a lot, I don't know.  I can't tell you.
Speaker 1: Several boards.  Now--
Speaker 2: I was on, I served on a total of seventeen publicly traded company boards.  Obviously, not at one time.  But that's how many.
Speaker 1: Do you think your football career facilitated your board invitations for some reason?
Speaker 2: Aw yeah, I don't think there's any guess--oh, yeah, MGM Mirage [MGM Resorts International], I'm on their board right now.  There's no question that I would never look at anyone and say, "Did football probably help enhance your situation?"  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  In fact, I remember when I was pursuing my career in the business sense.  What I said on one interview, I said, "Sir, you got to know that when I was planning to step down from football, the one thing I wanted to be able to do is come out and say to you, do you remember Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis]?  But remember me now as the guy with the M.B.A. as equal to the guy who played fourteen, I mean, twelve years in the National Football League [NFL]."  I'm adding a couple.  You know what is interesting, the NFL has given me those two years credit.  So, it is fourteen years in my pension now as opposed to be sev- and that's why, I was surprised to find that out.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us some of your experiences of sitting on some of these boards?  Just not as a person that was put on as a player but having your M.B.A. and also just your experience to witness what it's like as an African American male on these boards.
Speaker 2: I will say to you this.  The first eight boards that I sat on, I was the first and the only black that served on those boards.  And you ask sometime, well, probably some of that was driven by football as a first awareness.  But I think the real invitation came when they discovered that I also had my--and you know, while I was playing football, this whole deal--I remember when I, when one person was interviewing me for a board.  They said, "I heard when you were retiring that you had also received your M.B.A. from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]."  And I said, "Boy any guy that comes out of there has got to be pretty special."  So, there's no question that that played a role in my life.  I think, and maybe I'll let this be one of my signatures in signing off.  I would say, Jacques [Jacques Lesure], I played two years in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Texarkana, Arkansas], I was captain of my team, I played four years in college [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], I was captain of my team, I played one year in service, I was captain of my team, I played those ten years in Green Bay [Wisconsin] and I was captain of my team [Green Bay Packers].  And you know, I look at that and my, I guess your first reaction, well you probably think of himself as being something special.  No, it's not about that.  I really believe that I was captain in each one of those situations because I showed the leadership and I performed as an individual example of what leadership is all about.
Story_ID: 443909
Speaker 1: So, with that leadership ability, you also went into some businesses with people like Tom Selleck?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Tom Selleck was in the distribution business for a short period of time.  Very interesting guy and I enjoyed it.  Coors [Coors Brewing Company] bought him out because he just--they wanted to use him in some advertising.  He didn't want it and he left the business.  But a very nice, I enjoyed Tom Selleck.
Speaker 1: You all did well with that.  You move into television and radio.  Can you tell us a bit about that?  Which is currently, your current--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just in radio.  I was in television for a short period of time with the Chicago Tribune.  Which seems to make the papers every day.  But actually [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Geraldo [Geraldo Rivera] and several other people, we owned the station in Atlanta [Georgia].  I mean it was just blowing the socks off the place when we sold it back to the Tribune.  And a station in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I truly enjoyed it, and I tell you, I met a guy for the first time that left a lifelong impression with me and that's Quincy Jones.  I tell you right now every time I hear or read or see something by Quincy Jones, inside I'm saying, "Boy, I mean that is Quincy Jones."  Very special guy, a very special guy.
Speaker 1: So, you've moved into the radio market now.  You own five stations now.  Around three in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], did you say?
Speaker 2: Three in Milwaukee and two in California.  One in Pasa- San Bernardino [California] and one in Temecula [California].
Story_ID: 443910
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you might want to tell us about future ventures or any parting thoughts that could really help the people that are watching this?  Especially the young people who will see this?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, Jerry Kramer who I played with and was my roommate at Green Bay [Green Bay Packers], he lives in Idaho now and a very, very dear friend.  In fact, I got a room at my house called the Jerry Kramer room.  I said to Jerry other day, I said, "You've been involved in a lot of things, Jerry.  Tell me, have you run out of mountains, is there something else?"  And we kind of laughed and he says, "Willie [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], I think you're asking me that question that I need to ask you."  And I said, "Well, Jerry, you're probably right."  I said, "But, you know, probably for the first time in my life, there's not an interesting mountain or hill to climb."  I said, "I just kind of wanna savor what has happened and I wanna thank God for every day that I lived to have allowed me to do that."
Story_ID: 443911
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community in general?  Your aspirations and hopes for--as a people?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you've just asked me a question that is far reaching with me.  I ask myself every day, what is going to be the outcome in the final analysis for African Americans?  I have a son [Duane Davis] and a daughter [Lori Davis] and I have a grandson.  In the radio business, I had initially said upon my death, I wanted the radio stations to be sold.  I can tell you today, I have changed my mind a bit to say, won't it be great if in the next couple generations at least there's a Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] offshoot of a family that owns radio stations.  So right now, I am planning for succession with my son and my grandsons and granddaughters.
Story_ID: 443912
Speaker 1: A last question to you is, how do you do want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Oh, that's a tough question.  How do I wanna be remembered?  If I could just get people to see me as the person I believe I am.  If they think of me as someone who cared a lot, someone who gave a lot, someone was very appreciative of everything that ever happened to him.  And maybe just in one word to say, a guy who felt blessed by all of his achievements.
