Story_ID: 111823
Speaker 1: We start by slating this; I introduce myself.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer back here is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: My name is Thelma Thomas Daley, D-A-L-E-Y.  It's T-H-E-L-M-A.  My middle name, which is really my maiden name that I use as my middle name is Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.  And my married name is Daley, D-A-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right and ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is June the 17th.  I was born in Anne Arundel County, just outside of Annapolis in Maryland.
Speaker 1: And can you please tell us what your occupation is.
Speaker 2: Well, really, I'm an educator.  I'm currently a college educator.  My field is counseling and, at the moment, I am a part-time professor at Loyola College [now Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland], serving as a counselor, educator in the graduate school.  My--most of my years have been serving as director of counseling for the Baltimore County Board of Education with directing the program in the 163 schools in Baltimore County; which is the horseshoe around Baltimore City.
Speaker 1: And you have been, just to know briefly, that you have been the President of Delta Sigma Theta; you've been president of quite a number of other organizations and you've had--I mean I don't know how you list all of them.  I've seen the lists and it's staggering.
Speaker 2: Well, I've been one of those persons, I've been fortunate to be national president of four national organizations which, I guess, is a bit unusual but it's not history- making but it is kind of--some people say, are you in politics and I said, well, really organizational politics because if you're in organizations, that is political.  But, I've broken some barriers in terms of organizations in terms of leadership roles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right--(simultaneous_--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Well, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  Is it July 22nd?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Today is July 22, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the moment, we are in the national headquarters of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP], where I serve on the staff.
Story_ID: 111824
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.  And the first one is--and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I, am I on TV now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food--seafood.  I love crabs and crabmeat and I'm in an area where you can get good seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't have a favorite color.  I like the tangerine families and I like the hot pink families.  And I love the tangerine families until somebody told me in calling me beautiful that winter people didn't do very well in orange and tangerine colors.  And do you know that's what I'm wearing today so I must look horrible.
Speaker 1: Well, that's not true.  Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is winter and spring.  I love winter.  I love it cold.  I love the snow and I love driving in the snow.  When everybody thinks I'm crazy, they'll call and say, did you go out today?  And I said--they said you didn't go out today did you?  And I said well, I think I did.  I love driving.  I love the challenge of driving in the snow.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I do not have a favorite vacation destination.  I just like the water for a vacation destination; something with water and something peaceful; something quiet but--mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right, now, ma'am, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have a favorite saying or phrase but I do have a favorite poet.  And I normally go to the works of Langston Hughes to look at something that always seems to hit whatever I want to say.  So I don't have a favorite phrase, but the lines from the works of Langston Hughes seem to hit me.  Also, are--from Georgia Douglas Johnson, who said, "Your world is as big as you make it."  And I do believe that your world is as big as you make it and I think that's so great, particularly for young people to say, your world is what you make it and it can be as big as you make it; and it looks like reaching the potential in--and widening the horizons.
Story_ID: 111825
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  Now I'm gonna ask you about your mother and your father and I'll start with your mother.  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Hattie Virginia Randall, R-A-N-D-A-L-L, Thomas.  And my father was Richard Garnet Thomas.
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm gonna ask you about them separately (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask you about one and then the other.  But--do you have your mother's birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Anne Arundel County in Maryland.  She was born in the early 1900s, before 1910.  I have to go back and check it exactly.  She was born in a family of two brothers and one sister.  And my mother's father, whom I remember, Grandpap, and his mother.  Grandpap's mother was a full-blooded Cherokee.  I remember seeing her as a little girl and I just have an image of her there.  And my grandfather owned his farm.  He had a farm of about 100, 150 acres in Anne Arundel County, which was very nice to have that many acres in his day, in an area outside of Annapolis [Maryland], which has now become a very, very high cost area to live in.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are there any stories that were passed down through your family about what your mother's side of the family about your mother's side of the family was doing before the end of slavery or even during Reconstruction at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard anybody in my family talk about slavery.  And I've never been able to trace my family into slavery, okay?  So that is not a history--that is not a history for me.  I've heard more stories, I guess, in terms of my father's side, where we used to sit and listen to stories and so forth, than on my mother's side, but I cannot trace anybody in my family on either side going back to the days of Civil War or to the days of slavery.  Nobody ever talked of anybody having been in bondage that way.
Speaker 1: Well, what about--do you know if they were free people of color in--during those days?
Speaker 2: All I know is that they were free people of color.  That's all I know is that they were free people of color.  I never heard of anybody who was not free.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there no stories from those days where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There no stories ever told to us as children, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well those were depressing days for both free people of color and slaves (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, mm-hmm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--you know prior to the Civil War with no citizenship and all that.  So I just thought there might be some stories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There aren't any fascinating stories.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 111826
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I met my grandfather.  My mother's mother died when my mother [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] was fourteen years of age, coming from church in a horse and buggy and died of a heart attack, okay.  And I can--I know the spot where my mother said she died because we spent many days on the farm which is very, very beautiful; beautiful cherry trees and apple trees and all those things and very pretty.  And the spot where she almost got to the house and died in her--a horse and the buggy there, okay?  My grandparents on my father's [Richard Thomas] side I knew very, very well.  My father--my grandfather was in business.  He owned his grocery store, was a funeral director and a minister.  My grandmother--my mother never worked outside of the home.  My grandmother never worked outside of the home.  My grandmother really was a teacher.  She was a religious teacher.  She was a Sunday school superintendent for more than twenty-five years--maybe fifty years.  She was a Sunday school superintendent.  I know she was president of the PTA [parent-teacher organization] for twenty-five consecutive years.
Speaker 1: What church denomination did she belong to?
Speaker 2: Methodist.
Speaker 1: Was it A.M.E.?
Speaker 2: No, United Methodist; United Methodist on both sides--United Methodist.  But originally, originally on my father's side, on my father's side, there were--some of them were originally Presbyterians, coming out of Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] and in some the textbooks, there are pictures of Mr. Jeremiah Swann [ph.] who was in our area and led the Presbyterian Church and also led the Presbyterian Academy.  There was an academy and my father's a graduate of the--of the academy--the Presbyterian Academy.  And after years, the Presbyterian church closed and the Methodist church took over, so I was really born into the Methodist denomination 'cause we were all--I say born into it because we all went to church, every Sunday--Sunday school, never missing, never missing, so.
Story_ID: 111827
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I just want to go back to your mother [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] again (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--what kind of personality did your mother have and what did she do?  You said she didn't work outside of the home but she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me tell--my mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--what was she like?
Speaker 2: And my mother died early.  Well I say early because she was the first major death in our family.  She died at age fifty-two of pancreatic cancer and it was a blow to all of us but my mother was very sweet; very sweet, very involved in the community, very active and very much involved in our family business and I'll talk about that later but a very energetic person; a person who was very attractive, I must say.  She had beautiful skin, beautiful long hair that she never pressed and she wore a size eight and ten, which I now wear eight and ten and we could really interchange our clothes--a sister and my mother and my sister and I could all wear the same size clothes, so. My mother was active in some of the clubs in the church.  And very--and active in the community and all of the people from the community used to come 'cause my mother loved to cook.  She would--we were talking about her yesterday.  She was an excellent cook.  She was an excellent winemaker and many people came to drink her wine and eat her chocolate cake, okay.  And she never turned anybody away.  She could also sew.  She could sew beautifully.  She could look at a pattern in a book and without that pattern, she would make it.  She could just make it, you see.  She even made our coats.  She was a very talented person.  In addition to that, she could even, if you say, make a chair or a bench, she could do that.  She was very, very talented in terms of crafts and so forth.  And she was not a college graduate.  Later, she went back and got her high school diploma, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she went to high school in Anne Arundel County [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to high school later and she went to--she finished by going to adult high school and finishing.  And she was so pleased when she did that--mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a reason that she didn't--she didn't go to high school when she was a teenager (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think the schools were that readily available and I don't think the parents really thought that the children should do that and many of them were self-taught and all those kinds of things and so education wasn't readily available, all right?  And I guess that was it.  But if you have--you can be very intelligent and you may not have book learning but you may be still learned and you have a desire and so you over--you really overcome whatever a barrier may have been for you.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I realize that some (unclear) didn't have a school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Story_ID: 111828
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story that she [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] tells about how, or that your father [Richard Thomas] tells about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They were living like five miles apart, so I don't know exactly how they met.  I would imagine this tall, handsome gentleman saw this tall, slender, beautiful young girl and I guess he was smitten by her.  I don't know; I never heard the story of how they really met, but they were not that far apart.  I would image that they met at some kind of a picnic or baseball game 'cause they--the men used to gather to play baseball and go to picnics and so forth and, not so much, the movies or something where we would meet somebody in a restaurant or hotel or something.  I imagine it was something like--it could even have been church.  But I don't know exactly.  I know my mother married early.
Speaker 1: Now how old was she when she married?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Twenty?  Yeah, around twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111829
Speaker 1: Now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Okay, there were six of us; four boys and two girls.  And I am the second from the oldest and, at the moment, my brother who is oldest is deceased.  And my sister is deceased, okay.  And our--all of us were offered an opportunity to go to school.  Everybody went on for some form of training except one brother who had a damaged eye early and I think that kind of deterred his wanting to keep on going to school but, but he's done very well--
Story_ID: 111830
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Richard Garnet Thomas, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, G-A-R-N-E-T.  I don't think there were two T's, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My father is deceased but I'll tell you about my father.  Okay, my father's always been in business and I (unclear) a little something on my father and he was honored a couple of times.  My father was--I guess always in transportation business 'cause my father was in trucking business.  And always had jobs--I can always remember growing up and there were always people at our house.  Nobody had to call to come to our house.  People were always there, white and black.  And that's what it was--white and black--because at that time, there were no Hispanics, no Asians around.  It was a black, white society.  And--but my father would always have work for men to do.  And even when some of the men got in trouble and may have had to go to jail overnight or something, my father would find a job for them, okay.  And the--in his business out--in trucking and marketing--and I'll come back--and later my father transferred from trucking to charter bus and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask about his early life and his development.  I mean, how did he get involved in all these businesses.  What was his educational background--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: His educational background was that he had finished the academy which was equivalent.  My father was so smart.  I imagined--he finished academy and the academy--I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What academy was this?
Speaker 2: It was a Swan [ph.] Presbyterian Academy, okay.  And if you look into some of the books I ran across--I ran across some books at Loyola [College, now Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] where Mr. Jeremiah Swan [ph.] played a major role.  He looks like Frederick Douglass, with all of the white hair and (unclear) at--he was a graduate of Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania], okay.  And my brothers ended up at Lincoln University.  The Swan Academy, I would imagine as equivalent to our high schools.  I guess they thought it was equivalent to our high schools.  My father could help us with the algebra and geometry and whatever else we wanted to be helped with but he had a strong business sense, okay.  And in something that was written up when he was honored by the Frontiers.  It was said that he started his business from a $100 loan from his father, which started him off on buying his first truck.
Speaker 1: Now what did his father do and--
Speaker 2: But that was my grandfather who was--had this grocery store, funeral director--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --And the minister and the pastor and the minister.
Speaker 1: Do you have an idea about how, how the family, you know, how your grandfather acquired that--all that--I mean that was a long time ago--
Speaker 2: I don't know but I don't--we have--everybody on both sides of my family had land.  We had--I don't know anybody who lived in a rented house.  We never lived in a rented house, okay.  There was always land in our family on both sides.
Speaker 1: There's not a story about how--how (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know how they got the land on both sides but, but my father's side and on my mother's [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] side.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know the reason why I asked 'cause it's so--it seems to be anomalist in some ways that black people, in those days, you know, I mean to acquire land and to be able to hold on to it is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we're still holding on to it because the children are holding on to it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: In those days, especially hard to hold onto some land with the country being--with rights being as--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --elusive as they were--
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) so that's why I asked, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't know those stories but if I were to go back and know all of the things I'd like to ask; and those are some of the questions I'd really like to ask my two aunts who are living--to go back and tell me those stories 'cause those are the things we, we really need to--we really need to know.
Story_ID: 111831
Speaker 1: Another clue I want to ask about--it may not lead anywhere but you said your father's [Richard Thomas] middle name is Garnet?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Could he be--have you ever heard of Henry Highland Garnet, the famous black minister and political leader of the 19th century, the contemporary of Frederick Douglas?  Is there--you think it's any connection to that one of our--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know if there's any connection to that or not.  I don't know.  My grandmother, Mary Martha Boston Brown Thomas--my grandmother was really half-white, okay.  My grandfather was very much African American.  In fact, I know one story where one family called them here is the Italian and the Ethiopian so (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Contrasting (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Contrasting the two of them, contrasting the two of them.  And my grandmother was born in Prince George's County, in the Mitchellville area, Queen Anne's and Mitchellville, which you know now is high-powered area, there, now.  Mm-hmm.  Okay.  But I don't know how they both--all I know is that we grew up being not rich, but secure.  Does that make sense to you?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Not rich, but secure, okay.  And not anywhere luxurious, but comfortable or halfway comfortable because our--well, you know, everybody had a home and it may not be like all of these large, large houses (laughter) that you see today but everybody had a home and later everybody improved on their homes.  And later, my father built a--I mean we were in a frame house first and later my father built a brick home and so that was the story.
Story_ID: 111832
Speaker 1: So your father [Richard Garnet Thomas] borrowed some money from his father [John H. Thomas] who was fairly well off from the funeral parlor and so forth and bought some--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--he was a funeral director.
Speaker 1: Funeral director?
Speaker 2: Now let me come back to that--so that's very interesting.  He was a funeral director so I didn't mean that he had a funeral parlor.  That's very fascinating 'cause we used to say, well, he's the funeral director.  He would direct the funerals.  And somebody else did the embalming and so forth.  Do you follow me there? So that was--and his fans were always in the church, John H. Thomas, funeral director in the churches and so forth.  But very interesting, he was a funeral director, okay, mm-hmmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and we remember our--I remember two, two old hearses being in the barn garage--the barn and they were old like and he wasn't using them when we saw them.  I don't think he was (laughter).  They were old.  I mean, I remember seeing these big ol' hearses, two of them in there, okay, alright.  I know he used to work with Mrs. Parker, who had a funeral parlor, I guess.  They used to work together but he used to direct the funeral and maybe when we were little children, maybe then he was doing it but I remember him going with Mrs. Parker, alright.  And I don't know if he ever did it with J. B. Johnson out of Annapolis [Maryland] or not but that was the story of my father--my grandfather being a funeral director and maybe somewhere in somebody's archives, there's some of those old fans with John H. Thomas, funeral director on them.
Story_ID: 111833
Speaker 1: Now what was your--your father [Richard Garnet Thomas] was obviously very industrious.
Speaker 2: Very industrious.
Speaker 1: And--but what was his personality like otherwise and, you know, what are some other things about him that you remember?
Speaker 2: About my father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: About my father--very business-oriented.  Very business-oriented, very much involved in--he was involved in politics in a general way, in politics; very much a Republican.  Many people came to seek his support when they were running--that's when I said there were people at our house, white and black, sitting at our dining room table drinking my mother's [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] wine and eating her cake and so forth.  He was never running for an office.  He had some appointments before his death but he was never running but he was--I guess black people weren't running, you know, there were supporting the white people.  He was very smart.  What was his personality like? Much like mine.  He was goal-oriented; very personable.  He could tell a lot of jokes.  He could tell a lot of jokes and had people laughing.  And he could meet people no matter who they were.  He could meet them.  I think my brother has some of that in him.  He was very involved in the church.  He was very much a leader in the church and a leader in the community, okay.  But his business sense was, I think far advanced for the era, very much so.  Shall I go on talking about my father--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --a little bit more 'cause I said he was in business and he moved from the whole thing of trucking into charter buses.  And--never big--just a family-oriented bus company--Thomas Motor Tours, which had about thirty-five to forty buses, beautiful charter buses going--chartering all over the country and see my father had to--before all of the deregulation--my father had to testify before FCC?--F--which one is it?  FTC? [sic, ICC, Interstate Commerce Commission]
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.  Federal Transportation Commission or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had to go to Washington several times to always testify to get rights.  And the rights would be granted from state to state, okay.
Speaker 1: I think it's the Federal Commerce Commission (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: ICC.
Speaker 1: Is that what it is?
Speaker 2: I guess it's ICC.  He was always--he always had to go to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Interstate Commerce Commission.
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was one of those persons testifying for rights and so forth; and winning and winning, okay.  And then there were other bus companies who would call and say I need to go to Canada, could I go under your license today.  And sometimes the people would do that, okay.  And so, so my father's buses had been, as far as Texas, as far as Florida, up to Canada, out to Chicago [Illinois] and so forth.  And for someone without a college education but very strong business sense, that's what my father did, okay.
Speaker 1: Then the issue, I guess, he raises as someone with--engaging in interstate travel was with the laws of--with the federal laws regarding how people are treated prevailed over the local discrimination laws in these southern states, I guess, where he travelled--'cause (unclear) (coughing)--that became the issue during the Freedom Rides, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause federal law prevailed on interstate travel or just local law prevails as you pass through those (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was carrying charter people and so they would stop where they could go and then, you know, later they could go anywhere so all of the trips to Disneyland [Anaheim, California] and all of the trips to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and all the trips to Niagara Falls [New York] and those kinds of places there.  So our house was really like a whatever, and then our house where we grew up was turned over and became the office--that became the--where I was--where we grew up as children became the office for my father.  The whole house became the office and so--and the drivers--and sometimes the drivers would have to sleep overnight so they could get up and leave like 3 or 4 o'clock in the morning and so forth--
Story_ID: 111834
Speaker 1: So that's a part of my life.  In addition to that, there was always the marketing aspect in my family (laughter).  Are you laughing at me now?
Speaker 2: No, (unclear).
Speaker 1: You're smiling.  There was the marketing aspect in my family and so--my mother [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomass] always--my mother was so industrious and she used to have a beautiful garden, gorgeous garden.  And she would get up so early in the morning.  What I remember as a child was lying in the bed hearing my mother sing and smelling the wonderful aroma of coffee going through the house and I can almost capture that now, to say how wonderful that would be.  And my mother would be up singing and that coffee would be going and then she would be out early in her beautiful garden, working her garden.  Well, here was--here was the other entrepreneur in the family--Thelma.  And she thought her mother's garden was so beautiful that--the little girl who put up her lemonade stand and now she's raised all this money--well, I put up this little stand by the side of the road for the people to come by and, and to sell my mother's corn--
Story_ID: 109999
Speaker 1: Okay, yes, we were talking about your lemonade stand.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't really have a lemonade stand, but I just thought something should be done with my mother's [Hattie Virginia Randall Thomas] beautiful corn and, and her tomatoes, and her cantaloupes.  And so I took my little crate and set up and lo-and-behold, the people started stopping by my, my goods.  And there was one--and I was just a little girl and there was one fellow used to come out in this gorgeous, gorgeous maroon car--I think his name was Dr. Deets [ph.].  I imagine it was a very rich man from Washington [D.C.] 'cause they would head toward the beaches.  And he would just sit when he first started buying from me, then he would just sit.  He wouldn't blow and he would just sit and wait until we'd look and I'd say oh, he's there waiting for me.  And he would see what I had for the day, but later on--I want to go to the marketing aspect of it and this is the first year, this is the first year when my brother--and we kinda convinced him, don't do it anymore, decided to close the market.  We've had market, a big market going in our family for all these years.  We moved our market to the north beach road, where all the traffic was going and I've handled so many watermelons and so many bananas and so many tomatoes and so many cantaloupes and I made so many friends, a whole family 'cause the people would always come looking for us, for all of these home grown vegetables.  Now they weren't all grown on our farm 'cause we couldn't do that.  But we would go to the eastern shore and other farms and so forth and so in our family for all these years, we've had a big market going, okay.  And so we've always been entrepreneurs, relating to people, our selling, marketing and also it required the whole thing of a persona so the people would come back, not just for the tomatoes but they came back because of your personality and you bought them back.  And so when other people had vacations as children, the Thomas kids didn't have vacations as children.  The Thomas kids were always on the market during the summer because it was the summer months when the markets were going, okay.  And then there was always the fun are--like somebody said to me recently said, watch her after an affair we had with the Coalition 100 Black Women, they said watch her count money.  Well, my father [Richard Garnet Thomas] taught us how to count the few dollars.  He could just count the dollars.  And I think we picked it up, to count the money, to count the money.  It wasn't thousands of dollars but if you count $500 or $600 or $700, that's, you know, that looked good to us as kids--counting out the money.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--you had a particular technique--you had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a technique and we sort of picked up that technique, you know, picked up that tech--flick that thumb and (unclear) (laughing) (unclear) and make them crisp in there, you know, something like that in there.  So that's kind of like what we did as kids.
Story_ID: 110000
Speaker 1: I also remember that my father [Richard Garnet Thomas] always took us as a whole family and my grandmother always went with us.  We would possibly go to the museums in Washington [D.C.].  We would go to see the sights.  We never went very, very far but it was a nice trip, you know, we would go together and we possibly saw some things that other kids in our neighborhood didn't see or didn't do, but we did it as a family.  And that was very nice, that was really kinda nice as I look back on it, you know, we didn't sail across the seas or fly someplace. I remember when I took my first flight, it was to Detroit [Michigan], but those were kind of things in terms of motoring someplace with your father driving and maybe stopping to get sandwiches or do something like that or something of that nature.  And that was kind of nice, you know--maybe four children, five children, six children--how many children had come at the time; we ended up with six children, so--mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 110001
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about school--where'd you go to school and how did you like it?
Speaker 2: I didn't like school; I loved school.
Speaker 1: Where did you go, first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, school was in our neighborhood.  We all went to Lothian, L-O-T-H-I-A-N, named after the British people who settled in our area, the Lothian Elementary School.  And I have to tell you part of the school land--that a second building on that campus--the land was bought from my father [Richard Garnet Thomas], okay.  So that's also give you another idea of my enterprising father.  Our--well, Bates High School [Annapolis, Maryland], all of us went to Bates High.  I'm a graduate of Bates High School.  I'm a graduate of Bowie State University [Bowie, Maryland].  I'm a graduate of New York University [New York, New York] and I--
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't want you to get too far (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: We want you to talk about grade school--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--you want to talk about grade school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay, we never missed a day.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: None of us missed a day, okay.  We had perfect attendance through like twelve years of school, perfect attendance for all of us, yes.
Speaker 1: What would your friends say you were like in school--what kind of a little girl were you?
Speaker 2: Studious, teacher's pet to some degree 'cause if you could read very well and write very well, then you were the teacher's pet, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you try to be the teacher's pet?
Speaker 2: No, I never tried to be the teacher's pet.  No, I never tried to be the teacher's pet.  I remember one day being caught for chewing chewing gum and I thought that was the worst thing 'cause I knew that the teacher was going to tell my father and I was worried to death and isn't that crazy, just chewing chewing gum.  I thought that was so awful, you know, to be caught chewing chewing gum.  But, you see, it was like goody-goody, always wanting to make A's and if you didn't get an A, you thought you had fallen down, learning new poems every night, getting up reciting.  I loved to recite.  I loved to say the poems.  I loved to be in the plays.  I could never sing but I thought I could recite and I could orate.  I was in spelling bees that were county-wide spelling bees, okay.  So those kinds of things, I guess, were antiquated things today but that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What were your favorite poems?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, I can remember Walt Whitman's "Oh Captain! My Captain!"--how I used to say that.  I used to, you know, that was one that stands by with me and how I used to orate that one; "A Psalm of Life" [Henry Wadsworth Longfellow], those were some of them.  I had not gotten into the black poets 'cause nobody had put the black poets into my life and they were all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) not even Dunbar (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the Paul Laurence Dunbar came in and all of the Paul--and all of the Paul--'cause my father would always bring us into Paul Laurence Dunbar and "The Negro Caravan" was very popular in my house.  And he loved "The Negro Caravan" and we would pull out some of the writings from "The Negro Caravan" and that really brought it into my life and into our lives in terms of that, okay.  And I look back and see how different things are now.  You're taking me back into history with that.  So what was I like?  I thought I had the biggest feet.  I thought I had the biggest feet in school.  I thought I had the skinniest legs in school.  I thought that I wore out a pair of shoes every six weeks.  I had to have a new pair of shoes 'cause I wore out my shoes, okay.  I remember my father going to Montgomery Ward in Baltimore [Maryland], right out here in Montgomery Ward and bring me back 'cause he would buy things for us and buy our shoes and buy clothes and bring 'em back to us.  And brought me back these little high top shoes and I said, I am not wearing these shoes to school.  And I cried and I cried and I refused to wear those little ugly shoes to school.  But I was very hard on shoes and so--and I know also that they used--even through high school, they used to say oh, I know she's gonna be a teacher 'cause she has pencils in her legs, you see, so they used to laugh at me for being skinny but I'm not skinny anymore so, that's what I was like.  And I used to wear three braids 'cause my mother [Hattie Randall Thomas] used to wash our hair and part it and it usually was a braid on top and two plaits or sometimes it was parted in the middle and two braids.  That was it.  I don't know what else about school, but I was a good student all the way through school.  I was a good student.
Story_ID: 110002
Speaker 1: [Did you have a lot of friends?]
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was selective or maybe they were selective.  I had friends in school, but I was, there was, I had friends in school all the way through but I was selective 'cause my friends were always nice friends.  And so what does that mean? All friends were nice friends, but particularly in high school, there were some people who were extremely popular because they always had on the pretty matching sweaters and the pretty matching skirts and the pretty matching socks and stockings and so forth.  And they were always sought after.  But there was a group of us who were little bit more conservative and we were always close friends, but not the friends that everybody thought were the fast friends, I guess, if I could look at it that way.  Does that make sense to you?  I'm not explaining that very well.
Speaker 1: Your friends weren't the, the, I guess, people considered the big time, high society people around.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they weren't--I wouldn't consider it--they were not the high--I don't guess anybody was high society but they were not the--not the one to be sought after for every dance or to go to every party, let me put it that way.  Does that make sense?  I was always very popular with my teachers.  My teachers were like friends and I knew I was always liked by my teachers.  My name always went up on the honor roll, okay.  And a very catastrophic moment for me was my first six weeks in Latin.  Yeah, I took Latin.  My first six weeks of Latin.
Speaker 1: That was pretty common.  I mean, it's not--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Latin is back in the schools.  It's back; it's being offered now in Baltimore County [Maryland], they had went back to offer Latin.
Speaker 1: So it seems that--it was offered up until maybe the mid-60s [1960s]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but then they went back.  Now they're offering again but I took Latin and I was catastrophic the first six weeks because my teacher, after the first grading period, seated us according to the grade she was giving us.  And I remember--see there were like four or five of us who were always in the front rows and I ended up in the third row and I will never forget that.  And I said, oh, God, how can I be back in the third row?  'Cause for some reason, I wasn't hearing the Latin.  Well, I was determined that no longer would I be in that third row and I moved up to the first row.  And I never left the first row--first row after that.  I never left that first row.  But that was catastrophic for me.  That was very catastrophic for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that the worst thing that happened in school to you?
Speaker 2: Is that the worst thing that happened in school to me?  Well, that was bad enough wasn't it?  Not to some people but to me, that was bad enough.  I don't know of any other--I don't know of some--I don't know of some other things.  I remember in elementary school 'cause I went through school earlier than I was supposed to have gone through school and I remember going through elementary school fearing 'cause--fearing that I should not have been in elementary school.  I should have been a year later and that the attendance officer, or whoever would come around would ask the teacher and every time these supervisors visited, I would shiver as a little kid 'cause I knew that they had let me in school and I should not have been in school but I was smart enough to be in school.  And I would shiver and I went through saying, oh, they gonna put me out, they gonna put me out and there I was, you know, right there in the first grade, they gonna put me out, they gonna put me out but--
Speaker 1: So you thought they'd put you back in the kindergarten?
Speaker 2: They put me--yeah, they put me out of school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: They put me out of school, yeah, they put me out of school, but that was my fear then.  I don't know of any other catastrophic kinds of things that--I'm trying to think what was hardest subject for me--I don't know.  I loved math.
Story_ID: 110003
Speaker 1: What subject was your favorite?
Speaker 2: I tell you what I didn't like, but I made it through it with A's, I guess A's or B-pluses or A-minuses was--I guess physics--when I think back on it.  And I guess I've forgotten most of the physics and the chemistry 'cause my brother said, you don't know any science.  And I said, well, I got through--I got through the science, even took science in college.  I love math.  I really love math and I wanted to be a math major.  And I wanted to go to Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia] to be a math major and my father said, no, there's six children in this family and they all have to go to school.  And you can't go to Hampton, you're going to Bowie State [College now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], which was cheaper.  So I majored in elementary education and I did not go to pursue my math and maybe I wasn't destined to do that, maybe I wasn't as good in math as I thought I was, you know.  So that's a part of it, okay?
Story_ID: 110004
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--well, are there any particular teachers in grade school that made a big impression on you?  And, by the way, was grade school segregated when you went to it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were segregated.  We didn't care.  We didn't even realize that they were segregated 'cause we had such a good time.  We didn't know--I mean we saw the white kids going by and so forth and I have to tell you that in terms of segregation in Anne Arundel County which the county seat is Annapolis [Maryland], it was segregated, as you know, and many of the kids had to walk to school and luckily we lived near the school.  We could even go home for lunch and kids went home to lunch with us.  And the white kids had their buses but the black kids didn't have any buses to go to elementary school.  My father [Richard Thomas]--my father--oh, I forgot this part--in starting off in the charting buses, he really started off, he also, with the trucking, he added school buses and he had a big contract for school buses.  And my father had the first, first school bus to transport elementary kids in Anne Arundel County, okay.  So that's a part of the history there in terms of my father.
Speaker 1: Did he transport black and white or just--
Speaker 2: No, black kids, there was no--no, black kids, no white kids, just black kids.  Yeah, we were happy to be--never thought about it, you know, 'cause we--you know how sometimes you're institutionalized?  And you don't think about it, you see.  You co-exist and you don't think about it, mm-hmmm.
Story_ID: 110005
Speaker 1: What about the teachers?  Were there some special teachers in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were special teachers and very interesting thing is that most of our teachers in elementary schools had come from the North.  And I didn't realize later why they had come from the North.  Why we had a teacher from Indiana, teacher from Ohio, you know, teachers like that.  And it wasn't 'til later I realized why because they couldn't get jobs in the North.  And they had come as--they had come to a borderline state and were being employed in Maryland, okay.  I had very excellent teachers.  I believe I had very excellent teachers, okay.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember certain names, and--
Speaker 2: Surely, I remember some names.  I remember Mrs. Martin McGruder, Miss Frieda Martin McGruder [ph.], who was from Belpre, Ohio.  And I don't know if you know where Belpre is 'cause I went home with her.
Speaker 1: Now what area is that?
Speaker 2: Belpre is--you go through West Virginia, Clarksburg, right across the line in West V and I think it's Clarksburg, Belpre, B-E-L-P-R-E, okay.  One teacher, Ms. Bell married my cousin and she was here in Baltimore [Maryland] and she died not so long ago, Ms. Eleanor Bell Randall.  One of my favorite teachers whose vocabulary was so extensive was Mr. Duncan.  He had such beautiful use of the language and his words and his vocabulary.  And it was--he was so brilliant, you know, okay--elementary.  One of my--in high school, I had the same homeroom teacher, Mrs. Lasang (ph.) from Washington.  She's still living.  And Ms. Branham (ph.) was a very special teacher.  Ms. Braham was one of the baker's dozen.  Are you familiar with the baker's dozen?
Speaker 1: No, tell us what the baker's dozen is.
Speaker 2: Baker's dozen was the--I guess it still exists--it's a very exclusive group in Washington [D.C.], very--all I know it's a very exclusive group in Washington that only certain people belonged to the baker's dozen and you may want to do some research on the baker's dozen.
Speaker 1: What qualifies that as special?
Speaker 2: I don't know what qualified them but I do know one thing--all of them were, you know very, all of them, I think all of them may have had a touch of wealth.  I think they also--we have always been very segregated in terms of, you know, in our society that the lighter the complexion, the people made it, for some reason, and I don't know why that existed.  I do know that many men who were very dark married very light women and that we used to observe that.  But I don't--I can't--I know baker's dozen and I have to go back, maybe to the library over there and look up the baker's dozen, but I know she was a member of the baker's dozen.  I remember Ms. Drummond, Mrs. James, who died about last year.  And she used to call me her sister because she had skinny legs too.  But I don't think that's why she did it but I was close to my teachers and those three stick out with me. Rachel Carter Smith was one who taught me biology, was very firm and very whatever.  Mrs. Tate was my Latin teacher and she drank ice water all day.  She kept ice water in there and, I think her husband had been in the [U.S.] Navy and there were a lot of sailors around Annapolis, you know, and a lot of sailors used to come by and we all knew "nau-tye nau-tye" [ph.].  We would always say something with "nau-tye nau-tye in it, you know.  So those were some but they were--oh and then my very--one of my very favorite persons was Mr. Frank Butler, who, who died so long ago, was here in Baltimore [Maryland] and was a very outstanding in the Sharp Street Methodist Church [Sharp Street Memorial United Methodist Church], which is, I think, the oldest black Methodist church, maybe, in the United States.  There's a lot of history on the Sharp Street Church, okay.  And he played a major role in that church but he taught me science.  He was also my principal but those were some people who stand out in my life, okay.  One of the persons who stands out as a very special person to me was Eleanor Davis [sic, Elnora Davis], okay.  And you know who Eleanor Davis is?  Benjamin Davis', the younger Benjamin Davis' [General Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] sister, General Benjamin Davis' [General Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] daughter, was one of my teachers.  And I saw her once, I was in Chicago [Illinois] and she was getting off the elevator and I told her who I was and so forth, okay. That's a little bit about my boring education.
Speaker 1: That's not boring--I don't think it's boring--
Story_ID: 110006
Speaker 1: Now what activities were you involved in in high school [Bates High School, Annapolis, Maryland]?  Did you--were you on the school paper?  Did you--were you involved in social activities in high school?
Speaker 2: I have to think way back there--what I did.  I was--whatever we had, I was involved in it.  Whatever they allowed us to be--I was--I know in college, I was on the school newspaper.  I was head of this and head of that and I'm tryin' to think in high school, no varsity sports.  I played sports.  I didn't play hockey.  The girls used to play hockey.  I didn't play hockey.  I played volleyball; volleyball and softball, I played.  I was trying to think what other kinds of clubs we had but I have to go back and recollect on that now.  But I was always kind of like in a leadership role, student council, those kinds of things, okay.  I was never hidden under the carpet but I was never that one sailing through the sky for everybody to see.  I was somewhere near the group that was somewhere near the stage but I didn't always want to be the first one out there.
Speaker 1: Were you the treasurer of the student council?
Speaker 2: No, maybe the teachers were the treasurers of the student council (laughter).  Maybe they didn't trust us, I don't know.  I don't remember anybody being the treasurer, that was possibly a teacher or something like that.  But I was always involved in the plays, the drama, the drama plays or--
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the plays you were in?
Speaker 2: Let me go back to say some of the plays I was in.  Go to something else and maybe I'll come back to that.  Maybe I'll come back to something--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--you were--now you were on the honor roll and you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were a very bright student, teacher's pet and all that and you--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't teacher's pet.  I was just a good student.  I wasn't teacher's pet.
Speaker 1: You said that they liked you a lot.
Speaker 2: Well, the teacher's liked me because I was nice.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: And I liked my teachers.  I don't know any teacher I did not like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I respected my teachers.
Story_ID: 110007
Speaker 1: Here you are, you're a good student and you're getting ready to graduate (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--from high school or college or where?
Speaker 1: From high school [Bates High School, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And did you--at the time that when you were ready to graduate from high school, did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew I was going to college.  I told you I wanted to go to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Did you know which one you were going to?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go Hampton.  And then they offered me a four year--I was offered a four year scholarship to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], okay.  And I said, I don't want to go to an all girls' school, all right.  And I'd look back and I'd say, gee, I really didn't know Bennett that--you know, that I didn't know--we didn't go visiting colleges like they're visiting colleges now and so forth.  So you just took whatever and I said, I don't want to go to an all girls' school and so I turned down the four year scholarship to Bennett, okay.  And then when my father [Richard Thomas] said I couldn't go to Hampton, so the next best thing was to go to the school in--and I don't know why I never about Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], 'cause I used to go to Morgan during the summer.  We used to spend at least two or three weeks at Morgan with the Methodists for--with the Methodist--the youth used to go out there during summer and the people used to come from West Virginia, Virginia and Pennsylvania and all them and we would spend at least two weeks out there on the campus, in classes and vespers and activities and you got to know people in the different states and you had your little puppy love.  You'd fall in love for the summer with somebody and oh, whatever, and you know, so forth, you know, those kinds of things though.  But I ended up at Bowie State [College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] and--which I think I cried, but I was probably destined to go to Bowie State so--and I don't regret it.  I got a good education there and it has not hampered me, and I guess, I don't think it has hampered me and so, you know, whatever, so I look at myself being on committees with people who may have finished other schools and I really see no difference so.
Story_ID: 110008
Speaker 1: What was Bowie State [College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] like?  I mean what was it like?  It's a black school, you know.
Speaker 2: It's a black school.  It's much larger now, but it was a smaller school then--
Speaker 1: State supported (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: State supported school, state supported school.  Yeah, I knew all the teachers, the teachers knew all of us.  We would go into Washington [D.C.] on weekends to go to the--catch the train and go into Washington on Saturdays and come back.  We had our own little group, there were six of us, six girls.  It was Olivia--it was Olivia, and Betty and Myrtle and Thelma and Muriel and Ella.  And we were the ones who--Betty was from up at Cumberland [Maryland]; Olivia was from Westminster [Maryland]; Muriel was from Rockville [Maryland]; Ella was from Rockville and Myrtle was from Anne Arundel County [Maryland] and I was from Anne Arundel County and we pal-ed around together all the time.  We did all of our activities together, yeah, it was a team of six of us, okay, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the teachers at Bowie State that you like to remember (unclear)--or for some reason you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember them all in some way.  Those who may have touched my life in some way?
Speaker 1: Yeah, those who took a particular interest in you or maybe a big impression?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Mrs. Law [ph.], she was my English teacher and her brother was the director of admissions at Morgan [State College now Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I remember her for several reasons.  She was very, a very dedicated teacher.  I thought she was a very good teacher.  I remember also that I think she was the voice.  Oh, I remember her son 'cause her son was at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and I think we kind of liked her son (laughter).
Speaker 1: You liked her son?
Speaker 2: We liked her son but she also--and maybe I have to be careful in saying this, Mrs. Law is dead now, but she may have had a bitter divorce or something because she said something about men, most men are like whatever.  And I kept wondering why would she say this about men.  But I think she had had some sort of a bitter divorce in some way.  I remember Mrs. Brown, who was in history very stern, very stern.  I remember my music instructor who was from Xenia [Ohio], Charlotte Bronte Robinson, Charlotte Bronte Robinson, who was in art and music and very dramatic--very, very dramatic, okay.  And I can see her now wailing her baton and I was brave enough to say that, yes, I'm gonna be in the band or whatever 'cause I used to play the coronet; believe it or not I used to play the coronet and now I couldn't 'cause I lost, you know, you have the--you have the--get the embouchure there but here I was brave enough to be in the coronet and I was in the choir singing first soprano and my husband [Guilbert Daley] declared I could never sing when he said, sing--'cause now I don't sing at all.  I don't even sing "Lift Every Voice And Sing," if you're standing beside me 'cause I don't want to throw you off and they all say I lost my--you know, I should not have been singing first soprano.  I really should have been alto.
Story_ID: 109535
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your singing.
Speaker 2: Well, I really can't sing and everybody knows--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).  Okay, yeah--
Speaker 2: I don't even sing in the shower, how people sing in the shower and you--I don't sing at all.  I don't sing at home.  I don't sing in church.  I don't sing in schools.  I don't sing anywhere because I can't sing and I was--if I know, for instance, we're singing the Delta hymn in front of everybody and they know you're supposed to be singing--so I'll say the words but I won't say it--but I will say the words, you know (mimicking singing), you know.  So they will stand up and not say she doesn't know the song; yes, I'm singing it but I'm not throwing anybody off key, okay, so, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And see I dabbled a little bit into art.  I used to love to do charcoals.  I had some charcoal drawings and things that I did, you know, I dabbled but I never went into something but I used to love to dabble art and into watercolors but particularly charcoals.  I used to like to do charcoals, and pastels, and play the horn [coronet] until I really realized that that's enough.  This is far as I can go with the horn so--all right so that's it but I was active in school [at Bowie State College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]; I mean a little bit of everything, you know a leader, a writer, whatever.
Speaker 1: So you wrote for the school paper?
Speaker 2: Write--wrote for the school--write for the school paper or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --if they needed somebody to go to a conference or something, you know, I was possibly one of the two of three who would go to represent the school or something of that nature, so that's kind of like then where I've been in my life.
Story_ID: 109536
Speaker 1: Now did you get involved with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] in college?  Was that where you got involved with the Deltas?
Speaker 2: Well, I would love to have been involved with the Deltas in college, okay.  But when I was in college [at Bowie State College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], they didn't have the Delta campus--they didn't have the Deltas on campus and then when I got--I immediately, I went on to graduate school.  And it was--when I was a graduate school at New York University [New York, New York], then I was invited by the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alphas] and invited by the Deltas to become a member.  And luckily, I decided on becoming a Delta.  I'm very glad I became a Delta.  But when I was in college, there was no chapter.
Speaker 1: You were at New York University?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in New York University but then I had to go in a graduate--I had to go in a graduate chapter, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: You said, I mean I didn't want--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I went on to New York University but it was in the grad school, when I was in grad school that I became a Delta and I went through the graduate chapter, okay.  I'm a Chrome Sigma Chapter, and went through the (unclear) and became involved in the Deltas.  And that's very interesting because [HM] Frankie Freeman and I were the two national presidents, who were not national presidents, who were not Deltas as undergraduates.  And I guess people think that gee it's a kind of unusual that you're not an undergraduate school, you know, that you're not--that you can rise to that level--that you can rise to that level to become the national president and you were not a Delta in college.
Speaker 1: Did you feel, when you were at college, that you were missing something by not being part of a sorority in college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was involved in so many other kinds of things.  I don't think I missed it.  You only miss things later.  You don't miss it then, you may say, gee I wish it had been, but you don't miss it because then you don't know, okay.  But you look and say gee, it would have been nice if it were so, okay.  So I look back and say, gee it would be nice if it were so.  I would feel closer to the chapter on the campus now, if it had been so.  There's a chapter on the campus now.  But the chapter was not there then, okay, all right.  And so there were also some rulings there 'cause there were some rulings existing in terms of state schools and those kinds of things in there.  So I became a Delta later.  I became a Delta relatively early because now remember now I finished college when I was nineteen.  I finished high school when I was fifteen, remember I was jumping ahead a little bit so I may not have become a Delta when I was--well a lot of kids are becoming Delta's when they're twenty and twenty-one.  So I was not far behind them in becoming a Delta, okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you started grad school, you were nineteen years old?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--very--way ahead--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was not necessarily that precocious, but I was also persistent and diligent and very goal-oriented and knew what I wanted in a way.  I knew what I wanted, okay, mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 109537
Speaker 1: Now were you--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I was just wondering if you were--'cause you're so much involved in civic activities--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--when you were younger, were you--did your family take heed of the politics of the time and the--was there a lot of discussion in the family or the college [Bowie State College, now Bowie State University, Bowie Maryland] about, you know, the condition of black people in this country or other--you know, the social--the schools or the--or the way people were raising their kids and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I think--let me just say to you--it--it may not have been a discussion as to whether the president should have men in Iraq or not but I think the general tenor of how I was raised and how we were involved, I think I told you, my father [Richard Thomas] was involved in politics in a way and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He was a Republican (unclear)--
Speaker 2: A very strong Republican and we were very much in organization and community and a sense of community, the sense of community involvement, and that whole same thing permeated, I guess, throughout.  There was always an involvement, always an involvement.  We were not out there always ringing the bell to say down with Mr. Jones and down with that but moving in another kind of way, moving in another kind of way to surface.  I was taught early to be able to do something for yourself, and to be able to stand on your own.  And I remember going down to Sunflower County, Mississippi and met--was in the home of Ms. Fannie Lou Hamer when she showed how she--you have--all of those people planting their gardens because she said, if you plant your gardens and you have food, then you can fight.  And I guess I grew up saying, I'm very independent, okay.  I'm very independent and I guess I was taught to be independent.  I was taught to be independent.  I was taught also, I guess, to, to win over people.  And there's a way of winning over people by being diplomatic rather than being very, very negative in terms of that.  And I used to look at some of the people who used to come out and talk and, and during the whole Black Power Movement and all of that and so forth.  And, and some--I said, you don't have to talk that way to get what you want.  There's another way.  And I'm saying that because very few people do me in.  The whole thing is so funny because in working in Baltimore County [Maryland] which is basically has always been a very rigid, white county, okay.  And that's where most of my career was spent with the board of education of Baltimore County.  It had very few blacks in key positions.  My brother and I both rose to have very key positions in the county but then the people would say, you know, you may think you're getting her but you're not.  She'll get you and you won't even know what struck you.  It will come back in a different way, then they'll get you.  And so, in a diplomatic way, I knew you could move through all of this in a diplomatic way but you also had to do something for yourself.  You also had to have something.  You couldn't just sit up there and wave a flag and say give it to me.  You had to have something to earn and to have a--does that make sense?  Maybe it doesn't make sense to you.  I never rode in the back of the bus 'cause I didn't ride the buses in Annapolis [Maryland].  I didn't ride the buses so I didn't experience that, okay.  Does that make--I didn't experience that, okay 'cause I rode in the cars, I didn't experience that.  So I guess I was insulated by being dumb, by being poor or being whatever, I didn't experience that.  But, but I knew that it was not right for the segregation.  I knew it wasn't right for the black kids to walk to school and the white kids to ride by waving to them, okay, all right.  And that someday, all of that had to crumble but I do believe there's a way that you help to crumble that, not by stoning the bus.  And so that you impair the bus, there's another something that you impair that's greater than impairing that orange bus, that's going up and down that highway and subway, so.
Story_ID: 109538
Speaker 1: So what was your question to me to get me off of--(simultaneous--
Speaker 2: I was wondering if you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --to get me off on this soapbox in terms of this because I feel as though I've broken barriers but I've broken them in different ways, okay.  Could I move on to some barrier--could I move on a little bit because--where do you want to take me?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) to take you to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], we're trying to do this chronologically--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, you're doing it chronologically--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--want to get to what you're talking about--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So you're at NYU and what was your major (unclear)?
Speaker 1: My major?  My whole field is counseling.  My field is counseling, okay.
Speaker 2: And what was the difference between that you noticed--did you notice a difference between New York University and Bowie State [College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure 'cause New York University was larger and integrated and, and the whole thing of integration and the whole thing of openness and being liberal and--
Speaker 2: Well, was Bowie State more conservative than--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, it was smaller and smaller and segregated at the time--where it's now--it's very integrated.  In fact it's larger percentage of whites are at Bowie than there are African Americans at Bowie at the moment.  But my school was smaller but I, but I step out into this wider world, which was an exciting world.
Speaker 2: But did you think, think that it was more--NYUU was more liberal than Bowie State, you say?
Speaker 1: Ahhhhh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --than NYU?
Speaker 1: Well, it was more cosmopolitan; let me use it that way.  It was more cosmopolitan.  That is a better word to use.  It was more cosmopolitan.  And I was exposed to these great professors in the field.  The people were writing the books and so forth and--
Speaker 2: Who are some of the ones that you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, Bob Harper [ph.] was one who was very, very outstanding in the field of counseling, Robert Harper was one.  Milt Schwebel [Milton Schwebel] was one and who really became my personal, when I say personal, if I could go back and say who was my special, special, it was Dr. Milton Schwebel, who even visited my home here in Baltimore [Maryland].  And he left New York University and went to Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] as assistant president or some administrative title there.  We even visited him in his home.  But they were writing the books and things.  Marty Hamburger [Martin Hamburger] writing in the field and that was exciting to me.  Henry Borow, who had come in from the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis Minnesota], very, very renowned in the field.  And I was very glad to have the people when I could go to the library and find their works and pull it up.  And to me that was very exciting to be able to do that.  And I was a good student at New York University.  I was a good student, okay.
Story_ID: 109539
Speaker 1: So when were you there [New York University, New York, New York]?  What year--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was back there, I was back there in the dark days and--(laughter)--you want me to go back there.  I was back there.  You see, you want me to go back to these years and I'm not telling you these--(unclear)--you're trying to get me to get those years in there but I was back there when it was a exciting time to be in school and I'm not going through all those years with you.  And then I didn't go on for my doctorate and let me just come back and say something to you.  I want to go back to this 'cause I look back on this now.  And I look back maybe just 'cause I'm female and because of being black.  And I look back to say of the kind of grades that I made and the closeness that I had with my professors, not one professor as I know, encouraged me to go on for a doctorate, okay.  Not one.  And I come back and say, gee wonder why.  And I look back and I say, yeah, they were some things existing.  There were still some things existing there.
Speaker 1: Racism.
Speaker 2: Racism.  Racism.  Racism was still rampant, was still rampant then, okay.  And I finished my doctorate at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] and I delayed it.  I delayed it for a couple reasons.  I delayed it because I didn't want--I was moving faster than my husband [Guilbert Daley] and I didn't want to--and he was studying and he changed schools a couple of times and I didn't want to finish before he got his Ph.D.  I didn't want to jump in there.
Speaker 1: Now when did you get married (unclear) during this process?
Speaker 2: I got married early in my life.
Speaker 1: Alright, so were you married at Bowie State [College, now Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No, I, no, I wasn't married at Bowie State.  I had graduated from Bowie State when I got married, okay.  And I met my husband at a Delta.  They sent me to--I met him at a Delta-something [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] in Washington [D.C.] and he was studying at Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.].  And so, he came up and asked me--something they were going to have--you know how you meet your date or something--they were doing that (unclear) the dance the next night and somebody was going to take me and here this guy came up.  And I was standing up there and he started talking for just a minute and he said, do you have a date?  And I said no.  May I take you and I said yes.  And where can I pick you up--blat bluh--that's what all I knew until I came in, okay.  And so that was that little bit of history, right there, okay.  My husband died a couple of years ago suddenly on our anniversary when we were 'bout to fly out to, to Barcelona [Spain] and do the Mediterranean, etc.  He was a professor at Coppin State College [now Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and was also--he had just retired from Coppin State College and was voted in as professor emeritus.  And this past year, they built a new building and named it after my husband.  It's called the Daley Living Learning Center.  Quite a nice honor isn't it?
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a nice honor.
Story_ID: 109540
Speaker 1: Do you want to know the year I got married?  Not really (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You just said you'd like to tell us, you know.
Speaker 1: You're off tape right now, right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, we're rolling.
Speaker 1: We're rolling.
Speaker 2: You're rolling it?  Okay.  I got married in 1953, mm-hmm.  Yes, a skinny, little, ugly bride.
Speaker 1: I doubt that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right.  A skinny, little, ugly, country bride, so--where are we now?  So you wanna go someplace else with me?
Story_ID: 109541
Speaker 1: Well, what's coming through here, if I may say, is that you have a--you seem to have a very engaging personality and so I mean you--your leadership qualities--I mean if people don't get anything out of this at all, I mean in terms of dates, they do get a sense of what your personality was and why you became leader of so many different formations.  And so, I think, you know, I don't know of any--did you have a sense at a certain point, you talked about your sense of diplomacy and your persuasive powers, I mean is there a certain point where you discovered that you really had those kinds of gifts and that they were useful?
Speaker 2: No, I've been the same.  I just never, never thought about it.  I guess now I realize it in some way, but I just never, I just know basically I'm the same.  And I can meet people from my childhood, you know, the older people in my community and they all say, they know I'll (unclear) come home.  They always say she's the same.  She doesn't put on airs.  And I keep telling people, there's no such thing as a high and a low in terms of status or title.  You know I always say people, get away from that whole thing, like that.  And so I'm usually Thelma.  I don't believe in this whole thing of keeping up with the Joneses and so forth.  And I know what my limits are.  And that's a part to it.  I also know that you have to treat people as people.  And you don't treat somebody one way because they're in a position or because they can give you something or because they have a title or something.  But you treat people as people and unless you do that then I don't want to be around you and other people don't want to be around you.  And so I guess that's basically it's very simple.  You know be kind to everybody.  Do unto others as you'd have them do unto you.  So it's very, very simple.  My life is simple.  And I guess I have a very simple philosophy in terms of that, so.
Story_ID: 109542
Speaker 1: Now your engagement of social change activities--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --seems to be through most of the traditional black organizations, right?  But what I heard you say, I guess, not too long ago, you said you met Fannie Lou Hamer in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it--in what capacity were you in Mississippi dealing with Fannie Lou Hamer?
Speaker 2: Well, I was with the National Council of Negro Women with [HM] Dorothy Height very early it was down there with her.  Right now, I serve as vice chair of the board for the National Council of Negro Women, which I never thought I'd get to that position, you know.  But very early, she invited me on one of those tours to Mississippi and working with the women and with their head start program and it was all--
Speaker 1: Had you known Dorothy Height a long time before--
Speaker 2: Well, Dorothy was the president of Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and I met Dorothy Height through the, through the, you know, through Delta.  You know everybody who is a president in Delta.  And in Delta, I've served in several roles in Delta.  I've served as national treasurer.  I served as national projects chair.  I served as national first vice president and chair of the scholarship and standards committee and then as president of Delta and then on some other committees and things, so. But you know everybody who, who's a president.  You know those people.  Does that make sense to you?  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about Ms. Dorothy Height?  I mean, she's, she's really a legend now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, she's wonderful.
Speaker 1: What are some of your reflections on (unclear)?
Speaker 2: On Dr. Height?  She--there's no one like her.  She has the most acute mind I've ever seen of anybody.  She can recall dates and moments and hours and you can be relating something and she'll sit there and she'll say--you'll think maybe she's sleeping or crocheting or something--she say, no, no, no, it's not like that.  They went down this street and that street and this street.  And it was 5 o'clock in the morning on January the 12th, 1963 and it was in Lebanon.  And it was not in some other place.  And she--very, very brilliant.  I've never heard her talk about anybody.  I've never ever heard her say negative things about anybody and her ability to conceptualize and she's moving from one thing to another.  You think that this big event, well the next day she had something else going out there--blooming, blossoming, like that; and the whole thing of wisdom and the whole thing of the ability to see the global and the ability to relate to people.  And I'm very fortunate.  I am very honored that, that, that she considers me to be a friend.  We sometimes she--well sometimes I get a call from her every day.  Isn't that interesting?  Sometimes I get a call from her every day and sometimes two and three calls from her a day.  And she'll say, well what about this, what about this, you know.  And I'm honored that it's because she feels she can trust me.  And I want to come back to trust.  I feel that trust and loyalty are very, very key, okay.  And that, that if you ask me to do something and I accept, then I feel that you should be able to trust me.  And then if I feel that you're not worthy of my trust then I would sever, okay.  And so that is my whole philosophy there.  So I feel that Dr. Height feels that she can trust me.  I think she also likes my creative ability.  She likes my creative thinking 'cause a lot of times I do training for the Board.  And she'll always say the Board has come in, can you do something to help them in the leadership development and so forth. So, and I don't mind doing it.  The other thing is whatever I do for people--I mean the speeches I make, the workshops I've given across the country, I don't charge.  If somebody would like to give me a gift, that's fine.  Pay my airfare, pay my hotel but I'm not out there so say, give me $1,000, give me $2,000 in terms of that but if you want to give me a gift, that's fine but you don't have to stretch to do it, okay, all right 'cause I feel in some way that I'm supposed to share and help people to grow.  And when everybody can grow and grow no matter how old they are and we grow from each other and that's my whole philosophy.  That's my philosophy with my students.  I teach part-time at Loyola College [now Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] in the graduate school.  And I say to them, and I start teaching Thursday.  I have to teach classes this week and next week, okay.  And I say that we learn from each other.  And I learn from you and you learn from me and that's a part of the sharing process in here, okay.
Story_ID: 109543
Speaker 1: How did we get off on this--you asked me about Dr. Height [HM Dorothy Height], who is a wonderful person.  Nobody like a Dr. Height and I keep saying she is possibly the world's most famous person.  I know there's Margaret Thatcher and there's others out there but what she has done and the things she has been through and how she--she was the only woman out there on the Civil Rights Movement.  There was [A.] Philip Randolph and Whitney Young and all of those others but you look at the pictures, who was there?  Dorothy Height was there.  Dorothy Height was that woman who was there and she's ninety years, going on ninety-one years old, mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)(unclear)--people who don't know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so and her book is off the press, "Open Wide Freedom's Gates," [sic, "Open Wide the Freedom Gates"] her book, that's off the press stand.  She's in Atlanta [Georgia] now.  I talk with the office today.  She's in Atlanta today.  Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] is doing something with her and somebody else is doing something with her and so she's out on this book tour, mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I think it's significant that she focused the organization onto Ms. Fannie Lou Hamer during the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 1: Well, she did she would go to Mississippi with Wednesdays in Mississippi.  She took the pigs and I went with them when they took the pigs.
Speaker 2: Now what is Wednesdays?  Now don't go too fast 'cause people listening to this won't know what Wednesdays is so tell us what that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, she did Wednesdays in Mississippi with Polly Cowan.  Polly Cowan was this very rich white woman.  I think her husband was with CBS or something.  And they were trying to think of what to do and so they organized women to go to Mississippi on Tuesdays.  They were white and black.  They would spend Wednesdays in Mississippi.  They would divide up when they got to Mississippi and the white would go with the white women and the black women would go with the black women and they would dialogue but they lend support and they would fly out.  And they were Wednesdays in Mississippi and they were going to show their support bringing other ideas in terms of this.  That's called Wednesdays in Mississippi.  And on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So Wednesdays it was called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Wednesdays in Mississippi and on one of the Crisis Magazines and I'll give you one out here, they have the whole thing, you know Wednesdays in Mississippi on them, that the Crisis magazine featured.  And I'll let you take that.  I'll get one from the Crisis office and give it to you--
Story_ID: 109544
Speaker 1: But I went with her [Fannie Lou Hamer] when she took the pig bank in.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what is the pig bank?
Speaker 1: Well, the pig bank was--the people in Mississippi were very poor and we went to many homes and it was very interesting 'cause I--you'd go to home after home and you didn't see a kid eating a sucker or nor biting an apple, which is kinda unusual.  You never saw a kid with a piece of candy.  You didn't see any oranges on the table, you didn't see any food around.  Everything looked bare, okay, 'cause there wasn't much food.  And Dr. Height took in the pigs and the little pig skin, okay.
Speaker 2: What are these--these are--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: Real life pigs.  Pigs, pigs and pig bank.  And have the, the agriculture agent, extension agent come in and work with the families.  And the families got--they watched what to do with the pigs and the pigs grew and each family got the pig, okay.  Now the whole thing was they couldn't sell that pig.  They had to kind of rear other pigs and then get food.  So it was, in a way, making them independent, okay.  And you'd say, well, gee, pigs, how simple.  But look what a simple project meant to people.  What a very simple project like the pigs going in, like the pigs, the shotes [ph.], the shotes, you know, going in and what that did for the people in terms of helping them to be independent and self-sufficient so that they could fight.  So they could fight the battles in Mississippi.  Ms. Fannie Lou Hamer had sixteen bullet holes around her kitchen screen door where the people had shot in her home there.  And we saw her gardens where she had all the people planting the gardens so they could--and we went to the church where they would sing and sing and sing the songs, and sing the songs and get rejuvenated so that they could fight.  So they could fight in different way and very moving, very moving.  And she would say that Sunflower County [Mississippi] is the poorest--is the ruralest of the rural and the poorest of the poor; the ruralest of the rural and the poorest of the poor.  And Mound Bayou [Mississippi] was near there and Mound Bayou, you know, is all black town.
Story_ID: 111835
Speaker 1: We were talking about your experiences in Mississippi. This is in the '60s [1960s], right?  When would this be in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: This was the latter part of the '60s [1960s].  This was somewhere in this latter part of the '60s [1960s], yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember seeing Fannie Lou Hamer on television, when the Democratic National Convention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) '64 [1964] in Atlantic City [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You hadn't met her at that point, right?
Speaker 2: I had met her.  I guess I'd met her then.  I guess, I'm trying to think and put it in perspective; I had met her or met her after that.  I'm not so sure but met her in person and, you know, she was kind of not large but a little bit large and I remember her hair was a little like wavy, wavy hair.  And one eye was kinda like something, I don't know about that eye but she could sing.  She would stand up in front of that church and just sing and get those ladies going and so forth on that.  And I'm saying, I went to her funeral which was possibly so large and I remember, I think we flew into Jackson [Mississippi] and we drove and drove and we met and drove and drove and drove and there were so many people who had come.  Everybody attached to civil rights in any part had come.  And everybody had to speak.  And what was so amazing to me is that I went because, at that time, I was president of the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and Ms. Hamer was an honorary member of the Deltas.  We had made her an honorary member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.  If I had not been with Dr. Height [HM Dorothy Height], I know I would not have gotten in that church because of the way they were screening people and all of the people who had been in the news and so forth were up there but they all were speaking and to me they were grandstanding.  And the only person I recall who related to her husband and to her family was Dorothy I. Height.  Everybody else was talking about something else.  It was almost like the family was not sitting here.  And then after the church service, we all went to the school next door to the auditorium of the school.  And all of those high-powered leaders who didn't get to expound at the--in the church, then they had a whole 'nother service in the auditorium.  But this is how Fannie Lou Hamer was memorialized with everybody from every corner who ever said anything about civil rights had come in that day and you could run through the list of them.  They were there.  They were all there.
Speaker 1: Can you--from what you say, many of them missed the point of the funeral--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think they did but that's from my perspective, 'cause my perspective would be a much more humble perspective.  My perspective would be a much more person centered perspective and family-oriented perspective, rather than what we did together, you know, what we did together; what we did together and a lot of times people tell their own story by saying what we did together than by paying a tribute to someone, so, and maybe that's where I part with some people to say, if you're introducing somebody, you don't have to say, I met her there and I met her there, just introduce the person; not tell your story.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't like to tell my story anyway, Mr. Crowe.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 111836
Speaker 1: But ma'am, can--what, what has been for you the highlight of your career of service?  You've been involved--I mean--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, let me just tell--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You, you've had a career as an educator (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but let me just tell you a couple things for me.  As a counselor--and the whole counseling profession has been major--has been mainly white males, okay.  And for me, at that time, I was a high school counselor, chair of a department in a basically white school in Baltimore County [Maryland].  They had eighteen black kids and 1,800 students.  But when I moved through and became the president-elect of the American School Counselor Association, okay.  And that was in the '70s [1970s].  And let me tell you how institutionalized I was.  Because I was elected to the board of the American School Counselor Association which I possibly was the first person of color.  First, I was appointed to the board of American School Counselor Association and, and it was mainly male and we, we were--the building was located at 1607-1609 New Hampshire Avenue in Washington for the American Personnel and Guidance Association and the division was the American School Counselor Association, which was the largest division.  After being on the board, the board members said, you're gonna become president.  And I said, oh, no, not me.  They said, you're gonna become president and they signed the petition for me to run to become president and I emerged to become president of the American School Counselor Association, which was breaking history.  Our overall big, big organization was called the American Personnel and Guidance Association which is now--the name has been changed to the American Counseling Association.  The American Counseling Association represents school counselors, mental health counselors, rehab counselors, college ed counselors, college supervisors.  There are fifteen divisions in it, okay.  Are you not following me exactly in terms of the structure there, okay.  I was first elected to become president of a division, the American School Counselor Association at that time.  At that time, the division had 15,000 members but we represented all of the school counselors in the country but later I emerged to become the president of the overall organization, the American Personnel and Guidance Association of the American--now called the American Counseling Association, which is made up now fifteen division, represents all forms of counseling in the country; mental health counselors, you name it, there's a--the government counselors, whatever form of counseling there is, okay.  And it's always been a male-dominated group and I broke the barriers to be the second female to emerge as president; and the first person of color to emerge in that organization.  And not a year has passed that they have not asked me to be in some leadership role in the American Counseling Association.  This past year for their convention in Anaheim, California, they asked me to keynote the convention.  And I keynoted the very large convention of about, well, I guess by 7,000 people.  I keynoted the convention in March in Anaheim, California.  I've served as national treasurer twice.  I've served as parliamentarian so many times.  I've chaired every task force.  I've chaired the foundation.  I've chaired whatever major part--I was one of the persons to help set up the National Board for Certified Counselors and became the first secretary treasurer of the certifying body which is now a separate body of it, so that's been my involvement in my field, in my field itself and I'm very proud of my involvement in my field, which is counseling.
Story_ID: 111837
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is so critical, you hear these horror stories--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --from black people historically who have been--have been discouraged by school counselors--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I'm not talking about black school counselors but usually--
Speaker 2: School counselors period.  Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--he's in Lansing, Michigan.  He's the top student in his class.  He's class president and so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --Only black student in the class room and the counselor tells him, he asks him, what do you want to be Malcolm?  He says, a lawyer.  He says, well, you better pick something that a nigger can do.
Speaker 2: And you see--
Speaker 1: [HM] Frederick Douglas we interviewed yesterday--Frederick Douglas IV--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Fred.
Speaker 1: The same thing was told to him when he was in sixth grade basically, in a white school setting by white counselor.  No, you shouldn't try to do this, you should try to be something that a black person can do.  You know, 'cause that's not--it's a ongoing nightmare kind of a story.  I mean I know personally (unclear) the stories.  So I mean--was there a struggle in that association [American School Counselor Association] with--around those kinds of situations?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a--the association was very prejudiced, very, very prejudice.  That's very interesting, just before I came out my house, I got this phone call and the person asked for me and said, this is Willie Williams, you may not remember me from--I said, Willie I remember you.  And he's now just been elected president of the black psychologists [Association of Black Psychologists (ABPsi)] and I haven't talked to him for years.  And while we were on that phone call, just before coming over to this building, we went back to look at some things from prior years and I said--we were talking about something and I said, Willie, you remember Atlantic City [New Jersey]?  He said, yes.  In Atlantic City, in the government body, at that time, there were 150 people in the governing body, okay.  And there were only two blacks in the governing body.  And one was from Washington [D.C.] and he was on a college level and I was from Maryland and I was at a secondary school level.  I was there representing the school counselors, okay.  And that's when the blacks were beginning to feel that they were suppressed in the organization and I saw the person go up to the other person and tap him on his shoulder and the person said, no, no, no.  And I didn't know what it was all about and soon after that I knew where I was sitting on the aisle, on the aisle, in the aisle side and then somebody tapped me and said, could you get us the floor.  And there was this person with this bush and dashiki on.  And I said, sure.  I remember going to the mic and getting the floor.  And that's when--now back to Willie Williams--spoke.  And that led to the formation later of Association for Non-White Concerns, which is now called the Multi-Cultural Association, okay.  And we chuckled over that this morning because there was so much prejudice in the organization.  So professionally in the counseling field where the people should be very open to people in the organization itself, racism has existed and sexism has existed.  And you've had to break down the barriers, okay.  My being there in a chair to vote to be able to get the mic was breaking down barriers in the way that I knew best, how to break down barriers.  It was best to break 'em down that way than get a soapbox and stand on the street and yell for me, all right; and to pave the way.  And because we gave that mic that day, there was somebody there to get the mic in this structure that was so formalized with those parliamentarians sitting up on the stage--and by the way, I know parliamentary procedure 'cause I knew if I know parliamentary procedure, they can't get around me, all right.  And I knew that if I knew more than they did, I could get around them.  And that was one of the ways in which I fortified myself, in terms of yeah, I'm gonna move through this structure, okay.  But that led to the whole thing that the Association for Non-White Concerns, which was basically black is now multi-cultural and so the Native Americans and the Hispanics and others belonged to this organization, to this division as well as other divisions in there but it was breaking down barriers in the field there.  But a lot of those ideas permeate the thing, permeate the field.  And that's too bad 'cause that's not the way people should be trained and those people to me are not counselors, okay.  To me, they're not counselors, alright.  Most of the students I have counseled in my life, even though I counseled black kids, but most of the students I've counseled have been white kids.  Suppose I did things like that to them, okay, all right.  Okay, so where are we in the story right now?  I'm into my whole field in counseling.  So, you know, I broke down those barriers in the American School Counselor Association and the American Counseling Association and I'm still breaking down barriers in that association through leadership, through modeling, through mentoring and through teaching, okay, and through training people to be counselors, through training people to become counselors.  And not the kind that would put down kids and say this is as far as you can go or interpret the tests, interpret the aptitude tests to say that this is all you can do.
Story_ID: 111838
Speaker 1: So it's been important that you've been involved in this at this level because if not, then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very important.  I remember when all of the tests and things 'cause I served on the advisory committee with ACT, the American College Testing Bureau, the one of the two.  I served on the board of College Board.  I served on the board for College Board for a long time and it was through my serving on the board for College Board that I was recommended to serve on the board for Educational Testing Service.  So the major testing firms, ACT, I was on their advisory, College Board, a long time on their college board and then on the Board for Educational Testing Service.  So, you know, that's also, in a way, being in there to break down some of the barriers, in a different kind of way rather than putting up the orange crate on the corner and yelling out.  But somebody has to be in there to change the policies, to change the directions and to say, no, no, no, you can't do this.  You have to go another way.  So when I look at my whole thing and being a change agent, yeah, I maybe--I was not out there waving a flag but I have been a change agent in some of the things that affected the lives of many students and many people in this country in various ways.
Speaker 1: But don't you think that somebody out in the street raising their cry out is an ally for your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think there's a role for everybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I just look to see what my role is and what I do best, you see.  I don't do best in putting up a crate on the street, okay.  But if you put me in there in the board room and allow me to go through it, you can bet that I will make a difference there, at least I have made a difference.  I don't know what I would do but that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--but would you make as much difference if there's nobody wasn't (unclear) or nobody upset on the outside?
Speaker 2: Surely, because you don't always have to have somebody on the outside.  I don't think you always have to--sometimes you have to bring people to the, to a cognitive level, okay, that it may not be somebody else out there.  They may not have even thought about that but you also have to bring people to--for instance I serve on a hospital board now, okay.  I serve on the board for St. Agnes Hospital, okay.  Just recently, we had a retreat and then we--before the retreat we had all of the people from Ascension Health to meet us in a special retreat out at the airport.  And they gave the wonderful presentation.  When they got through and I said, I heard you say all of this.  I heard you say all of this but I didn't hear you relate to the cultural aspects.  When you said culture, I didn't hear you talk about other aspects or diversity.  It was to bring certain things to the attention that they had not thought about.  To say, yeah, let's look at this.  Let's look at this; things that they may not have thought about, okay.  So I think that's a role that we can play, that's a role in human rights and civil rights and rights of people, and carrying out whatever the constitution may have meant or may not have meant, but taking it to another level.
Story_ID: 111839
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, tell me, what would you consider the highlight of your--
Speaker 2: --of my career?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I guess the highlight of my career would be moving through my professional organization [American Counseling Association] in my career.  I would think that in terms of--I mean to reach the, to reach the pinnacle and the presidency of my professional organization, my professional organization.  And see when people see me, they said, oh, she was the president of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, okay; which was great, wonderful.  Do you understand that?  Wonderful. But if you were to say to me, what was it, I would say to be the president of American Counseling Association, okay, all right; to be able to move in this way and you may not know it, but I served as president of both organizations at the same time.  And somebody said, well, how will it work?  Well, it was very convenient because American Counseling Association, at that time, now it's in Virginia, had its offices--had their offices at 1607-1609 New Hampshire Avenue and Delta 1707-1709 New Hampshire Avenue and in the middle there was a parking lot, there used to be a parking lot.  And I would park my car on the side (unclear).  And I'd go in to the right, if I go to the right first, it's Delta.  If I go to the left, it's American Counseling Association.  And the American Counseling Association bought my time from the board of education.  And so I was free to travel and when I travelled, wherever I went, there were Deltas.  It also had another fact because when I travelled with American Counseling Association, the Deltas would always come out and I can remember the white board members, they were all white saying--because the Deltas would always entertain me.  And they were saying, you know it's the first time I've ever been in a black home.  First time we've been in a black home, first time.  And so it was also bringing people together in another way.  And so there were some spin-offs there for both groups.
Story_ID: 111840
Speaker 1: It is good to have a black constituency if you're a black member of anything, right?
Speaker 2: It is so very good to know your family, so very good to know your families, okay.  And so I'm proud of the fact, I been president of the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  I'm proud of the fact I been president of the American School Counselors Association.  I'm very proud of the fact of being president of the American Counselor Association.  And I'm very proud of the fact of being president of Women in Community Service.  And Women in Community Service is made up of five groups, okay.  And the office is over on Beauregard Street in Virginia.  And that's made up of the National Council of Negro Women, National Council of Jewish Women, Church Women United, National Council of Catholic Women and what was called the American (unclear), that's the Hispanic women.  And we made up the five groups there.  It grew out the whole Job Corps movement, okay.  And so we really worked with the--then it was the 106 Job Corps centers across the nation.  I've been in many job corps centers, all across this country, okay, all right.  And so they whole thing of those leadership roles and working in that way with a variety of people has been very, very rewarding, in a way.  And, and this role I serve in here, we're in the building for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, I serve as director of the women in the NAACP [Women in NAACP (WIN)].  And that's an exciting role that [Kweisi] Mfume asked me to assume and I do it on a volunteer basis and I'm volunteer staff and that's an interesting role to do that.
Speaker 1: Now you just returned from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I just returned from the convention in Miami [Florida], which was a fascinating convention, in Miami, yes.
Story_ID: 111841
Speaker 1: And this kind of leads to a question that we ask everyone and that is, what are some of your hopes and concerns with the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I just watched television and it just hurt me when I saw that [Carlton] Dotson, I think his name is Dotson almost confess that he had killed the guy [Patrick Dennehy] in Baylor [University, Waco, Texas], his room--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Basketball?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--basketball killing (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I keep saying, why, why, why, just why?  And I would really like for--I would like for African Americans to go back and feel the pride that we once felt, the pride in themselves.  And I wish some way that the environment--I know that the environment has an awful lot to do with it but not all of us came up in posh, posh environments.  It's, it's how we felt about ourselves and the family values and so forth.  And I would hope that someday that the black crime would diminish and that black people--I look at the young boys and girls and the girl, too, and I look at the number who are going to prison and who seem like whatever, hopeless, hopeless, that, that would change in some way.  And I know the whole world has to change but a lot of people made it through when they had to cut wood, they had to build log cabins, they had to do all kinds of things and the conditions were very poor.  But for some reason, they stuck together and they made it through.  And I would hope that one day that the black race would not be at the bottom and that many of our youth would not feel that they couldn't live beyond age 21; that they would see themselves living through 40 and 50 and 60 on and being productive.  And not saying, well, it doesn't matter 'cause I know I'm not gonna make it beyond 21.  And I just hate for that whole aura to permeate our society.  I think it's very demoralizing in many ways.  It's very demoralizing.  I've worked with, with students in training others to do peer, to do peer mediation.  And I remember one session, we're in the, we had gathered the students and I was helping the counselors to direct the training program and then the ice breaker we went around and this group of about twenty-five students mixed in the mix, there were some Asian students and black students and white students in the group.  And I remember getting--when the person went around said to the young girl and she said, well, what would you like to be or what would you like to do?  She said, well, I'd like to be an unwed mother.  I'd like to have my own child.  And go to the next one a couple down and the girl said it and nobody flinched.  Nobody looked as though it was unusual.  It was just those of us who were adults thought it was unusual for a thirteen or fourteen-year-old to say, I want my own child, you know.  And, but no--everybody accepted it and I just say, how did we advance in a society where a thirteen or fourteen-year older can say, I want my child.  I want to be an unwed mother, you know, because I want somebody to love.  How did we get to this and what were the forces that drove us to this point, how did we get there, how did we get there?  We weren't always there.  How did we get there?  If we could break those, whatever those forces are so that African Americans in this country will enjoy dignity, will enjoy pride, where our children will feel that they can grow up in safety and be somebody and want to be somebody.  That would be a day to rejoice.  That would be a day, when the crime levels will go down, when we will not see college students at all killing each other for some reason and say, that's what I think needs to be changed in this country because I don't see it in others and I think that has to be changed in terms of what we have fought for through the years, what many people have struggled for through the years and that for some way, we can all relate and they can see a way through.
Story_ID: 111842
Speaker 1: As a professional counselor, do you see a basic lack of good counseling going on in the school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I--let me just tell you, no, I see excellent counseling going on in the schools, okay.  I see--let me just say this to you, and my--and I just left Baltimore County [Maryland] recently as the full time, you know, directing the counseling program there.  And our whole counseling program was really rated as one of the strongest, if not the strongest in the state.  We knew it--that we had good counselors.  And now I'm training people to be counselors.  I teach in the graduate school at Loyola College [now Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland] and the program is certified.  And most people want the people coming out because they know that they're well training, all right.  And so therefore, I been surrounded by people--some people who are not good but, by the time, we got through with them, they were either good or gone, all right, 'cause I feel that if you can't be good, then you shouldn't be there, all right.  There's no place for those who are just barely fair or C minus people.  Go, because you're dealing with human lives, which is very delicate, very, very delicate.  And what you can do to twist the life of someone, you just said, someone said, oh, yeah, you should be a junk man or something like that and you grow up all of your life thinking about that, you see.  And some things stay there, I think I joked immediately to say, yeah, when you said about this interview, about the colors you shouldn't wear--and the colors--and today I'm wearing an orange shade of some kind of a shade or orange I'm wearing.  And I remember I used to wear a lot of tangerine and orange 'til I went through a color me beautiful.  And people were doing your make-up and coloring you and so forth.  And when they got through with me, they said, you should never wear orange, you should never wear tangerine.  And it's always impacted and I said, gee a color that I like, you know, they said, no more for me.  And that's always been there to say god, it's the wrong color for me.  So what you think people might forget, people don't forget.  Somewhere it lies back in the subconscious and it comes out and it comes forth in some way to say--and sometimes it's an impediment for you and it should not be an impediment for you.
Speaker 1: So you're saying we all influence each other in ways we may not even know.
Speaker 2: We should be very careful what we say to people because we may be influencing somebody which may serve to impede somebody, rather than to catalyze the growth. We should always look at catalyzing the growth of people and making something better for people.  If we can't do it, move aside, just move aside, if you can't do it.
Story_ID: 111843
Speaker 1: With some of the concerns that you expressed, do you think that school counselors like yourself might not be enough to deal with the--some of the community problems that lead to violence in the streets--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think sometimes people think school counselors should do everything and they can't do everything, okay.  And I think it's a team working together, the school psychologist, the nurse, the assistant principal, the pupil personnel worker and some schools have social workers, working as a team.  And I think also sometimes people deal with individuals but I think also you have to deal with the broader level and look at what's affecting the school, okay.  And so if you change something that affecting the school, then you've changed it for many people rather for one person.  So it's not all individual, which I think is a misnomer.
Story_ID: 110932
Speaker 1: Now you've been involved in--I don't know how many other--what are some of the other things you've been involved in?  I know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a tape?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're rolling now.
Speaker 2: --Are you rolling the tape?  Well the SIDS [Sudden Infant Death Syndrome] project is what I do with your--both at the coalition--one with the black women and with the Women in the NAACP [Women in NAACP (WIN)] (unclear). And so we've made that a national project with both and it's a coalition that we're working with, with the three groups.  And it's a model because it's very unusual for three groups, you know, the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Coalition of 100 Black Women and Women in the NAACP to come together because each group likes to grandstand itself and to come together as a model of how organizations can come together.  We just finished three summits.  The first one was--the first one was the first day in February, which was held at Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].  And that was coordinated by the Coalition of 100 of Black Women.  And we had buses to come from all those southern states in, okay.  And then, I coordinated the one in Los Angeles and we had people from fifteen states, Utah and Wyoming and all out there, Nevada.  All these people came in the for SIDS Summit.  And the last one was in Dearborn.  And each group coordinated one but we all worked together.  And people from all groups came in.  And then when we look at the statistics really when Yvonne Maddox presented the statistics, the rate is going down and they feel because the word has gotten out there.  And you ask me what else have I been involved in.  I've been involved with the Links.  I've served on the national board with the Links.  I served as national project director for the Links.  And I just came off the eastern area team serving as ritual and protocol chair with eastern area--eastern area Links, I've served several times on the east--on the regional level with the Links.  Coalition of Links and the Deltas and some--I belong to a smaller group in Baltimore called the Full Amathians [ph.] which is an old, old group in Baltimore.  Mrs. [Vashti Turley] Murphy from the Afro whom I never met, who was also founder of the Deltas was one of the founders of the Full Amathians.  And it's called Lovers of Learning and we meet and--to discuss issues and have people discuss issues to enhance our learning and, and keep us acute and aware so forth.  So basically that's a part of my life.  I enjoy organizational dynamics.  I enjoy training.  I enjoy the National Council of Negro Women, where I serve as the vice chair, Dr. Height [HM Dorothy Height] is chair.  I serve as vice chair of the board.  That's very interesting to work for the National Council for Negro Women.  It's very interesting to work with Dr. Height in terms of that.  I think I said to you earlier, I do a lot of training for the board.  I'm also--I chair the financial affairs committee for the board.  I also chaired for several years, chaired the financial affairs committee for the American Counseling Association.  So with my professional organization and the community organization and the national organization, that's a part of my life.
Story_ID: 110933
Speaker 1: What do I like to do for fun?  I love to cook.  I love to cook.  I love to make dishes for the first time.  I like very small dinner parties where people may get food they don't normally get.  I don't cook the basic foods because other people cook them and I don't want them judge me by theirs.  But the people think I'm a gourmet cook.  I don't think I'm a gourmet cook, it's just that what I might serve you may not be what you have eaten every day.  So it may be different. But if it's prepared, it's prepared well because I believe if you're gonna cook, you find the best ingredients and you take your time and you prepare it with pride and love.  And you serve it in a very decorative and beautiful way.  I don't believe that you should slop the food on the table.  I believe that the food should look inviting.  It should be very pretty, okay, all right.  And so I enjoy people.  I think I'm best when I'm around people in a way, certain kinds of people, okay.  But I'm shy, I'm very shy and all of the personality tests come up and have me as being introverted and you're laughing at me in some way but I am introverted in a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--Myers-Briggs--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I've taken Myers-Briggs and donated--yes, and Myers-Briggs and I don't, you know--I'm shy--I've forgotten which letters I am right now 'cause I push 'em out of the way 'cause so-for some reason, I don't like being classified the way I'm classified, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: The Firal B [ph.] brings me up as being introverted.  And so even though I look at these for other people, for myself, I keep saying, well, maybe so, I know I'm shy but I don't see myself as being introverted.  However, I would not be the one to run out there and yell all over the place.  But I wouldn't be the one who would not meet you and come up and make you comfortable. So is there a difference in that?  I would welcome you in--wanna make sure that you had a chair and that you were--that you met everybody else in the building, okay.  And that you were comfortable but I wouldn't push myself up there, in some way.  And I would introduce everybody else before I would introduce myself.  And I wouldn't care if I were never introduced.  So maybe that's where the--being introverted and being shy comes in.  I don't know but I was shy as a kid, even though I would get up and speak before, you know, when I was president of American Counseling Association, at my convention, there were 12,500 people and I didn't mind presiding in front of them.  I enjoyed presiding in front of them and speaking in front of them.  And Dave Brinkley one night, Dave Brinkley [David Brinkley] when I was president elect and Dave Brinkley was the speaker and we sat side-by-side on the stage and the person who was the president took up more time.  Dave thought he was gonna speak and the other person went on.  They said, oh, hell and started talking to me.  Then after Brinkley spoke and the people asked Dave Brinkley some questions and Dave Brinkley said, do you think there will ever be a woman president of the United States.  And he said, you got one sitting right there on the stage.  He said, you have one sitting right there on the stage, you know, so, but that's--you know, those are some of the fun moments there, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 110934
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on your career, and all of your volunteer activities, what do you consider right now as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a legacy.  I don't know what my legacy is.  My legacy may not be as defined as many people say that's their legacy.  My legacy is that I may have touched, I may have touched general people in some positive way.  I may have touched.  I run across former students.  I run across former students who come to me in such a very fond way and say, you know if it hadn't been for you, I would not be here.  If it hadn't been for you--so my legacy may not be something that's so crystalized to say, that this monument is my legacy, okay.  My legacy might be out there that you would never, never know about and the many, many people who have moved to another level because they feel, not because I did, because they feel, their perceptions were, that in some way, I helped to catalyze them to another level.  And I think that's possibly my legacy.  And that is not a legacy that people can talk about 'cause it's hard to quantify, hard to qualify, hard to put in your hands and to see one, two, three, four, five, okay.  But I do believe that's my legacy.  I do believe my legacy is in touching people just general people, people without titles, who have now grown up to have titles.  And people who are touching other people.  I think in terms of how I'm touching my students now and they can go out there and what they can do in some way, I think, maybe that's my legacy.  I don't know what my legacy is.  I don't know--
Story_ID: 110935
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything that you would do differently, when you look over your life?
Speaker 2: I don't know what I would do differently.  I, I had--I had said in later years, recently I'd say, gee I would love to have been president of a small college in some way.  I would love to have done--been the presidency of a small college.  I didn't think about 'til later but I think I would have enjoyed that, okay--of a small integrated college.  I think I would have loved to have been the president of that, okay.  I think that--I think many of the things I have done may supersede some of the things that people are highlighted for and, and put up on screens and, and put in museums--I'm just using that in a way, may supersede that, but it may not be what people are looking for in terms of how they highlight people and how they revere people in a way to say, yeah, this was a so and so, this was a so and so, okay.  I remember very well being on the board with, on College Boards' board.  And I remember one person saying to me 'cause--saying to me--said, you know, you're on the secondary level.  You know if you move to the college, you'd get much more note, okay, all right.  And I know this person was interceding for me to be a dean and be a dean of women--I didn't want to be a dean of women for anybody.  No, that wasn't my whole thing, there.  But there are certain ways you're moved that, you know, you hang from the chandelier and there are other ways you move that you are a candle burning here rather than the beautiful chandelier.  But I have no regrets.  I'm very pleased that coming from a humble environment, from a family of six, from a very small community, from Anne Arundel County, from the small state of Maryland, that I, I am who I am and I'm comfortable with myself and I'm not uncomfortable by wishing I could be somebody else.  If I kept wishing I was somebody else, or something else, I would be unhappy and I would not be a pleasant person to be around.
Story_ID: 110936
Speaker 1: And a, ma'am, this is slightly different from legacy, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You mean what do I want on my tombstone (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No, not necessarily (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you what's on the tombstone, because I put it on there for my husband [Guilbert Daley] and myself and it says something about a life of commitment to education and community service.  And that's what it says, a lifetime of commitment to excellence in education and community service.  And I think--how would I like to be remembered?  As a very positive being, who influenced the positive directions of others.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much--
Story_ID: 110937
Speaker 1: Who's in the picture?  I mean, tell us who's in the picture, when it was shot, were there some special circumstances?  Describe those, just briefly, okay. We have a lot of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Give us your--
Speaker 2: Which one?  That the one turned sideways, my father [Richard Thomas]?
Speaker 1: Right.  And we turn 'em sideways to scan 'em better--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: --when we shoot 'em.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a picture of my father, that was possibly taken some time in the '70s [1970s] right there, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what's your father's name?
Speaker 1: MY father is Richard G. Thomas, Sr.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is a picture with some grouping of Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] then and there.  Isn't it amazing that I was with a grouping of Deltas wearing a pink dress.
Speaker 2: And about what year is that?
Speaker 1: Could I look at it?  I think that possibly was the late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: What did it say?
Speaker 1: All right, it's nothing on the back--
Speaker 2: Oh, that is a picture that I was speaking some place and my hair was curly, curly 'cause it must have been very humid (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --a lot like (unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--very, very humid but I was giving a speech there and that could have been like the 80s [1980s], '79 [1979] or '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my husband and me, that was somewhere possibly in the '80s [1980s] when I look at his hairstyle there and--there--his moustache and his hairstyle.  That was part possibly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was your husband's name?
Speaker 2: Gilbert A. Daley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture coming up of me with the American Personnel and Guidance Association [now American Counseling Association] and that definitely was a picture somewhere in the '70s [1970s] because standing in that picture is Chuck Lewis [Charles Lewis] on this side who was the executive director of the American Counseling Association.  Booth Schurtzer [ph.] who was a past president of the Association of Professor at Purdue University.  I was standing there in the middle and next to me, I was possibly president elect.  Because on the other side of me is Norman Feingold who was the president when I was president elect.  And that gives you an idea of the cross-section of what the organization was like.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was taken in maybe Lake Tahoe 'cause my brother was in California and I was visiting my brother.  My brother was older than I was and that's the picture of my brother and that was, it could have been the late 80's [1980s] or the early '90s [1990s] when we were there, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a picture with Cardinal [William] Keeler who is the current cardinal and that was in the '90s [1990s], my husband [Guilbert Daley] and Cardinal Keeler and myself.  And Cardinal Keeler always has a reception at Christmas time.
Speaker 2: He's the cardinal for this area?
Speaker 1: He's the cardinal for this area.  He was also, the was also president of the bishops, the national president of the bishops, but Bishop Gregory now has that position.
Speaker 2: Right, it's (unclear)--from Illinois--
Speaker 1: Yeah, mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the next one.
Speaker 1: That's me going somewhere to do a workshop or to do something, with my books in my hand and I don't know where I'm going or what I'm wearing but I guess I thought I looked good.  I was gonna do well.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, I have to talk again? (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, really, okay.  I think that's a picture when I was president of American School Counselors Association.  I remember that dress very well. It had white leather coming all the way down and there I was looking very serious and very ugly (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of myself with Mr. [Kweisi] Mfume and I think we were at one of the conferences and that's somewhere maybe like '95 [1995] or '96 [1997] or something in there, could be '98 [1998].  I'm not sure.  All right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, next.
Speaker 1: That's a committee meeting.  On the side is Mary Kay Albritton who was over people services division with the Maryland State Department of Education.  And in the middle is a person from the counseling association whose name skips at the moment.  And I'm there.  And that's a picture somewhere in the 90's [1990s], we took that picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a teen lift with the Deltas, one that says 1968, Dr. Geraldine Woods from California was the president and I was the national projects chair of Delta Sigma Theta during her term and that's when we took the students all over the country from different states in what we called the teen lift.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This was in March of 2-0-0-3.  It is the naming of the building at 633 Pennsylvania Avenue for Dr. Dorothy I. Height [HM Dorothy Height], for the National Council of Negro Women, big, big celebration and I also chaired that two days of celebration.  Now the picture coming up is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: I was in California for the summit for the SIDS [Sudden Infant Death Syndrome] Conference and that was in March of 2-0-0-3 and the conference had--the summit had gone very well.  We had lots of people to come from 15 different states and that was in my hotel room afterwards.  And I just decided to relax and somebody came by and took my picture and I think it's a disgrace that you show it but you're showing it, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This was when I finished all of my doctoral studies at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] and the picture is dated 1986 and that's when graduation was but I really finished in 1985 and my husband was with me so all of my graduation pictures from there.  I believe maybe there one or two by myself but my husband was such an intricate part of my life so we shared the things together. (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Okay, that's February 16, 1966?
Speaker 1: Ninety eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 2: Eighty six?
Speaker 1: Eighty six, '86 [1986].  The picture coming up was my official picture for Delta Sigma Theta.  That's on the wall at Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.  It was also my official picture, blown up larger, my official picture for the American Counseling Association.  It was a picture I like.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is when we marched down Pennsylvania Avenue during the administration of Bertha Roddy to celebrate the right of women to vote and Delta Sigma Theta was the only organization early when the women marched down Pennsylvania Avenue to fight for the right to vote and so again when they went back to celebrate the anniversary, Deltas were there to celebrate the anniversary.  We were the only black group marching.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Coming up, you see me--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Unclear.
Speaker 1: Ahhh ahhh, they were not there in 1919 doing that.  There, I think I'm on the seashore.  I like the water and I believe that was out at Lake Tahoe where that picture is taken out a Lake Tahoe.  I do relax at times.  I do relax.  I like to do that.  And coming up, maybe dusting an office.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: Did you get that one?
Speaker 2: It really looks nice on the full screen.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Ahhh this is when I finished my bachelor's at Bowie State [College, Bowie, Maryland], which is Bowie State University now.  There I am sitting there, standing there or whatever.  That's how I looked.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year is that?
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna tell you what year I was--like nineteen years old.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's how I looked at age nineteen.  I was so whatever.  This is--oh, this is a wedding reception which was really at home in our yard or our garden.  I called it a garden reception.  I don't know what you'd call it.  Some people may call it a yard reception but I had a reception at home in my garden.  And on there, well you see the best man and Billy Bolden (ph.) from Washington, my husband, I'm there, my sister Ronetta, my husband's mother and my mother and my husband's two aunt's are there.
Speaker 2: Is your mother here?
Speaker 1: That's my mother right there.
Speaker 2: This is you?
Speaker 1: That's my sister.
Speaker 2: Your sister.  And this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I'm next to--right.  That's right, ahhh ahhh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's me.  And that's a current picture taken and that's taken through the church.  We took all the pictures for the church and that's a very recent picture--me--looking there now so you see me.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my sister.  My sister is now deceased and my sister was younger but that gives you an idea of the family, photo of the family there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What's her name?
Speaker 1: Ronetta Thomas Henry, R-O-N-E-T-T-A, Ronetta, Thomas is her maiden name and Henry was her married name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year do you think this might have been? Approximately.
Speaker 1: Approximately, let me see how long she's deceased.  I don't know, she's pretty--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --(unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  I don't know.
Speaker 2: This looks like Indira Gandhi, but that's you right?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There I am with the president of Cuba, President [Fidel] Castro and that was in November of 2-0-0-2 when I went on the good-well mission, seventeen of us went with Mr. Umfume to Cuba.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this was (coughing)--this was--
Speaker 2: I'm gonna skip this one because I--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this was just before--the week before President [Bill] Clinton left office, all right.  And that's what he came to the headquarters of National Council of Negro Women and we were able to take our picture with him and he signed 'em, hmmm hmmm.  That's a part of--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: There I am with a part of my family, with my niece, Faith, who is like a daughter to me and her little daughter, Alexandra, and we were up in Coppins State College [now Coppin State Univeristy] when [HM] Harriette Cole was reviewing her book, somewhere within the last eight to ten years--let me see, yeah, I guess but, the last eight years.
Speaker 2: That was taken in the '60s [1960s].  I remember my corduroy dress and I remember who wore that--I mean who took that picture of me and--
Speaker 1: You could have gone to Hollywood with that picture--
Speaker 2: And that's funny looking little me right there, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (OFF VOICE CAMERA):  Good enough.  Next.
Speaker 2: And that other one is the picture of my husband and me taken not so long ago.  We took that picture at church, how they take the pictures for the church book that they put together, then they blow up some in the--and so that's the two of us there.
