Story_ID: 159293
Speaker 1: Okay so I'm gonna start by slating to say I'm Harriette Cole interviewing you for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Curt Champagne, observing is Matthew Hickey.  I'd love for you to say and spell your name and tell me where we are and what today is, today's date.
Speaker 2: My name is John Edward Davis.  We are in Chicago [Illinois]. Today's date is October the 21st [October 21, 2014].  It is a Tuesday.  It is gray outside and--
Speaker 1: It's the year 2014.
Speaker 2: Oh, and it's obviously yes, the year 2014.
Speaker 1: And what do you do?  What's your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I am a media and political consultant.
Speaker 1: And when were you born?  What is your birth date?
Speaker 2: November 3rd, 1947.
Speaker 1: So it's almost happy birthday.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 159294
Speaker 1: So let's start with some People magazine-type questions.  So what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, my favorite food has to be beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Travel destination?
Speaker 2: My most favorite, most comfortable travel destination is Thessaloniki, Greece.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My most favorite, I guess favorite saying is can't nobody love you like them, can't nobody hurt you like them that supposed to love you because they're the only ones you will let close enough to you to do you harm.
Speaker 1: That's powerful.
Story_ID: 159295
Speaker 1: So, I'd like to start with your family background, and let's start with your mother.  Would you tell me your mother's name, when and where she was born, and tell me about her.
Speaker 2: My mother is Myrtle Donaldson.  She was Myrtle Davis.  She was born in Cooper, Texas, east Texas, and she was one of four children to my grandfather, Albert, at the time and his wife, but my mother, her mother passed away and, and my mother suddenly had another stepmother and she moved to, from Cooper, east Texas to Wichita Falls, Texas, in north Texas where she met and married my fa- my stepfather, Felley Donaldson.  But, Myrtle Donaldson, Davis was a, is, is a wonderful, caring human being who worked very hard as a domestic in the homes of very wealthy oil and cattle people, in, in Texas as well as a smattering of doctors and other pro- professionals.  But, she was, she is just a saint.  She would cook not just for her own family and her own children, but she always had enough for everybody else in the neighborhood who just happened to come by at dinnertime. I'm sure a story not unlike so many other African American families of the day in the 1940s, '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born, what year?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1928, and so she has you know eclipsed the eighty-year mark and we're so happy and, and fortunate to have her still around, being very productive and of course in all of our businesses.
Speaker 1: But of course.  And how long did she work?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness my mother worked up until the year 2005, and at that point she was working at a hospital in Wichita Falls, Texas, basically working the, the night shift doing some cleaning of rooms and beds and being an assistant to the nurses and doctors.
Speaker 1: My grandmother was a domestic, and she worked until she was ninety-three, and my mother said, "Don't you think it's time to retire?" (Laughter) We have a good work ethic don't we?
Speaker 2: But in those jobs you know they, they got such a great satisfaction particularly if they worked for people who were respectful, and in my mother's case she wouldn't tolerate anyone who was not respectful to her and so, she, she gained a tremendous amount of admiration from the people from whom she worked and many of their children even to this day are like her children. They still call her, they still visit.  They come from all over the country whether it's California or Virginia or Carolina, they come back to Wichita Falls, Texas, and just last week in fact they, one of the young girls came with her husband and had dinner with my mom just like the old days.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Now her, she grew up in Texas.  What did her parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: Her father, Albert, worked as a, at the Sheppard Air Force Base [Wichita County, Texas], worked in the kitchen, wasn't a chef, but he cleaned and, and did those kinds of general duties.  My grandmother, my grandfather's third wife, my mother's stepmother Lettie [ph.] was a homemaker.  But, that's, that's generally what, what they did most of, of their lives, you know, just labor and domestic work.
Story_ID: 159296
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your mother's [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] family?  Can you go back to slavery?
Speaker 2: Almost, we, we can go, we can go right at the, at the end of slavery about 1863, 1865, so we, we're right there to my, my great-great-grandmother, I knew my great grandmother.  Her name was [Lula] "Ludie" Warren.  She was a phenomenal lady who we always thought was, was a midwife, but I found out recently that, that no she, she worked in, in the fields and she also worked in, in private homes as a domestic.  But, she too was one of these people who commanded a tremendous amount of respect.
Speaker 1: Ludie a tremendous amount of respect.
Speaker 2: Yes, and you know it's amazing that as children there were three or four of us great-grandchildren who would have to go down to Cooper, Texas, where she lived she lived in east Texas in the summertime, dreadfully hot, and we would have to do chores for her.  We would go to the ice house for instance to, to bring ice and her command was, "Don't drop my ice," and of course we would have these tongs and my cousin would be on one side I would be on the other straining you know and, and not just to not drop it, but to get it home in time before it melted and we would walk what seemed like an eternity from the ice house to her house and put it in an icebox.
Speaker 1: A literal icebox.
Speaker 2: Literally an icebox.
Speaker 1: And how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, I was about six years old.
Speaker 1: So this was heavy too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seemed like a ton at the time, and the, and the, the dirt road was hot.  I just remember it being blistering hot.
Speaker 1: Did you ever drop it?
Speaker 2: Never dropped it, never dropped it.  Now my cousin would sag on the other end and I would strain to make sure we didn't drop it, but then we would clean the, the outhouse.  We would put new planks out to the outhouse, put a new phone book in the outhouse, so we, we learned a lot of things, but we also used to watch my great-grandmother, Ludie, do her hair and we were fascinated by her because she had long beautiful hair and she would never allow anyone to touch the, the hair that she had combed out from either the brush or the comb.
Speaker 1: What did she do with it?
Speaker 2: She would wrap it in a ball and she would put it in tissue and she would keep it in a keepsake place, either a drawer or box in her drawer, but it smelled so good because she had this coconut type oils and other things that felt, smelled so wonderful on her hair, that sometimes when she didn't have incense to burn 'cause she you know praised the ancestors as well.  She would burn this either incense or charcoal by the front door.  She would put a glass of water every day, fresh glass of water by the door for the ancestors, and then she would burn this incense and when she did not have incense she would take this hair and she would take, take some of it and twine it as tightly as she could and then she would put it in the little dish and she would burn that too.
Speaker 1: Wow, and the incense was that something that she made as well?
Speaker 2: It was basically charcoal I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it, it, but it smelled good.  I, I don't know what she did to it to make it smell that way, but it wasn't you know an industrial you know nasty smell or anything of charcoal.  This was really, really very sweet and we, we had such admiration for her and, and such a, you know amazement, you know of, of her connection, you know, to this other world.
Story_ID: 159297
Speaker 1: As she [maternal great-grandmother, Lula "Ludie" Warren] prayed to the ancestors, did, was she also involved in the church?
Speaker 2: Not much in the church at all.
Speaker 1: So it was more like an African connection?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Did you talk to her about that?
Speaker 2: No.  Unfortunately, you know as children we didn't gage--engage you know adults you know in, in heavy conversation or probing conversation about, about anything, you know.  What we gleaned you know about their lives and insights generally came from their discussions with other grown people, and we just happened to you know get it vicariously.
Speaker 1: What else did she do that showed you her connection to the ancestors?
Speaker 2: Well, the one thing that, that we always thought that in given the racial situation, the social situation in, in Texas and particularly east Texas in those days that you know you just couldn't you know sass white people.  I mean it was just, you couldn't talk back to them.  Often times you couldn't even look them in the eye, so, but my great-grandmother could go anywhere.  She could go to the movie in Cooper, Texas, Sherman, Texas, Tyler, Texas.  My, my great-grandmother would send us to the store and we wouldn't have to have any money even to the white stores to get what we needed 'cause everybody knew Ms. Ludie. They respected Ms. Ludie.  There would be white men in, in, in cowboy hats, in pickup trucks with gun racks who would come to her house and with, with fruits and vegetables.  And I'll never forget this one man.  We would sit on Ms., Ms., my great-grandmother's porch in the afternoon in the cool of the afternoon evening and I remember this man coming up in this pickup truck and he wanted to bring her some fresh shelled peas, but before he could even step foot in her property he waited out on, by his truck, took off his hat and asked her if he could come up and bring her fresh shelled peas.  We thought that was just the coolest thing.
Speaker 1: And this is in--
Speaker 2: Cooper, Texas.
Speaker 1: --Cooper, Texas, where there, well there were outhouses but certainly if there were bathrooms they were for coloreds and for whites and everything was segregated (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, strict segregation in terms of public accommodations.  There were, there were no hotels, I mean you, you had to you know sleep either in your car or your bus, if you're traveling by bus, or you stayed with friends, relatives, or you slept in a park on a roadside.
Speaker 1: And as you were coming to visit her, where were you coming from?
Speaker 2: Wichita Falls [Texas].  It was, it was no more than a, about a four hour drive or three and half hour drive.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the segregated public accommodations?
Speaker 2: Absolutely 'cause we often, you know, had to pack our own food even for such a short trip.  I mean if we were going to stop and, and have something to eat outside of the car we would have to find a place, a park, or some grove trees where we could, where we could roll out our, our food and enjoy what my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] or aunts had already cooked or my grandmother had cooked, but certainly we just, we just couldn't go to a restaurant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What age were you during this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, from the time that, that, that I was maybe six, seven years old that I was cognizant of, of these things, and I mean, all the way until I pretty much graduated from high school in 1966.
Speaker 1: Makes sense.  And how long did Ms. Ludie live?
Speaker 2: Ms. Ludie lived until she was eighty, I think eighty-eight years old when she died, and you know it was really tragic the way she died because her daughter had an insurance policy and as a condition of the insurance policy you had to go and get a checkup and so she was taken to a hospital for a checkup in Dallas [Texas] and there was nothing wrong with my great-grandmother.  She was, you know, up and about every single day almost at the same day, same time of day, crack of dawn, but she was disoriented obviously in a hospital overnight.  She got out of bed, fell and broke her hip and at that point she basically gave up.  Of course it, it really hurt my, my great-aunt to, to think that her mother had lived all these many years independent and independently and then would have to go down that way.
Story_ID: 159298
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name, where he is from, his birthday, his people.
Speaker 2: Well, my father was named Tommy Christian, and Tommy Christian was as far as we can gather from our, our background that we've, we've been able to do he was from a little town in Oklahoma and my father came to Wichita Falls, Texas, across the river from Oklahoma and to go to high school.  He attended Booker T. Washington High School [Wichita Falls, Texas] in the 1940s, and he met my mom [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] and she was sixteen at the time and she became pregnant with me.  They never married, and he soon left and attended Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] where he was a star football player.  He and a friend of his named Arthur Devon [ph.] enlisted in the Service together, in the [U.S.] Army, and they were hauled off to Korea, to the Korean War and it was a long time before he ever returned to Wichita Falls, Texas.  Leaving Korea, he settled in Los Angeles [California] and that's essentially where I met him as a, as a teenager.   And you know he always wanted to play for the Los Angeles Rams.  He wanted an opportunity, but they had their quota.  If they had one black, they had too many blacks, so he never got an opportunity, but he was, he was quite a guy on the streets of Los Angeles especially around Central Avenue he was the guy.  Everybody knew Tommy Christian.
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, was he in touch with you?
Speaker 2: No, but my, his mother and my grandmother, Lillian, Lillian Johnson, Lillian Christian Johnson she was, she lived right down the street.  I was very fortunate to have three grandmothers, great-grandmother all living at, at one time.  I was very, very fortunate and loved each and every one of them.  They had such fine qualities and they were great stabilizing forces in sometimes a very chaotic world racially and, and then in your family you know there's always some stuff going, but these woman always stepped in and calmed everything down.
Story_ID: 159299
Speaker 1: At what age were you when your parents [Myrtle Davis Donaldson and Felley Donaldson] got married?
Speaker 2: I was eight years old.  I had been living with my, my grandmother and grandfather, Albert and Lettie Davis, living comfortably and wonderfully spoiled rotten by a whole, you know, group of unmarried uncles and aunts in this big house with so much going on, lots of music, a lot of black men ironing and starching their shirts and shinning their shoes and looking great and groomed and, and then when I was told by my grandmother that I would be going to live with my mother[Myrtle Davis Donaldson] across town, another part of the black community, with she and my, with her and my, and my stepfather I was none too pleased and in fact I, I, I remember going over there, staying the first day, but running away the next going back across the tracks to my grandmother's house and they just basically you know told me that, "You, you can't do that anymore.  This is where you gotta go, it's where you gotta stay."
Speaker 1: This is--Lottie is Ludie's [Davis's great-grandmother, Lula "Ludie" Warren] daughter?
Speaker 2: No, Lettie.
Speaker 1: Excuse me Lettie.
Speaker 2: No, Ludie, Ludie's daughter was my, was my mother's mother.  Now her, her name was, was Bragg and she died when my mother was seven years old and--
Speaker 1: Ludie?
Speaker 2: No, that's--
Speaker 1: Lettie.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's okay. I'm not following you.
Speaker 2: My, my, my mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Your mother's mother.
Speaker 2: --Was Ms. Bragg--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Okay.  That is Ludie's daughter.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: Okay and then, and, but she died when my mother was, was young.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So they, when, so who were you living with?
Speaker 2: Okay, there are all these Ls.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My, my real father's [Tommy Christian] mother was Lillian.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: Okay, Lillian Christian Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My, my grandfather's or my mother's stepmother is Lettie. That was my grandfather's third and final wife and my great-grandmother was Ludie, so Ludie, Lettie, and Lillian.
Speaker 1: It was a little bit confusing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you know and course I, we just, it just kind of rolled. It seemed lyrical, literal.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --You know and literally and had that little lilt to it that you could just roll it off your tongue, Lettie, Lillian, and Ludie.
Speaker 1: So when you were born your, your mom was very young.
Speaker 2: Sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: So, her mom took you right away or what, what happened?
Speaker 2: I was born in my grandmother's bed.  I was born in my grandmother's bed on a Monday.  My mother had walked she says down to my, my other grandmother, Lillian's house.  It was just down the street 'cause she was out of school and she complained that she was feeling badly and thought that she would--might deliver and my grandmother Lillian walked her from her house back to my grandmother, Lettie's house where she put her to bed and then called the doctor.
Speaker 1: So, then you were born.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I was quite the celebrity.  I mean at, at that time there were no children in my grandmother's house.  A bunch of unmarried uncles and aunts, teenagers and, and, and older and down the street at my other grandmother's house, Lillian's house, all of her children, my uncles and my father had long moved out and so I was the, the only grandchild and I again, I, I lived a very charmed life.  I had a wonderful, wonderful childhood.
Story_ID: 159300
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Of my grandparents [Albert Davis and Lettie Davis] on Friday nights, my grandmother cooking, frying chicken, spaghetti, and maybe some other things, so if someone wanted something special she would do it, but then they would play cards and dominos practically all night long and there would be people coming and going inside the house.  They'd have about four or five card tables set up throughout the living room playing cards and dominos and that was big, I mean that was before television in our house at least.  And it was, it was so mesmerizing to see the interaction between these, these grown folks.  I couldn't wait to be grown.  I couldn't wait to do, to do the things that they did and have the fun that they seemed to, to have had.  And these are people who worked, you know dreadfully, you know hard work most times as laborers and field hands and domestics, you know, being humiliated many times and yet when they got in that community in their homes they had lots and lots of fun.
Speaker 1: This, your home was in what town?
Speaker 2: Wichita Falls, Texas.
Speaker 1: Wichita Falls, Texas.
Speaker 2: Just north of, well it's north of Dallas [Texas] about ninety-five miles, south of the Oklahoma border in Lawton, Oklahoma, by about fifty, fifty-five miles.
Story_ID: 159301
Speaker 1: What are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember of your home and your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: The, the, the sounds of, of trains.  I loved the sound of trains.  It, it was such a haunting, almost foreboding kind of, of sound, you know, and, and to realize that every, every train engineer conductor it seemed had, had his own sound, you know.  They would hmmm, now that was a specific engineer with his own sound, and I just thought that that was just cool.  He must have owned that train, you know, that was his train.  And we lived near Sheppard Air Force Base [Wichita County, Texas], so the sounds of these, these jet fighters you know taking off and, and coming in for a landing or the scrambling of B-52 bombers over your house at four o'clock in the morning.  And then the smells, oh my gosh, the, the smell of, of great cooking, whether it was fish or the great smell of cabbage and the great smell of okra, you know, cooking.  The smell of black-eyed peas and red beans and rice it was just, I could, I, I really right now I'm salivating almost because you can all--you know it's amazing how the smells, you know, or, or, or just you know, you know latched into your brain that you just never forget them and if you smell a hint of, of those ever again then it suddenly awakens those same, those same recollections, those same memories.  It's, it's amazing how strong that is, but yeah the, those smells and, and I really believe that again the sight of grown people socializing and, and sharing and caring about each other.  I mean we may have been sort of like isolated in our black community, but we were also as children insulated against a lot of the perils that our grandfathers and mothers and fathers and mothers went through and I guess we didn't really appreciate that until much later.  Oftentimes when I got to college in fact and my friends we would talk about it.  I didn't realize how fortunate we were to have lived and, and been reared in that kind of environment with those kind of people who was, who were very protective of you and you thought that they were just being heavy handed, that they were being mean, but, but they, they had, there was a method to their madness, and we're so happy that, that we listened to them, we obeyed them.
Story_ID: 159302
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up who were the storytellers in your family?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother, [Lula] Ludie [Warren], was a storyteller and, and so was my, my stepfather, Felley Donaldson.  Felley had great stories.  Most of the stories, you know, gleaned from another world, the world where he worked as a domestic.  Again, he worked with some of the richest oil and cattle barons in north Texas, so he was brushing elbows with some of the most powerful people really in the country as a domestic.  He heard all their conversations.  He internalized their conversations, and then he came back to share their conversations so that we would not be deceived in the least about who these people really were and how they conducted their lives in private.  And he, he met John Wayne.  He met Bing Crosby.  He, he just met a lot of folks that, that he kept a little diary and a little red book, which I have.  He gave it to me before he passed away that listed all of these people, Senator John Tower and L, [President] Lyndon Johnson, [Governor] John Connally, but he would, he would tell these stories about, you know, mostly the, the children of, of the wealthy people that he worked for, many of whom, you know, trusted him more than they trusted their own parents.  We'll never, I'll never forget that, you know, from time to time they would come into our community, into our home and they wanted to stay.  They just, they felt very comfortable there.  When one young man was having a drug problem he wouldn't, he wouldn't agree to anything that his parents wanted him to do in terms of rehab, but my father talked with him and he went back and told his parents, "Look if Felley goes with me I'll go to the rehab clinic."  And I'll never forget my father packing a little suitcase and saying that he was, he was leaving that he was gonna go to Kansas with this kid and he didn't know how long it was gonna, gonna take, but we would be okay.  And my father drove with him in his Mercedes-Benz all the way to Kansas to a treatment, drug treatment center, drug and alcohol treatment center and when my father passed away this person came to our house in a beautiful Ferrari with his wife and said that he would not be alive had it not been for my father, but, so we knew, you know, the, the, the inner workings and the inner dynamics of these families and my father told wonderful stories.  He was a 33rd degree Mason, and he was in Washington, D.C. at a convention once and I was there on a news story for CBS.  My father called me over to the Omni Shoreham Hotel where he was with President [William] Tolbert [Jr.] of Liberia, and there was all this talk about all these the diamonds and the jewels and the cars and the homes and all these things that he had amassed and my father as a very simple humble man with all these other people just in awe of all of these, these things that this man, this president, this important person had.  My father said to him, "I don't wanna be disrespectful, but how many homes, houses does a man need before he feels that he is at home?  How many cars does a man need before he really feels safely driven?  How many diamonds does a man need before he feels really wealthy?"  And it was, it was a hush in that room.  He said, "Whatever you do Mr. President don't ever raise the price of rice."  I just loved my father.  He was an amazing man, simple man.  When we had his funeral two years ago, we didn't have a church big enough, so the biggest church in the black community allowed us on that special day to have the service in their sanctuary and it was still overflowing.
Speaker 1: And who came?
Speaker 2: Oh my God some of the wealthiest people in north Texas, some of the children of the people he used to work with who had their own testimonials and stories about how he helped them, how they listened to his stories about how they went fishing with him, how they just really enjoyed, you know, sitting and listening to him, a simple uncomplicated man, you know, so a lot of folks, very important people, bankers and lawyers and doctors and judges.  Oh my goodness they were all there.
Story_ID: 159303
Speaker 1: When you go to your growing up days the home with all of the, your grandmother [Lettie Davis] and your grandfather [Albert Davis] and your unmarried aunts and uncles and the ironing and all that, what, can you describe that house?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, that house at, on Chance Street [Wichita Falls, Texas] was, it was like the place to be because my uncles and aunts were very popular and my, my grandfather was a very popular guy.  My grandmother was a disciplinarian, and she would not only discipline her grandchildren and children, but she would, she would discipline everybody else's children along the block.  So, you know I, I would, we just had this, this house that, that hummed and buzzed with, with activity.  All, all of my uncles and aunts' friends would love to come, they came over to the house.  Almost every day there was something going on, but my uncles and aunts also had to work as teenagers, so you know they would, they would have my, my grandmother would, would have washed their clothes in a big, big pot outside with lye soap and she would stir it with a, with a stick over a fire on the, the outside and then she would hang it on the, the line outside and we would run through it as kids and you know there was always this smell it was, it, it wasn't a downy smell, but it was a freshness that you, you can't hardly imitate and, and, and of course those shirts were brought in they were starched and then they, my uncles and aunts would iron their own shirts and dresses.  So, you had that smell of, of, of sort of a steam and, and the fabric you know smell in the house and the polish, the shoe polish, Kiwi Polish.  They would use that Kiwi and they would shine those shoes, spit shine those shoes, and you know you couldn't even leave the house whether you were a boy or a girl in the family.  You couldn't leave the house without looking your best.  I mean when I think about you know how young people today just get away with wearing their pants below their waists and along their buttocks it's just, it's just crazy.  We could never have done that.  First because it's a reflection on your family and you couldn't do that.  You just couldn't do that to bring that kind of disrespect to your family.  And then of course you would have been chastised if not beaten with a switch by everybody in your family and you know you just couldn't be disrespectful.  I remember one time my, my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] was washing at our house and she was going back and forth getting clothes out of the washing machine in those days taking it out to the line to hang and I had my foot over the arm of the chair and every time she would come by she said, "Johnny take, take your, your leg off the chair it's gonna break the arm," and I don't know what I was thinking but every, she would go out the back door, I'd throw my leg across the chair and she would come through and she would stand over me, says, "Didn't I just tell you not to do that?"  I said, "Oh mom."  She would go up in her room fold some clothes, and she came back and I'll never forget I had my leg on, on the arm again and as soon as she walked by I took it off.  She walked past me to the kitchen, she put the basket down and she came back and slapped me.  My mother never hit me before then, but she slapped me and I jumped up and I, I'm standing over my little short mother as if I'm going to challenge her, and she says, "And what do you think you're going to do?"  And I sat there and I sulked.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh I was about thirteen years old and I sat down because suddenly it flashed in my mind: "What do you think you're doing?"  I mean if you touched your mother you will die, and it wouldn't be my father [Tommy Christian] or my stepfather [Felley Donaldson] that would do the harm, it would have been my mother's brothers, my uncles, who would have come down to my house and probably taken turns beating me within an inch of my life for striking their sister.
Speaker 1: So this was in your mother's house.  This is when you're visiting--
Speaker 2: No this is while we--yeah we would, when I was living with my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We moved from across the tracks--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --where I lived with them as a seven or eight year old kid.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I got to be ten years old, we moved to, back to the side of the town where my grandparents lived and lived only about three blocks from them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived with your grandmother and your, and your mother.  The whole family was, was everyone together up until--
Speaker 2: When I was, when I was born up until about five years old when my mother was married to my stepfather--
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: --and then at seven years old so I went to live with them across town, but you know up until that time yeah we all lived, lived together--
Speaker 1: Together.
Speaker 2: --in my grandparents' house.  But, we moved into the new addition.  They had built these really nice little tract homes and we moved from across the tracks back over into, from the Kemp addition [Floral Heights, Wichita Falls, Texas] over to the new addition.
Speaker 1: And did your parents--prior to your mom did your grandparents own their home?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: So as, as domestic workers how long did it take them to, to save the money to, to buy their home?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but as, as far as I knew all along when I was a little kid they owned their house.  Now, you think that you know they weren't making a lot of money, but everybody chipped in, my uncles, my aunts. I mean everybody chipped into the pot and so you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And they had how many children?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, my uncle Jesse (ph.), my uncle Donald, my aunt Helen, my, my mom, my aunt Bessie Dee (ph.), my uncle Robert.  So, there were like seven kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And they lived, the, the children lived there for how long?
Speaker 2: All of the children lived there in my mother's case she was out before she was, you know, twenty years old or nineteen years old.  My uncle Jesse and my uncle Donald stayed the longest.  They were the youngest.  My aunt Helen was out early.  She was married, but lived two doors down.  My aunt Bessie Dee was the oldest and she was gone a long time.  She was working in, in food service out at the [Sheppard] Air Force base [Wichita County, Texas].
Story_ID: 159304
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Well I attended Booker T. Washington Elementary, Junior, and Senior High School [Wichita Falls, Texas], so did my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson], so did all of my uncles and my father, my real father [Tommy Christian] all attended the same school in Wichita Falls, Texas.
Speaker 1: So, these were the segregated schools for black folk?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And how many people were in your class growing up?
Speaker 2: In my graduating class from Booker T. Washington High School were 126 students, one of the largest graduating classes.  The whole school, high school, was no more than about 630 or 40 people.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm curious to know if so you're in a Southern school.  You're in the South, you're in the black school well every, every city had a Booker T. Washington or [Paul Laurence] Dunbar or Fredrick Douglass.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I mean those were our schools right?  Did you have new school books?  What, what--you know there're, there're stories of what teachers the, the, you know, the tools teachers had to, to use to teach children. What, what was the reality for you?
Speaker 2: First of all, Booker T. Washington, all of those schools from elementary to high school were the greatest schools in the state of Texas as were many black schools.  One because we had the best teachers that, that money could buy.  They were the best teachers because when you went to the university level a lot of those tenured professors were never gonna give up those positions.  They were gonna always be, you know, at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  They were always gonna be at Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], or they were always gonna be at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  They were just not gonna leave.  So, we got the benefit of some of the most brilliant, some of the most energetic, and forward thinking teachers because they couldn't go anyplace else.  They couldn't go into the white inner scholastic league to teach, so they, they were basically relegated to teaching us, and we were so, so fortunate to have them.  No, we didn't have new books, I mean, you know what happened was we would get the books that the white kids had already used and fill in all the lines, so what we would have to do is take line paper and, and you know glue it on  over the names that had already been filled out on the, on the front of the book, on the front cover of the book, and we would write our names and we felt that it was a new book because our names were first.  And then we had teachers who emphasized that it does not matter what the book looked like on the outside, the only thing that matters is that you read the words on the inside, and that's it.  We had great teachers.  We had, we had great schools.  We had great discipline.  I mean I, I don't even, I would not even say that we had a dumb kid in the school.  Well, if there were some kids, one or two kids that maybe weren't achieving as, as quickly or on par with everybody else, our teachers took the time with them and brought them along, so nobody felt as if they were being left behind long before No Child Left Behind [Act of 2001].  They didn't feel as though they were, they were being, you know put into some special class.  They were, they were just students who because maybe of their family life or, or because of some other strife in their community or their, their home they were having problems, but teachers saw through that and, and they brought them out.  It was wonderful.  It was wonderful to see.
Story_ID: 159305
Speaker 1: I, I went off to college at Washington State University [Pullman, Washington] and I was as a freshman living in a, a dorm room with a kid by the name of Ed Weinstein [ph.].  Ed Weinstein had gone to a very pri- privileged school in the State of Washington, and I don't know it was just a bolt of lightning that hit him and he turned to me in our, in our room one night and said, "John how did you get here?"  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "How did you get here?  Now you went to a public school right?"  I said, "Yeah I did." "Segregated school?" "Yes."  "How in the heck did you get here?"  I said, "Well Ed I assume I got here the same way you did, I mean hard work and, and study and got my grades and here I am."  I said, "Nobody did you a favor and certainly nobody did me a favor to get me here.  You know I'm here on thanks to a football scholarship, but I came here to get a degree and I'm gonna get my degree."  I said, "You may have come from you know a place of privilege and you may have come from a private school, but guess what, Ed, where are we now?"  He said, "What do you mean where are we?"  I said, "Where are we right now?"  He said, "Well we're in our room."  I said, "We are in our room."  And Ed, of course, got kicked out of school in his junior year for doing something very stupid, and I graduated in three and a half years, gave them a half of year of that scholarship back.
Speaker 2: Well, you, you went halfway across the country to Washington State which now is and this is in what, what year '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Nineteen, well I went out to Washington State in 1967 in the spring of '67 [1967].  I had attended Henderson [County Junior College, later Trinity Valley Community College, Athens Texas] from high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Wichita Falls, Texas].  For four months I went down to Henderson County Junior College south of Dallas in a little town called Athens, Texas, and again I played football there as a student athlete and we were, went undefeated.  We were the national junior college champions.  We played in the [Junior] Rose Bowl in Pasadena [California].  We beat Pasadena City College [Pasadena, California] mercifully and then I, of course, I was, I was, I was seen by a lot of big-time coaches and the one coach Bert Clark who was at Washington State University coaching at the time appealed to me to come to Washington State, and I thought you know my folks can't afford to send me to school and if I got hurt by staying in junior college for another year and a half I, I would never, so I did, made a calculated decision to only go to school at jun- at Henderson County Junior College for four months and then leave and go to Washington State in the spring.
Speaker 2: What position did you play?
Speaker 1: Played quarterback and in those days, you know, there were, there were a few.  There was Warren Moon.  Of course he, he came up at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].  [Alex] "Sonny" Sixkiller was a Native American at the University of Washington.  Then of course you know I played against O.J. Simpson and Tody Smith [Lawrence Edward Smith], Bubba Smith's [Charles Edward] brother, a lot of guys, a lot of big-time athletes that went on to, to great things in professional football.
Story_ID: 159306
Speaker 1: So, you go to Washington State University [Pullman, Washington], your first roommate is a Jewish kid, [Ed] Weinstein [ph.], you grew up in the company of black people, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: When you go into that school, into that dorm room, and you see that your roommate is a young Jewish male, what is, what's your first take?
Speaker 2: Oh I had no problems at all.  I mean, I, I, I thought it was just fabulous.  It was, it was noth- see you know we didn't live in, in a cocoon and, and even in high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Wichita Falls, Texas] we had young white kids coming from the other high schools in Wichita Falls [Texas] over to our side of town because we had the best football team.  We, we won the state championship, a school of 600.  When you think that there were schools that were much larger in Texas, 1500, 2000 students and here we are we won state championship football, so we were very popular school in north Texas and, and practically every athlete that played on the team was, was also very popular.  So, we, we, you know it wasn't that we were, you know, completely shut off from, from those kids or their influences or their way of life, so it wasn't, it wasn't that, that, you know, that jarring or that shocking to be in the room with Ed.  It may have been a little bit shocking to him and, and I, and I'm certain it was because he had to overcome you know the, the characterizations I'm sure that he had heard about blacks or black athletes and I can honestly say that I think I, I broke those molds in his mind.
Speaker 1: So, what was your experience being on an integrated campus in a state that did not experience racism the way that it was in the South anyway?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we--I was in you know Pullman, Washington is a little tiny town in eastern Washington state.  It is only eight miles from Moscow, Idaho, which is the University of Idaho only eight miles away.  This is all rural area.  So, there are a lot of people out there that harbored some of the same sentiments as some people that I was around in the State of Texas and in the South, so you know we, we just you know geographically it didn't take away, you know, the stench of racism, but it, it was interesting that many of the black students, and there weren't many, it may have been eighty at one time.
Speaker 1: In a class of?
Speaker 2: In, in a school, a, a school of more than fourteen, fifteen thousand students.
Speaker 1: Wait, say, say that number again.
Speaker 2: Eighty.
Speaker 1: In fourteen or fifteen thousand students?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: But, we, we had a--
Speaker 1: Did you have a black student union?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: We had a black student union, yes we did, but again it was very small, but it was very active and we had one of the most dynamic professors who was our advocate and who gave us the kind of guidance that we, we would need to survive and that was Dr. Johnnetta Cole.  She was an anthropology professor there.  She was married to Robert Cole at the time, economist, economics professor.  They had their two kids.  They had their two Russian wolfhound dogs, two beautiful cars, big beautiful home, and we would go up to her house on Wednesday nights most of the black students and we would have our meetings and talk strategy and what we wanted, how we were gonna put pressure on the school for certain things that we needed.
Story_ID: 159307
Speaker 1: Now what year are we talking about, the year?
Speaker 2: 1967 to 1970.
Speaker 1: So, this is at a boiling point in the United States is it, is it as to race relations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was at Washington State [University, Pullman, Washington] as well.
Speaker 1: And so you said you said you talked strategy [with the Black Student Union].  What were these conversations that you were having?
Speaker 2: Well one we, we realized that even though some of us may have come from Texas or Newark, New Jersey, Oakland, California, Austin, Texas, New York City, Washington, D.C. that, that we all had the same sort of social and economic experience and so we, we found a, a commonality there that drew us all together, not just on the color of our skins, but just because we have this common culture that we could, could always latch onto and then of course it was emphasized by Dr. Johnnetta Cole.  But, we would, we would talk strategy for instance getting more black professors on campus.  How are we going to, you know, initiate this to, to be able to get and, and have success in getting black professors on campus.  Very few at the time.  How are we going to get, you know, accommodations for specific cases.  For instance, an athlete who may have run out of scholarship, but he still had another semester to go.  How could we affect that and get him another half year.  One of the things that drove me to give them a half year of that scholarship back is because I remember sitting in the office on my first day at Washington State University and I'm listening through the door as a, as a young man by the name of Ammon McWashington who was a running back at Washington State from Texas who was pleading for a fifth year.  He had gotten his knees hurt, but they were not going to give it to him.  They might, they said they might find him a position maybe as an assistant coach or something or somewhere they would try, but they couldn't guarantee anything.  I just--he walked out of there and he looked so downtrodden.  Then I thought I would never put myself in that position, and so I went I got summer credit for summer school and the coaching staff I think were, were probab- they were the most surprised people at school when I told them that I'm gone.  Thank you for the degree, I'm gone.
Story_ID: 159308
Speaker 1: You, you were an athlete on scholarship, but what was your major [at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington]?
Speaker 2: I was a business major for the first year or so.  Then I, I was interviewed before a football game one time and I just loved the lights and the cameras and I thought that this was so cool, and the guy who did the interview, a kid by the name of Mark Kaufman from Seattle [Washington], told me, "Look why don't you come on and, and take a couple of classes."  I took some production classes, loved the lights and cameras.  They did their own soap operas.  We, we, I did radio.  I did classical as, as well as, as you know hip hop or in those days it was like R&B, you know, and so, and I just thought it was so exciting.  It was so creative.  You know we had the business law.  You had the statistics, and, and all you did was Monday through Thursday you would take it in and then on Friday you regurgitated you know for on a test and, and that was just wasn't me, but I, I just took to this thing this, this broadcasting, just loved it.  And then I, I met some, some of the most interesting people in the country.  Guys that worked with Edward R. Murrow in the radio days in the heyday of World War II like Eric Sevareid and Richard C. Hottelett.
Speaker 1: And they came through your school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah 'cause Edward R. Murrow was a graduate of Washington State University.  His wife spent a lot of time there.  So, we had, we had, I had a great time and I was at, at the time I think the only African American in the whole broadcast sequence at the time and just had a ball.  I met a guy by the name of Hugh Rundell who taught a speech class and, and just told me that basically you, this is, this is a wonderful, wonderful arena where you can, you can take your voice and, and do anything with it.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you when, was your voice as it is now then?
Speaker 2: It, it had, it had some of the same timbre to it, but, but I think it was enriched by the fact that I learned to listen to how I said what I said rather than just talking.  For instance, Hugh would say, "Give me a Southern truck driver.  Now think about the sound of a Southern truck driver."  And so I'd say, "You know what I'm gonna do? I'm gonna drive this rig all the way from right up here in Virginia all the way down to Florida. That's what I'm gonna do. Right now I'm gonna take it good buddy and y'all have a good day now here."  And, and then he would say, "Okay now you're in, you're in London [England] and you're about to have tea with the Queen," and you would say, "You know it's, it's going to be a beautiful day and I just want to be able to say to the Queen, Queen mom look it's, it's a great day and I wish you the best and, and, and, and God save the Queen."  If you hear it, you know you should be able to imitate it or you know and, and it--I didn't feel like I was in a shell anymore that suddenly I'd been basically set free to be all of these things out of this one voice.
Story_ID: 159309
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your dad [Felley Donaldson], so did you, I know he was your stepdaddy, but still it, it sounds as if the storytelling may have come from him.  Did the voice, did he have a voice like yours?
Speaker 2: No, but, but he had a great singing voice, and it was on full display practically every Sunday or anytime you would prompt him particularly if he was, if he was singing you know an old gospel tune.  He had a wonderful, wonderful voice, but no he, he didn't, he didn't do a lot of talking.  You know he did a lot of listening and perhaps if in fact you know I have gotten anything from him is probably you know the value of listening.
Speaker 1: You were just describing him.  Would you describe him to me?
Speaker 2: Oh my father, my real father, Tommy [Christian].  When I saw him in California, we went up and down you know Central [Avenue, Los Angeles, California] and he just had a way with, with a crowd of guys you know on the street.  They just thought he was just the cat's meow.  The ladies did too.  He had a process, you know, he had a you know his processed hair.  It was all dyed lye, dyed, fried, and laid to the side you know and he was all conked out you know.  It was wild.  It was wild.  But, I remember walking up and down Central and he was telling everybody, "This is my boy," and I was the only child he had and, and they were all, "Tommy yeah this is your boy?"  "Yeah this is my boy."  And I remember walking by this, this store that sold clothes and they had, had this beautiful brown suit.  I really wanted that suit, and he said, "You like that suit boy?"  I said, "Yes sir I do."  "I'm gonna get you that suit before you leave."  We walked by a bicycle store and I saw this bicycle.  It was a Schwinn bicycle with these springs on the handlebars. I thought that was so cool.  He said, "Boy you like that bicycle?  I'm gonna get you that bicycle before you leave."  Needless to say, I left Los Angeles [California] minus the suit and minus the bicycle, but I had, had great stories to tell about, about my father and--
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you met him?
Speaker 2: I was about eleven, twelve years old.
Speaker 1: And what took you there to meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, my stepfather and, and my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] and my stepfather's father and my brothers and I we all loaded up in this little Ford Falcon station wagon and decided to go from Texas out to California to visit some of their relatives, the Donaldson side of the family, and while we were there you know of course I knew that my father was living in Los Angeles and I found him and his, his, his lady friend at the time, a lady by the name of Ardelia Magee [ph.] who was something else.  She wore her hair real slick to her head, a little short lady.  One leg was slightly longer than the other.  She walked, so she walked with a little of a limp, but she knew a lot of people.  She knew Sam Cooke.  She knew [HM] Quincy Jones.  I think her sister Cherry [ph.] was one of the housekeepers for Quincy when he was married to Peggy Lipton.  And they agreed even to bring Sam Cooke's body back here to Chicago [Illinois] when he was killed out there.  But, she was, she was a fascinating human being, and one of the only women in my father's wild and crazy days you know as a player in L.A. that could control him and so she was very beneficial to him.
Speaker 1: Did you stay in touch with your dad after that?
Speaker 2: Up until he died yes, yeah.  In fact, I got a chance to see him in Texas.  He went back to Texas.  When I got my first job in television in Fresno, California, in 1970, I was doing an interview with a guy from the Veterans Administration [United States Department of Veterans Affairs], and he asked me, you know I told him that my father had been in the military.  That he was in a veterans hospital in Oklahoma [Oklahoma City VA Medical Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] and so he got on the watch line in those days and found, found out some information for me for, about my father and when I saw my father again in Texas he was very thankful that, that I had, you know, thought enough to think of him and he just, he said to me that, "I know that I never got you things that I had promised you.  I know I never did a lot of the things that, that maybe a father should have done, but Johnny at least give me credit for at least giving you the gift of life.  Do with your life, you know, what you want and what you need to do to be successful."  And I just thought that that was the greatest thing.  He got to meet my child, my, my first child, my son.  My wife [Maria Ioannidou Davis] and I went and, and visited him when he was really, really sick at the time, but he thought that that was so honorable to bring this child to meet, to meet him and he was a good man, broken by circumstances you know.
Story_ID: 159310
Speaker 1: Well and he [father, Tommy Christian] and then your stepfather's [Felley Donaldson] family were part of the next wave of the great migration going from Texas to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  That was a huge push.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my father--of course again it, it was part of that time, but, but his motivation le- after leaving the Korean War was really to settle in there to get a chance with he and his, his buddy, Arthur Devon [ph.] to play football, pro football--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with, with the [Los Angeles] Rams.  He just, all he wanted to do was try out, give me a shot, and, and of course it just, it never happened.  And he was kind of broken because of that too.
Speaker 1: Now you played football.  You had the football scholarship.  Did you imagine that you would become a professional football player?
Speaker 2: I had no great illusions.  I'm, I'm a small guy you know.  You know any guy 5'10", 175 pounds, you know, I was fast, but I, I never had any illusions about playing professional football.  Now, there was supposed to have been, you know, my coach in college told me that there was a possibility that somebody at the Cincinnati Bengals might be interested in you or somebody up in the Canadian league in the Edmonton Eskimos and then I looked on a map to see where Edmonton [Alberta, Canada] was, and then I realized why they called it the Eskimos.  I'm not going that far north for anything, certainly not for football.  So, no I had no illusions about playing pro football.
Story_ID: 159311
Speaker 1: So you're at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 2: Washington State [University, Pullman, Washington].
Speaker 1: Excuse me Washington State University and you get into the broadcast program as the only African American correct?
Speaker 2: At the time.
Speaker 1: How welcoming were they of you?
Speaker 2: They were wonderfully welcoming.  Again, it was Mark Kaufman who says, "Look man take a, take a class.  You're gonna enjoy this."  And I did and I, I just had such a ball.  Again, I met some of the most encouraging people anywhere.  Cal Watson--Cal Watson was one of the administrators in the broadcast communications department.  Cal Watson went on to be a high-ranking official in the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in Washington, D.C.  Jim Dunne was, was a phenomenal broadcaster.  And again Hugh Rundell and a lot of these, these guys that knew Edward R. Morrow, some who had worked with and around Edward R. Murrow, so they were, they were giants in the radio side of the business.  And so I was very fortunate that they just kind of welcomed me in.  There was, there was never a doubt that I was going to be accepted.
Story_ID: 159312
Speaker 1: Now at, at the time that you are in college [at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] a lot of things are going on.  You, you talked about Johnnetta Cole and the support in helping black students understand the mission I guess.  But, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated while you were in college is that, that true?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  I, I, of course let's go back to, to [President] John F. Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I was in high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Wichita Falls, Texas] in, in 1963 when John F. Kennedy was assassinated right down the road in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I was in a typing class in Mrs. Ivory Moore's [ph.] typing class and I'll never forget the, the screaming and the wailing that went through the hallways of the school from these girls running down the hall screaming and crying that the president has been killed in Dallas.  I mean it was, it was horrifying.  I mean everything just came to--it, it's as if everything froze, time just basically froze in that moment because I can hear it distinctly right now.  I can, I can, I can see the girls in the hallway, you know, and then you know jump ahead to, to Martin Luther King being assassinated.  I mean we just, you wouldn't think that in, in a lifetime you would see two significant people of that generation, you know, killed in this country and yet there we were witnessing it and you know there was no violence or anything like that on the campus, but there was a tremendous amount of, of anger and again I think that because of Johnnetta [Cole] and, and other people like her who, who just kind of stepped up to guide this, this bubbling anger to make sure that it went in the right direction.  She was very instrumental in, in tempering it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And she wasn't much older than you.  She was a young teacher at this time wasn't she?
Speaker 2: Relatively yeah.  I would, I would think that Dr. Cole at the time was, was in her thirties.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Story_ID: 159313
Speaker 1: So, in 1968, which is the same year that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is assassinated, President [Lyndon Baines] Johnson created the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders [Kerner Commission], which was really indicting the broadcast community for not having, for excluding African Americans in the newsroom and not covering black life.  So, this is at the same, so this indictment comes down in the midst of all the other things that are happening in our country while you were in school [at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] preparing to, to move into broadcast.  Were you aware of that and--
Speaker 2: Not at the time no.
Speaker 1: And when it comes time for you to graduate what are the opportunities available to a young black male graduating in broadcast journalism?
Speaker 2: I really didn't think that there was any opportunity.  I never even sought it.  I was, I had a little group in, in college and we were singing.  We had a good time, didn't make much money of course.  When I graduated, I went over to Seattle [Washington] in the summer, and I was pursuing a singing career.  And we went over to American Recording and we slapped egg cartons against the wall for acoustics and we sang and we sang and we sang and we sang and nothing happened, so I was, was visiting Washington State, the campus, and this guy, [Eugene] Pat Patterson, who was a real mover and shaker in the legislature in Washington state.  He asked me to, if I would give a call to a guy in Fresno, California.  They were looking to hire an African American their first, but give them a call.  This is something that, that you may be interested in.  So I did and they agreed to fly me down to Fresno, California, on the hottest day of the world.  I was picked up at the airport by a wonderful brother who was the only black cameraman at the time in all of central California named Earl Bradley.  Earl Bradley picked me up in a station wagon with no air conditioning, took me to KMJ-TV, channel 24 [later KSEE] in Fresno, and I was interviewed there, went through all the departments, and I was interviewed and came back to the general manager's office after the interviews with the news director and others and his name was John Edwards, a diminutive little man, wonderful human being, knew Chet Huntley, Tippy Huntley, Chet's wife at NBC, and he said to me, "What do you think?"  I said, "I like it, I like the place and I like the people. They seem nice."  He says, "Well would you take the job?"  I said, "Well I don't, I don't know."  "Here's what I'mma promise you, said I'mma promise you that we will not embarrass you, ourselves, or the black community if you take this job.  We will train you and you will be ever as professional as anybody else. Would you take the job?"  I said, "Yeah, oh yeah I'm taking this job," (laughter).
Story_ID: 159314
Speaker 1: And how long were you there [at KMJ-TV, Fresno, California]?
Speaker 2: I was there for seven years to 1977.  I had a ball.  It was the greatest experience, you know, of my broadcast career.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well because it was where I started.  It was how they, it was how they, they, it's how they brought me along.  It's how they nurtured me into the business, you know.  Again I was not left out on a limb to fend for myself and you know to fall off the branch.  They actually took care of me and I, I really appreciated that.
Speaker 1: And so while you're there in Fresno [California], Fresno in relation to the rest of the state is what, what, what?
Speaker 2: Central, almost in the center part of the center, the absolute center of California, Central Valley, agriculture.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of stories did you do over that seven year period? So what are the years that you work at this, at Fresno station (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: In Fresno at KMJ it was a McClatchey broadcasting station and, and it was a great, great organization.  I worked in Fresno with KMJ from 1970 to 1977 and had really the good fortune at the time of even meeting Eleanor McClatchy.  She was so down to earth she would come over to Fresno from Sacramento [California] where she lived and serve Christmas dinner.  It was to the employees.  We had our own, you know, cafeteria lunchroom and everything.  It was amazing.
Speaker 1: So, you're in Fresno this is the '70s [1970s] are there any other African Americans working at the station other than this cameraman [Earl Bradley] you mentioned?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: During the entire time?
Speaker 2: During that whole time.
Story_ID: 159315
Speaker 1: And you leave [KMJ-TV, Fresno, California] in '77 [1977] to go where?
Speaker 2: To Portland, Oregon to KGW Channel 8.  It's an NBC station in, in Portland, Oregon, and went up there in 1977 and had, had great experiences there, covered great stories including the eruption of Mount St. Helens.  I was up there for, for weeks, you know, as, as it was gurgling and you know threatened to explode.
Speaker 1: So how close to it were you?
Speaker 2: Well, for instance on the, on the Friday before it erupted I was essentially on the plateau, just right there in, in, in, on Mount St. Helens, and there was a strange thing that happened that day.  We were going to do a live shot, you know because the, the, the geologic survey group had indicated that you know it, it's, it's bubbling underneath and it could erupt at any time and you know so what are you guys seeing or hearing.  And I'll never forget it must have been about ten, fifteen minutes before we went on the air and you know all these birds were chirping and things were rustling in the, in the grass.  You'd see in the weeds, in the bushes, you'd see deer or elk.  All of sudden, nothing, it was quiet; then all of a sudden we feel this little rumble and then the station says, calls us on the two-way indicating, "Did you guys feel anything, see," you know. We say, "Yeah we sensed a little shake."  "So well you had, that was, that was a small eruption not too far from you. Did you see any plumes or anything?"  "No we didn't see any plumes."  And of course on that Sunday is when all heck bro- broke loose.
Speaker 1: Good thing you weren't there.
Speaker 2: It was horrible.  It was devastating, but I went up on that Sunday morning I remember the assignment editor at, at KGW at the time, Jeff Douglas [ph.], calling my house 'cause they, I had a car on the weekend, a news car that the company let me have.  He says, I woke up and I said, "What's going on?"  He says, "Get in here now we've got a mountain going off," and it was something.  I drove from my home in Beaverton, Oregon, which is about eight or nine miles from Portland into the city and of course that's all you could see and went up in the helicopter.  We had a guy who was flying our helicopter who used to be a Vietnam veteran in terms of being a helicopter pilot in the Vietnam War, and so he was, he was a very daring guy and so we flew as close as the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] would allow us to get to it and, and that was close enough.
Speaker 1: So, what was this experience like for you? You know you've done the range of things that new reporters do and grown in your career and now here's a natural disaster of, of tremendous magnitude and you're in a helicopter as close as you can get to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah and not only that, but David the pilot he went along the Toutle River and, and the Toutle River was this beautiful you know placid little waterway that suddenly became a, a raging torrent of, of pyroclastic mud that had been melted from the snowcap on Mount St. Helens and had created this hot sort of molten mud and it expanded this river probably three or four times and so you, we're going against this roiling river and we're watching these huge trees being swept along, houses, cars, bodies so--
Speaker 1: It's not drawing down the helicopter?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no we're right along the river.  The mountain is over here.  It has already, the, the north face of that mountain has already been blown out on this, on this side, on the south side it is, it is basically just creating this, this again pyroclastic flow and it's running into the Toutle River taking with it trees, animals, humans, cars, and, and of course because we were going along the deck of the river, about as close as you can get without being in the river because that's how David, daring he was, but it gave you, you know, this, this almost microscopic view of this horrific scene.
Story_ID: 159316
Speaker 1: And are you reporting live as you are seeing this [Mount St. Helens eruption]?
Speaker 2: We were not reporting live at, at the time.  In, in that particular helicopter we couldn't do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we didn't have the capability of doing that, but we were shooting video--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and of course when we, we got back to the station [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon] I mean it was it was just riveting what we saw.  I mean most people you know because they were you know fifty, sixty miles away back in Portland [Oregon] or there about you, you know you had really no idea until you saw these images of this devastation, I mean, the likes of which only a person who had perhaps survived a nuclear explosion would have any idea of, of the magnitude of it.
Speaker 1: So I'm curious about the production aspect of this.  So, you are in the helicopter, you're, you're recoding, are you describing what you're seeing in real time or is that you're shooting and later you describe it?
Speaker 2: No, I'm shooting in later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then when you're back at the station you're watching it and describing what you see, what you saw (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly and being questioned by the, the anchor people you know--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --About this experience and, and, and what you, what you actually saw and again it's, it's one of those things that no movie could, could do something like this justice and just the kind of devastation. I mean trees turned into you know toothpicks.  They were shredded.  Everything up on that landscape was just blown away.  I think when President Jimmy Carter came several days later and we went back up in our helicopter followed them over the area and he described it as a moonscape.  It looked just like the moon.
Speaker 1: Now for you as a journalist witnessing that with this daredevil pilot who took you as close as you could get and journalists are supposed to be even, calm in the midst of all this.  What was your, what was your temperament as you're moving through this frightening experience?
Speaker 2: I was, I was just, I was calm, but I was very, very introspective.  I was very sad to see what I was seeing and I, I just felt so badly for, for these victims and it, it, it was just almost indescribable you know and of course the, the feeling is just you know of utter loss and disbelief that something like this could have happened and yet you know there were warnings all along.  One of the guys, the old cu- curmudgeon who lived up at, on Mount St. Helens his name was Harry Truman and Harry Truman had come down to the Portland area on Thursday of that week to speak to a group of kids in school, and he just was vowed I will, I will go with the mountain.  I'm not leaving. I will go with the mountain and of course he, he did.
Story_ID: 159317
Speaker 1: So, you stayed at that station [KGW-TV, Portland, Oregon] for, until '77 [1977] you said?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed at KGW in Portland [Oregon] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) oh excuse me.
Speaker 2: --For, for five years until 1982--
Speaker 1: Eighty-two.
Speaker 2: --And I came here to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, it's from '77 [1977] to '82 [1982] that you were there?
Speaker 2: I was, yes exactly.
Speaker 1: And, and it was then that you moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So now you're moving to a much, much larger market.  What brought about this move?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had never had a resume as a, as a, in, in my professional career, and I've always been recommended for jobs and for whatever reason it just seems like, it seemed like you know the experience in, in Portland [Oregon] basically had run its course and I got a call that, that they wanted to, to interview me here in Chicago and I said yeah.  So, I agreed to fly here on, on a Friday and I interviewed and had a wonderful time.  One of the, one of the guys who worked in the planning department at WBBM [-TV, Chicago, Illinois] in those days, Jim Lucas [ph.], had taken me to a party up on the, near Oak Street here in Chicago and afterwards he says to me, "Hey, do you like blues," and I said, "Sure I like blues."  Jim was kind of a down home kind of guy, and he says, "Great." He says, "Let's go listen to some blues."  I said, "Well okay. I don't have to leave until you know, you know mid-morning tomorrow morning so sure."  So he says, "You want a helmet or no helmet?"  I said, "Helmet for what?"  He said, "For riding on my motorcycle."  I had, I had a beautiful suit on you know, and you know it's like oh my gosh I don't know.  So, I got on the back of the motorcycle, no helmet, went all the way down Michigan Avenue down to the Checkerboard Lounge and I got to see Buddy Guy and as soon as we walked to the door everybody knew Jim Lucas.  Hey Jim Lucas is here.  We were ushered in and you know the Checkerboard in those days, a little small, little cracker box, but everybody that was anybody, whether it was Mick Jagger and The Rolling Stones, whether it was Elton John or whomever, they, they wanted to go there.  That, you had to be there to pay homage to guys like Muddy Waters and, and Buddy Guy.  Oh, it was great.  I said, "I gotta come back to Chicago," and then I just, I said to the general manager because he says, "Look we'll, we'll let you know maybe sometimes in the next few weeks whether you have the job or not.  We appreciate you coming out."  And I said, "Well excuse me." I said, "Could you let me know on Monday?"  He says, "What?"  I said, "Can you let me know if I have the job here in, in Chicago on Monday?"  Said, "Well we have other people we are going to be interviewing."  I said, "Well that's, that's well and good," I said, "but you will know by Monday whether I have done enough to deserve this job."  He said, "We don't understand that."  I said, "It does not matter how many other people you interview.  You can tell me on Monday whether I have or haven't.  If I haven't gotten it, then it's fine, but you can tell me on Monday.  I don't want to wait, you know, for another whenever two months while you interview other people.  You can tell me on Monday whether I have it or not."  They called me on Monday and said you got the job (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was pretty bold.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what made me even say it.  It seemed so stupid when I reflect on it.  It's like, are you kidding me.
Speaker 1: Now how old are you at this point when you're making this bold statement?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm, I'm a thirty-three-year-old man you know.
Story_ID: 159318
Speaker 1: And at this point are you a man with a family?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  My wife and I had our first child in college [Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] at you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay so, so--
Speaker 2: --nineteen, twenty years old.
Speaker 1: So, tell me, tell me about your wife?
Speaker 2: My wife is Maria, Maria Ioannidou, that's Johnson in Greek.  She came from Greece at the same time that I went to Washington State [University, Pullman, Washington] in 1967 on an academic scholarship.  She had attended Anatolia College in Thessaloniki in northern Greece, a very accomplished student, phenomenal scientific mind, and we didn't particularly like each other.  It was, it was, she was fun to be around because you know spring break with so many students you know going back to their homes the campus was basically, you know, left to those of us who were too far from home to go home and or foreign students, so I hung out with a lot of foreign students, a lot of Africans and South Americans and, and, and Europeans and we played soccer and, and made potluck dinners and so we got to know each other.  I really, really liked her and she liked me and we decided to get married.
Speaker 1: While you were at school.
Speaker 2: While we were in school and the only thing that her mother asked when she told her that she was going to marry me was not whether he was black, white, or green, but whether he was a Christian because they were Greek Orthodox and she says yes and so she gave Maria her blessing and we got married.
Speaker 1: Now what about your family?
Speaker 2: Had no problem at all.  My, my mother [Myrtle Donaldson] and father [Felley Donaldson] loved her.  They loved, and they--she's, she's a phenomenal lady.  We've had three wonderful children.  We've probably raised a half a dozen.  We adopted another boy, and she's, she's a very sharp caring, loving, dynamic woman.
Speaker 1: And you said she's a strong scientific mind.  Is she a scientist?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She was one of the first women in this country to run electron microscopes.  She did a lot of research.  She worked at the Oregon Regional Primate Center [Hillsboro, Oregon], Evanston Hospital [Evanston, Illinois] in, in the laboratories there, and then she just had a fill of science and she left there and got a master's degree in art administration from the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago].  So, she worked in her own gallery, a gallery that she, she worked with a friend of hers, Carol Jones, here in Chicago [Illinois] and arranged a lot of different art exhibits and shows.  She's worked with the Hellenic Museum [National Hellenic Museum, Chicago, Illinois].  So, she's you know, she is, she's very dynamic, has made really quite a, a career for herself.
Story_ID: 159319
Speaker 1: How long have you been married now in 2014?
Speaker 2: We've been married for forty, forty-four years, forty-four years.  My goodness, yeah it's been a real adventure.  It's been fun.
Speaker 1: And you were saying about her father.
Speaker 2: My wife's [Maria Ioannidou Davis] father--well her grandparents moved to Greece in the population exchange from the, the Turkish government had taken over this area of Tbilisi [Georgia] and they were forced to return, to go to Greece.  They'd never known, you know, anything outside of their Pontian, which is a culture in the Greek community and the Greek heritage and there is a group, the Pontians, that occupied this area in Russia along with the Armenians and the Syrians and when the Turks came in, in the 19, early 19, teens, 14-15 [1914 - 1915], they basically they said that there were going to be just Turks for Turks and so all these other groups, even though they had been there for perhaps centuries were going to have to uproot and they, her grandparents were part of the population exchange of Turks who were in Greece who went back to Turkey and the Greeks who were there in the, during the Ottoman and the Turkish rule went to Greece.  Then they settled in a little tiny community in Greece, and she went to live with them after her father who had fought against [Adolf] Hitler and fought against [Benito] Mussolini, but he was killed by his own people in the Greek Civil War in the late '40s [1940s].  So, she was, she was really there in this little town with her grandparents and, but there was something that they saw in her that she had this little gleam in her eye about learning and they realized that she didn't, she needed to be in a bigger place, so they sent her to Salonika [Thessaloniki, Greece] to live with her mother who was working at that time as sort of a military attache and she got an opportunity to attend Anatolia High School, Anatolia College/College [Anatolia College, Thessaloniki, Greece].  It's an extraordinary prep school in Greece and it was basically founded in the same place where her grandparents once lived, which is the irony of ironies.  All these things continued to kind of unfold.  And so she had an opportunity to go to college in the United States at two schools, University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] or Washington State University [Pullman, Washington], so she chose Washington State University.  With, with about two hundred dollars, she was sent to this country.  She taught, she caught trains through Europe.  She caught planes all the way to the United States and was supposed to have been met in Spokane, Washington, by this family that was going to take her eighty miles to Pullman, Washington, to Washington State.  They didn't show up.  But a little lady who was on the plane with her brought her into her house and, and she and her family took Maria down to the school the next day.  But, she, she was very gifted you know in, in science and so that's what she wanted to pursue and she, she had free rein at Washington State.  You know there were not a lot of girls at the time who were interested in these, you know, high-end scientific you know pursuits, but, but she was.
Story_ID: 159320
Speaker 1: And she [Davis' wife, Maria Ioannidou Davis] also was willing to follow your career as you were moving around.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, but in all of those stops in, in Fresno [California] for, for instance she decided that she was going to get another degree, so because, oh I'm sorry, she did not graduate from Washington State University [Pullman, Washington], so she had to get a grad, a degree at Fresno State University [California State University, Fresno, Fresno, California].  So, it was convenient we only lived a few blocks from Cal State University Fresno, so she got her, her degree there.  She wanted to learn to drive a car, so she learned to drive a car there.  We had our second child there.  And we had, our first home that we bought was there and we, we really immersed ourselves in the black community, the Greek community, and the Armenian community of Fresno.  It was just a wonderful, wonderful time.  And we had a little car.  We, we had a house that was 2100 square feet, sunken living room, vaulted ceiling.  We just thought it was a cat's meow.  I mean I put in a brand new backyard, and I had my first car.  I bought a 1968 Toyota Corona. Oh, that was a great little car.  In that little car without any seatbelts or anything, we would get on the road on weekends and we would go all over California.  We would go to the wine country in Sonoma and Napa Valleys, and we would just go down these little dirt roads and these Armenians and these Greeks and these Italians would just love for us to come down.  We would go down these dirt roads.  They would lay out salami and cheeses and crackers and breads, and then they would pour, they were pouring shots. You know those little tasters of, of wine they would be in glasses this size you know.  It was amazing.  It was a wonderful time.  You could do so much with so little.  We would pick up hitchhikers.  Oh, it was just the greatest time, especially in California in the 1970s.
Story_ID: 159321
Speaker 1: So now you've moved to Chicago [Illinois] in the early '80s [1980s].  You're, you've moved to CBS.  Chicago is very different in many ways including the racial mix is different--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --The, the way that an interracial couple would be received is probably different.  What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: It was an, an eye-opening experience.  I remember the first night that Maria [Ioannidou] came to, to visit Chicago.  She wanted, you know the station flew her out just to visit.  I had been here for almost a month, and so they, they flew her out and I was just showing her around and we happened to be up in Old Town section of Chicago along Division [Street] and around Wells [Street] near Cabrini Green, which is a public housing project at the time, and it was the first time that, that we were cursed by black people, not, that was not one white person that said anything, but it was, it was, it was just that, that thick and she couldn't, she couldn't fathom that I mean because you know most of our, our friends had been an amalgam, a mix of cultures and races, and to, to suddenly have to be you know put in a pigeon hole and categorized and, and not you know singled out for your individuality of who you are and getting to know me that you could just be, you know, generally, you know, disdained was really hard for her to accept.  But, you know we realized that this is what it is and we didn't create it, but perhaps because of the way we carry ourselves maybe we could help, you know, bring some, some, some, some reconciliation, you know, and I think in, in our own small measure we, we have.  Because our home in Evanston [Illinois], has been used almost as a little United Nations.  We've had little Indian kids, Native American children.  We've have Chinese, Japanese, lots of Jewish kids, I mean, we've, we've "raised" you know three boys who were all, you know, Jewish boys.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Well, one his father was a very prominent attorney and when his father died unexpectedly he just went into a tailspin, but he was very good friends with my, my son.  My sons you know they've broken a lot of barriers, and they brought I think a tremendous amount of understanding among people of their generation that they've come in contact with and so those kids felt very comfortable coming to us.  We are nonjudgmental in our house.  You can talk about anything.  You can grieve, you can celebrate, and, and they would come.  And my mother-in-law left Greece to come to visit in Portland, Oregon, when we lived there.  The first time she'd ever left Greece, and she followed us here to Chicago.  So, these children would come after school and our kids called her Yaya [Greek for grandmother] and so all the other kids called her Yaya because Yaya always had food.  Yaya was going to make spanakopita.  Ya, Yaya was going to make great soups.  Yaya was going to have fresh bread.  Yaya was just going to take care of everything, and because she didn't speak any English, but she understood it, a lot more than, than a lot of these kids gave her credit for.  She knew everything they were doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: And she lived with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 159322
Speaker 1: So, you have this very rich family experience that you are growing as your career is growing and, and so you come to CBS.  Can you describe your early days in CBS?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was the most fascinating time in, in the most fascinating city [Chicago, Illinois] I believe in America where everything is in its, in its rawest form.  It's, it's laid out on top of the table.  You don't have to look under the table to see where the politics are being, how politics are being played, you know how the mob scene or the gangland, you know sc- scene is being played.  It's right on top of the table.  All you have to do is be observant enough and astute enough to know what you're looking at.  So, you know I, I just, I, I just thought that this was of all the places I've worked, this would be the most fascinating and, and it, and, and it has been.  I remember meeting guys like Mike Royko and Studs Terkel and, and I worked with a guy who was the mob expert John Drummond.  You know I, you could sit at the feet of these guys on a Friday night and listen to them tell stories at Billy Goats Tavern and, and, and by the time you left perhaps at nine or ten o'clock at night you, you had a real clear understanding of where all these various factions fall, all these little categories.  And I'll never forget one guy telling me that you know when I asked him how, how are you staying alive man when you're doing all these stories on the mob?  And he says, "Johnny you gotta just stay in your lane, stay in your lane," you know, "we're not in the mob's business.  We're reporting on what the mob does.  We're not up in their business.  Stay in your lane and you'll be okay."
Speaker 1: So, for you what did it mean as you're developing your career in one of the most political places in the United States say shy Washington, D.C., their probably competitive even, even in that sense.  What, what did staying in your lane mean for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an eye-opener in so many ways, I mean, but politically for sure.  You know I never knew that, that, that you, you had to sort of like lay down your allegiance you know to, to a party.  In this situation you know in Chicago [Illinois] and Cook County it's the Democratic Party.  You know anything outside of that is, is sacrilegious.  So, you know, I--
Speaker 1: Even as a newsman, which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Even as a, even as a newsman.
Speaker 1: --Presumably as a newsman you're supposed to be neutral.
Speaker 2: Well you are to a certain extent, but you realize that be- before you can get an interview with someone or you get that little nugget that no one else has, I mean you gotta spend some time with, with those people, which means that you gotta take them to dinner, they gotta take you to dinner.  You'll pay for your own, but the fact is that you, they gotta know you.  They're just not gonna because you, you're a black guy in a nice suit that they're going to just, and you work for CBS, that they're just gonna open up to you.  I mean it takes time and it takes cultivation, and that was the one thing that I, I learned here that I didn't learn anyplace else is what you gotta do is that you get to know the people in the communities.  Get to know the people that, that are newsmakers, you know that are on the, on the, the, the, the scene and on radar and those who are off radar.  You know get to know the people in the communities.  Get to know what, where the communities are, you know, and, and I did.  I mean I took, I took probably a good month and a half to two months before I was even really on the air.  I got, I, I was going up and down the streets of Chicago with a courier by the name of, of Ed, and Ed was always, he was, he was picking me up in the mornings and taking me north, north suburbs.  He was taking me all over the greater Chicagoland, Chicagoland area getting me acclimated to, to this, this city, this area, to its social scene, to its politics, to everything.  He was phenomenal.  So, when I hit the ground here in Chicago I sounded not only as if I knew what I was talking about, but, but I know, I knew the communities, I knew the, the names of the streets and how to pronounce them.
Speaker 1: Which is really important.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, so you, I, I wasn't seen as really an outsider.  And a lot of folks thought I was, I must have been born here even to this day they assume (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Because this man took you around?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And that was, that was really sort of the, the doctrine of CBS.  CBS, you know, was very hard and fast about getting, you know, ingrained in the community.  In fact, Dan Rather, the anchor at CBS for many years, used to have a sign-off expression that wherever you are, be there and that's, that's basically our, our motto.  We, we got ingrained.  We, we got into the fabric of where we lived, where we reported and, and I think it served all of us and certainly it served me very well.
Story_ID: 159323
Speaker 1: Now, being in Chicago [Illinois] at CBS who else, who was working alongside you?  Who were the other journalists who were there?  Were there any black journalists who were there?
Speaker 2: Oh there were, there were plenty.  There were plenty before me, Emery King had been there before me.  Edwina Moore had been there before I was there, but (laughter) there was, there was one cameraman at CBS on the day that I came to interview for the job who shouted in the newsroom with the likes of Gene Siskel sitting there and big time sports guys, Jeannie Morris and Bill Kurtis and Walter Jacobson at the time were the anchors, that he said to the top of his lungs with the whole newsroom there and the general manager and the news director, "Oh my God they've hired a real negro," and I, you could have heard a pin drop in the newsroom at that time and what he said, he meant by that was the fact that they very seldom had seen one my color for one--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --But then they, they, he also knew of my pedigree in terms of what I liked to do, how I liked to get out there and scrapple in, in the street, how I liked to, you know, get to know the people and, and get my hands soiled you know in their problems.
Speaker 1: And was, was this a black man that was speaking?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Good for him.
Speaker 2: He's from Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 159324
Speaker 1: Now you're there [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] one year when Harold Washington is elected mayor, right?
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: --a magical time.
Speaker 1: Yeah what, what made it magical?
Speaker 2: Well, for one, they, they assigned me for the most part to work the Harold Washington campaign primarily because they didn't think it, it would see the light of day you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're new here--
Speaker 2: I'm still new.
Speaker 1: --You're still green.
Speaker 2: But, because I'm, I'm black and you know I can schmooze up to, to Harold perhaps and maybe get something.  Again, they weren't expecting a great deal of either me covering his campaign or from Harold as a candidate, but we kept telling them that, that there are some other things going on.  I said, "Do you guys know that Harold Washington is going to the, to the projects to speak to people in public housing."  "Oh so."  I said, "No, no I'm saying he's talking to gang members and everybody."  "Oh well, we don't need it."  When in fact, Harold Washington was telling these gang leaders who had been used and manipulated by the, by the various political machines for eons about getting the vote out and making sure those people vote for me.  Harold Washington says, "I know that Jane Byrne and the Democratic Party and others are, are showing you favor, giving you chickens, you know money, hams.  You take all the chicken, hams, and money that they give you, but you bring those damn votes to me."  Well, nobody else was up there, but me, a few other folks that were working as, as political operatives around him and those gang members.  We had a tremendous amount of influence back and certainly in those days because they were known gang leaders, you know, the guys like Jeff Fort and you know Larry Hoover and Willie Lloyd, [Jerome] "Shorty" Freeman and those guys.  So Harold knew.  He was able to resonate on, on every single level, so when the media, CBS included, were, were trying to denigrate him and trying to tear him down it's like how dare you, you know run for mayor with a record like you went to jail, you didn't pay your taxes, and every, I mean black people were saying, "Go Harold we didn't pay our taxes either, we couldn't afford it."  You know, "Oh Harold went to jail.  My cousin went to jail."  So, everybody, I mean people in the black community could relate and Harold, you know, would, would lay down these, these gauntlets to, to people with money, black people with money including [HM] John [H.] Johnson and Al Johnson, Al Boutte and a lot of these guys that, that you raise me a million dollars and you register me 100,000 new people and I'll think about it 'cause I've got a job.  So, it was a great time to be around Harold Washington.  I remember one, one day--and once he got elected, I mean I was shunted all the way to the West Side of Chicago on the night that he was elected.  You know I wanted to be--I thought well I'm going to be covering his campaign tonight.  No, we want you to go to a you know a precinct out on the West Side of Chicago in Douglas Park [Chicago, Illinois], I mean on the West Side of Chicago and, and I said oh my gosh and I was in a cab with this Jamaican who was a Jamaican cab driver here in Chicago and I was just, it was, I was just heartbroken that I'd been covering his campaign and yet here on the big night I'm going to be thrown out on the West Side with nothing basically to do.  But, the cab driver said to me, he said, "There gonna come a storm tonight, you can bet on it.  It's gonna be a storm tonight."  And so I finished my live shot out there for the early news and, and I got in another cab and I went to McCormick Place in the hall there and the returns were coming in and Harold was, was gaining, Harold was leading, Harold was dominating.
Speaker 1: Now you were in McCormick Place is this headquarters for him?  What--
Speaker 2: This was his headquarters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Had finished the job--
Speaker 2: My little, my little assignment.
Speaker 1: --That you, where you'd been sent to Siberia--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --And now, and now you've come back to his headquarters.
Speaker 2: And now I've come back to McCormick.
Speaker 1: On your own time.
Speaker 2: On my own.
Speaker 1: Do you have a camera?
Speaker 2: I don't have a camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Is CBS there?
Speaker 2: Oh, CBS is there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's well-staffed and now there are thousands upon thousands of people trying to get there, I mean in cars and bicycles, people walking.  It was, it was the kind of celebration I thought I would never see in, in a political arena.  And when I got inside the first person that I saw was the cab driver.  "I told you man it was gonna come a storm tonight."  I don't even know where his cab was.  I don't even know if he knew where his cab was.  He didn't care.  It was a great, great time.  And when Harold walked out on the stage that night and says, "You want, you, you want Harold, you got him" and that was a most empowering night for African American voters here in, in Cook County and it was an empowering night for black journalists in, in this town because Harold knew what many of them had gone through over the years or some were still going through and Harold was going to try as best he could to even liberate them.
Story_ID: 159325
Speaker 1: So, now for him [Harold Washington] being the first black mayor of Chicago [Illinois], highly political town, wanting to make promises.  What, what was he able to do for black journalists?
Speaker 2: Well, he gave us, he gave us a forum every Saturday morning.  It was the mayor's report that he, he created, so that we would have, we would have a forum.  We would have access to him.  At city hall, you know, there were people who are already there, had been entrenched for years in the, in the press room at city hall and few, if any, were black, but Harold Washington was giving us a platform on Saturday mornings to interview him.
Speaker 1: So even though you're with CBS, so theoretically you could have gone to city hall.  You--
Speaker 2: Oh, I could go to city hall as a reporter--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Reporter.
Speaker 2: --Not as the political city hall reporter.  Those folks were already in place, and again, they had been in place for years.  The dean of the city hall press corps in those days a guy by the name of Harry Golden, and, and Harry Golden you know he got to ask the first questions, you know, like, you know like the White House and so you know we were kind of like shunted to the back.
Speaker 1: So, Mayor Washington created the mayor's forum, was it, was that what it was called--
Speaker 2: The mayor's, the, the mayor's forum it was on, on Saturday mornings.
Speaker 1: And who came to that?
Speaker 2: Basically staffed by the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [CABJ], yeah.
Speaker 1: And as a representative of CBS news you were able to go and cover that with the camera (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely.  I mean he, he made news on every Saturday.  He made news.
Speaker 1: Intentionally.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: He saved things for you?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he would give us some insight.  I mean I, I got to know him to the extent that one Sunday afternoon he called my house and asked you know what was, what was I doing on Monday morning early.  "I don't know.  What do you want me to do?"  He said, "I would like for you to meet me at the Del Prado," which is a deli in the building where he lived on, in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I said, "Well you know what am I supposed to do?"  He said, "I want you to get a seat near the front door and just watch what happens."  So, I got there early, six o'clock in the morning, 6:30.
Speaker 1: With a camera?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, no he just wanted me there to observe, and in comes a string of black aldermen.  This is during his, you know, his, his first, his, his first election and what he was basically meeting with them for was to tell them that you can't do the same things as some of these white aldermen who have been able to get away with a lot.  Some things they've gotten away with are illegal, but you can't do it.  One, most of you are not, you're not lawyers, you don't have legal cover, you know, so you can't do what they do and I need all of you if I'm going to get anything done in the city, so don't get in trouble please.  And of course there were two or three of them who didn't necessarily take his, take heed to what he had to say and they messed up and of course they went to prison.  But, Harold did a lot of things, you know, through executive order and got things done.  He was very shrewd about knowing where the cameras were in city council so that he could play to the cameras, that he always, he was as much, you know, an instigator in the so-called council wars in Chicago as the white aldermen who were supposed to be the chief antagonists.  Harold knew how to goad them.  He knew how to get them to, to go off, so that the cameras, which only saw little Harold standing up there with a little tiny gavel in his hand and all the sea of white men, as all the cameras faced--shot was just little Harold here and all these, these, these white faces of aldermen, you know, just to his right in camera view.  Most of the black aldermen sat below the cameras and so we never saw their, their faces.  Harold knew that, and he used it.
Story_ID: 159326
Speaker 1: So, now he [Harold Washington], hi- his career was cut short.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah that was a very tragic day [November 25, 1987].  Our cameras were there when he was breaking ground on the South Side in the Kenwood-Oakland [Chicago, Illinois] community for this new housing, and he was, you know, his regular Harold self.  He was very affable, smiling, upbeat, and to think that just a few minutes later you know he had died of a heart attack.  He was gone.  And I mean that was a jolt.  I went over to, to Northwestern [Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] where they had taken him to try to revive him and I was there when they, they pronounced him.  It was, it was just a, a sad, sad time in the city, and of course we went and did you know stories in the street and then certainly on the South Side and West Side of Chicago in the black communities and it was just heartbreak.
Speaker 1: Across the city.
Speaker 2: Across the city.
Speaker 1: Across racial divides.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: People really felt that he had contributed.
Speaker 2: He was a bigger than life figure.  You know politically he was just everybody's dad.  He just, you know everybody loved Harold.  You know he, he really wanted to make sure that women, all the minorities in this city got a fair shake.  I know a number of professional women who lived on the North Side of Chicago whether they were Jewish or Greek or whatever, they got a shot.  They got contracts.  They got work in the city when they were always excluded up until Harold.  Even with Mayor Jane Byrne as the first, you know, female you know mayor.
Speaker 1: And you as a reporter who covered Harold Washington from his early days through his death won, you won a Emmy for your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Coverage.  So, was this the first Emmy that you won?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and, and it, it was, it was, it, it was meaningful, but you know that my, my coverage of, of Harold and the station's coverage of Harold I think was, was very, very sensitive and very significant you know to understanding you know the full totality of who this man was and the impact he had on, on the city.  You know I, I didn't, I, I never really sought you know an Emmy you know.  The only other time that I even considered entering anything for an Emmy was the, the release of, of Nelson Mandela.
Story_ID: 159327
Speaker 1: Now just context wise how many years were you at CBS [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh twenty-three years at CBS.
Speaker 1: Twenty-three years and so there were many highlights, but one--
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: --Of, one of the greatest that you were beginning to mention was actually being the first reporter of any background to--
Speaker 2: Well certainly the U.S.  I mean there may have been--
Speaker 1: Okay American.
Speaker 2: --A South African reporter when he walked out of prison who was there and tried to get a question, but--
Speaker 1: To interview, just to be clear to interview Nelson Mandela upon his release.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: So can you set the stage and, and even set the stage just a little bit further back because you know there was a lot of agitation--
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --In the United States to end apartheid.  The United States was integral to helping to agitate toward the end of apartheid.
Speaker 2: I mean it was, it was, it was affecting you know world geopolitics.  It, it was, it, it was, it was resonating everywhere that, that apartheid had to come down and that Mandela had to be free.  It, it was time, and, and there was, there was pressure everywhere.  There was pressure here in this country.  There was pressure in Europe.  There was pressure in other parts of Africa of course and Asia, but there was also pressure within South, South Africa.  The [President Frederik Willem] de Klerk government realizing that you know there were some people on the far right who were saying that we would rather detonate a nuclear weapon than to turn this country over to blacks.  We would rather sterilize the land for 1500 years than to give it over to blacks, and that's what will happen if Mandela gets out of prison.  So, de Klerk was under a tremendous amount of pressure.  But at the same time, you know, getting Mandela out would, would stabilize that country.  It would save it from a conflagration that nobody wanted to see, and it, it was, it was one of the momen- most momentous occasions I, I think in, in the history of the world.
Speaker 1: Now, as it was that you were working at the local level of CBS, so you're, you're not part of the national reporting team, anchor team.  You're part of the local channel and you're in South Africa at the point of his release.  How, how did that come to be?
Speaker 2: Well, of course you know we're a CBS owned station.  CBS owned at the time I think, I think four stations around the country, New York [City], Chicago [Illinois], Los Angeles [California], and--
Speaker 1: So, it has a national--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I mean our network news was up, their offices were just upstairs above us on the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --third floor or on the second floor and so you know we had a lot of close contact with them all the time, but we had the first black general manager at CBS at the time.  His name was John Rodgers, [HM] Johnathan Rodgers.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And I had talked to Johnathan about going to South Africa to do this and he said, "Well look we gotta negotiate with the networks 'cause I don't want to have to pay for all this myself on my budget. You know we're gonna have to partner with the network and we'll see what we can do."  So, we got a chance to go.  I took a cameraman.  I had, I had the full run of any camera crew that I wanted in CBS, and I chose a young guy by the name of Randall Blakey.  He was what twenty-three years old at the time.  No civil rights experience, not been through the trenches, never been to war, but I wanted him, this to be his civil rights experience.
Speaker 1: This is an African American male?
Speaker 2: From the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 159328
Speaker 1: And we, we took off and we went to, to South Africa and we get there and on the very first day that we're in Johannes- arrived in Johannesburg [South Africa], went over to the Carlton Hotel, checked in, went to over to the CBS bureau, got to meet the people there Larry Doyle who was a bu- bureau chief, great guy, and he says, "You guys wanna go out on the streets at all or?"  "Well sure."  So we, we went out, and he says, "There's a little celebration going on at St. Mary's Church [St. Mary's Anglican Cathedral] in downtown Johannesburg.  It's an announcement that they're, they're celebrating the unbanning of the ANC [African National Congress] and other outlawed, you know, organizations."  So Randall [Blakey] and I went over there and the people were coming out and they were so joyous, very peaceful, very orderly, but doing the toyi toyi, a little dance that they do--within seconds it seems there was a huge presence of South African police and one guy stepped forward and reading from this little booklet indicating that they were in violation of this particular, this particular law and you have two minutes to break up this illegal assembly, and I'm talking about less than thirty seconds he unleashed holy hell upon these people and a, we have footage of a, a young guy, tall strapping young man in South African police uniform, with the most cherubic face you've ever seen and he turned to be one of the most violent people you have ever seen.  He took the barrel of his rifle upside, and he hit this man and killed him.  There were three people killed that day in front of us on the first day that we were there for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Did you film it?
Speaker 1: --doing nothing more than celebrating coming out of a church to cel- celebrate peacefully.
Speaker 2: Did you get all that on film?
Speaker 1: We got it all on film, and when they came to confiscate our footage Randall popped the, the, the housing on the camera where the tape was and gave them the tape and I was incredulous.  I said, "Randall why did you do that?"  He says, "Just be cool, be cool," and he had actually dropped the original in the trash can and so they had a blank, and when we got back to the bureau Larry Doyle says, and [HM] Carole Simpson was there with ABC.  Carole's producer had run off somewhere, but I had pinned her against the wall of the church.  I pinned her--
Speaker 2: To protect her.
Speaker 1: --to protect her.  She was just totally stunned.  She says, "I'll never come back."  Of course that mellowed after a few days, but we got back to the bureau and Randall was sitting in his chair and he was just numb and Larry Doyle says, "Well what did you guys see over there?"  And we started describing you know how these people came out of the church peacefully and they were just celebrating and then all of a sudden the police came and just unleashed upon them this, this torrent of hate and Larry says and, "So that's not what you saw."  And we said, "What do you mean that's not what we saw. We got it on tape."  He says, "Look I'm not arguing here. I'm just saying that what you saw is the truth.  What the rest of the world will either hear or be reported from the South African government as to what happened," he says, "Read this."  He tore off the South African press wire and it says three police office- officers were slightly injured today by a rock and bot- a bottle-throwing mob outside of St. Mary's Church.  He says, "That's what, that's the importance of what you shot today.  That will negate what they are just saying here.  Your footage will offset what they have been saying."  No police officers were ever injured.  Those people didn't throw anything.  They ran.  That was our introduction to South Africa and almost every day after that there was some violent occurrence, incident.  There was bombings.  There were bombings at, at, at bus stations.  There were bombings at the ANC building, bombings every single day.
Speaker 2: And were you able to run that footage?
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, every day.
Speaker 2: And each day?
Speaker 1: I did, I did two stories generally a day from South Africa.
Speaker 2: Did you fear for your life as you were do, running these counter-stories?
Speaker 1: I only, only one time.  I made friends with--my father [Felley Donaldson] and mother [Myrtle Donaldson] as domestics always taught us to, to be nice to the people who bring the service.  Oh you'll get to meet the kings and the queens, but you'll get to meet them maybe even faster if you're nice to the people who bring the service.  So, when we'd had checked into, to the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg, I met these, these bus, these bellmen and these, these, these young guys who carried our luggage up to the room and we invited them to stay and of course they couldn't stay.  They were not allowed.  So, but they said if you want to talk to us you know come after work and catch the jitney with us to go to Soweto [South Africa].  So, I did one day and it was a great experience.  Riding on these jitneys, overcrowded, going to, to Soweto and not knowing how the heck I was gonna get back into Johannesburg at night.  That was kind of frightening because I was dropped off probably about six blocks or so from the hotel and I had to walk and of course I got stopped, I got thrown against the wall, all of my belongings were taken out, and when they saw the American passport they called me kaffir and of course I scraped all my stuff and went back to my hotel.
Speaker 2: And you were by yourself at this point?
Speaker 1: By myself.  That was the most fearful.
Story_ID: 159329
Speaker 1: How many days were you there [Johannesburg, South Africa] before Nelson Mandela's release?
Speaker 2: We were there about a week, eight days, before he got out, and it was, it was little Jacob the, the, the bellhop who, who came to me one day and he says, "Comrade Davis you must get, you must get to, to Cape Town [South Africa].  We have word the old man is getting out."  So, I went to the CBS bureau and asked [Larry] Doyle said, "Look Larry we've gotta go to Cape Town."  "What's happening in Cape Town?"  I said that you know, "There's word that the old man."  He said, "Oh we heard that.  We've heard it for weeks now he's getting out, what, who, who told you?"  And how am I going to tell him that I have it on good authority from the bellman at the Carlton Hotel that Mandela is getting out this weekend.  He said, "If you gotta go, you gotta go."  Okay well, we'll--so we flew down Randall [Blakey] and I and we're there on, on that Saturday and we're at the Ambassador Hotel and we're just chilling and, and I meet this Greek grocer and his wife and we spoke and they were telling us you know how tense it had been, but they were very anxious for Mandela to get out because it was going to symbolize a new day in South Africa.  And then of course late that night it was revealed officially that Mandela was getting out on Sunday, February 11, 1990, that he was getting out of prison, and we were there.  Now CBS and all the other networks had to scramble, and we were there already.  And on the day that Mandela got out on that Sunday he was at the, the mayor's office at the Grand Parade in south, in Cape Town he had given his first speech.  As he was giving his first speech, this guy grabs my arm and he's pulling me toward city hall whe- where Mandela is.  Now, we're amongst these throngs outside and it was, it was Jacob, the bellman.  He had, he had driven with all of his friends down to Cape Town, and he was pulling me inside the mayor's office.  They watched me go through.  They watched my, my cameraman, I didn't have, Randall was, was separated from me.  He was at another part of the grounds, and I had my South African cameraman, Sapiwe [ph.] and, and we are just going inside the building.  Nobody is stopping us.  Next thing I know I'm in the mayor's office and there's Mandela, there's [HM] Jesse Jackson, there's Walter Sisulu.  There's [Margaret] Madlana, there's, everybody is there and here I am with the only camera and I'm just, I'm, I'm blown away and so you never, as my father [Felley Donaldson] said, you know, you never know who these people are and how far you can go with these people, these little people that you think, you know.  They'll get you to the kings and queens faster, but you be nice to the people who bring the service.  Little did I know that this, that Jacob had been like a real mover and shaker in the ANC [African National Congress].  He was working as a bellman.
Speaker 1: So he brings you--
Speaker 2: He walks me literally from this throng, I mean thousands upon thousands of people, through the crowd with a cameraman into city hall and into the office where Mandela is.
Speaker 1: And what happens?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, we're, we're in, in the mayor's office and, and we're listening to all of these people and their testimonials and, and their stories about how they survived Robben Island and all the other prisons, the beatings.
Speaker 1: They're telling this to Mandela.
Speaker 2: They're, they're telling, all of them are telling their stories.  Many of these men of course served time with Nelson, and they're telling their stories and then he gets up and he, he speaks to, to the crowd, to the small group assembled there and I walk toward him, Sapiwe [ph.], my cameraman, says, "Get up there, get up there."  So, we get up there and we're, the camera is rolling and Michael Cheers from Ebony magazine is the only other photographer there, and as I'm talking to Nelson Mandela, Michael snaps this picture.  He takes a couple of photographs and at the time I'm telling Mandela about my son.  "I have a son who is in tenth grade in high school at Evanston High School [Evanston, Illinois], Ioannis."  Ioannis had an underground newspaper called Amandla which was the war and cry of the ANC.  I didn't know much about Nelson Mandela.  It was my son, a tenth grader in high school who had introduced me to Nelson Mandela, his writings, and what he stood for.  I was telling him that story, and as I was telling the story I started to well up and he embraced me and then he started to well up and then Jesse came and Michael Cheers took the picture.
Story_ID: 159330
Speaker 1: So, we, we had a chance to, to, to discuss his [Nelson Mandela] what, what we had just witnessed and his experience and it was brief and then I went back to the CBS bureau with this tape and they couldn't believe it.
Speaker 2: So, all of this you got on tape?
Speaker 1: I got it all on tape.
Speaker 2: You were telling him about your son--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The whole thing.
Speaker 2: --As and, and then you interviewed him did you not?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You--
Speaker 1: We talked, we just talked about that and so I went back to the bureau and Bob Simon, who was a CBS correspondent, he works now at CBS, he still works there at '60 Minutes,' and I asked Bob, "Do you think this is appropriate?"  He says, "Are you crazy?  You bet you're gonna use it and you're gonna put it on the air," 'cause you'll see [Nelson] Mandela embracing.  Though, although some here in Chicago [Illinois] jour- columnists had written that I had somehow you know abdicated my journalistic integrity somehow by you know--
Speaker 2: Having emotion.
Speaker 1: And, and embracing him, or him embracing me.  It was just, it was crazy.  I didn't pay much attention to it, but, but then we flew from Cape Town [South Africa] the next day back to Johannesburg [South Africa] and, and I wanted to go and interview with Dan Rather because you know I think Peter Jennings at the time brought another person, someone at NBC. I think Tom Brokaw was there.  He brought Brian Williams who is on, anchoring now, and Dan Rather brought, brought me, and we went into the backyard, a six camera shoot, in the old backyard of Mandela's home in Soweto [South Africa].  It was great.  It was a great, great experience, yeah.  Had to dig some dirt from his garden and put it in a little vial and some other pieces of memorabilia, but a tremendous fondness for that experience.  It was obviously like no other.  It will never happen again, and I, then I really wanted to interview F. W. de Klerk [Frederik Willem de Klerk], but, so I put in a request three or four days before I left and it was, it was not, I, it was not granted, so I got on a plane and I flew with my camera crew and we got to Frankfurt, Germany, and I got a message that you can, you know, de Klerk wants to interview with you.  'Cause my deal was that I wanted to interview him on a golf course. With all the things that were happening in South Africa he rarely had a chance to play golf, but I know he loved golf, and he had granted me an opportunity to do an interview on a golf course, but unfortunately I was in, in Frankfurt, Germany, on my way back to the United States and I was coming back here to do a program with the Chicago Sinfonietta [Chicago, Illinois] on, at that, on a play or, on a play for lack of better words term that [HM] Lerone Bennett had written about Harold Washington and I was the moderator with the Sinfonietta at Symphony Hall [Chicago Symphony Center, Chicago, Illinois] and so I had to come back and fulfill that obligation.
Speaker 2: Did someone else do that interview with de Klerk?
Speaker 1: Did I ever or did someone?
Speaker 2: Did someone else?
Speaker 1: Never in that fashion--
Speaker 2: That was your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Certainly not at a golf course.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, that obviously is a tremendous highlight and you were at CBS for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Yeah twenty-three years and you know a lot of, a lot of highlights, I mean a lot of highlights and you know and some sobering low lights as well, but for the most part it was, it was a great, great time, great run you know at some, some historically significant junctures here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 159331
Speaker 1: When, when you get to the end of your run, it was not without challenge.
Speaker 2: Oh it wasn't for sure.
Speaker 1: So, can you describe how, how you, your career at CBS ended and what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, on a day that I was supposed to interview Michael Jackson over in Gary, Indiana, I, I was ready--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And this is what year?
Speaker 2: This is 2003.  And as a, as a senior veteran reporter I mean I should be able to get first dibs on any camera crew that I want for such a significant interview.
Speaker 1: And, and just for context what's going on with Michael Jackson at this point in 2003 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was over in Gary, Indiana.  He was doing the, the little, the house where he was, was raised and they were going to, to make it you know an historic tourism, you know attraction for Gary, Indiana, and so he was just lending his support for, for that campaign.  And so I was really kind of confused as, as to why I couldn't get a camera crew and so I got a page to come upstairs.  I went up on the second floor and after twenty-three years I was given about forty-five seconds and the explanation was, "John we are not going to renew your contract.  We're going in a different direction, and this is your last day."  And I said, "That's it?"  And the general manager at the time and the news director sitting in, in the room with him said, "Yes that's it."  So, I turned around, I got on the elevator, I went down to my office, and started boxing up my stuff.  You know there was, there was some talk with the Chicago Black, [Chicago] Association of Black Journalists [CABJ] that they were going to mount a campaign--
Speaker 1: And [HM] Jesse Jackson did, didn't he?
Speaker 2: --in support me, in support of me.  Well, Jesse did not.  I mean he may have spoken with one or two people, but it, it, it didn't go anywhere and I think it would have had more, I think more gravity if, if the jour- black journalists had in fact written a strongly worded letter as they said they were going to do, publish in the newspapers, you know demanding a fuller explanation than the one I was given and, but that never happened and so it kind of soured me you know on the Chicago Association of Black Journalists as an organization and, and really I just, you know, went away quietly.  I mean I, you know resurrected my, my career as a political and media consultant, but you know I thought I had some more time, certainly and a lot more to give you know to the business, but you know probably blackballed, though no one says it out right, but that's, what else could it be.  Nobody else in town said you know come on over.  I had my agent at the time calling around and nothing happened, so.
Speaker 1: So, were you shocked?
Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was shocked.  I was disappointed more than anything, I mean, you know, there, there's a lot to you know to, to knock us off of our foundation from time to time, but this was just really a disappointment.  I mean, I'd, I had never worked any place but CBS in this town, [Chicago, Illinois] and yet there were other people who bounce between stations and I could never understand that in such a grand and great city with, with a lot of power to absorb that it, it couldn't absorb me and so I was a little, I was a little bitter, a little angry, but mo- mostly disappointed, but you, you gotta go on.
Story_ID: 159332
Speaker 1: And so in, in which, which year was it when you, as you say you resurrected your political career.  You created your own company.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When was this?
Speaker 2: It was a couple of years later like in 2005 and, or actually I was starting to do that in, in late 2003 around November and 2004.  I started to you know getting some, some political campaigns that, that I could work on and folks started calling, you know, with opportunities so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So, at this point you know Chicago [Illinois] politics inside and out--
Speaker 2: Pretty much (laughter).
Speaker 1: --Because you had to learn it from the first day you got here, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And, and so what kinds of things have you been doing in your company?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been working as the media and public relations spokesperson for a lot of political candidates.  [HM] Dorothy Brown when she ran for, for mayor in the city.  Terry O'Brien when he ran for Cook County Commissioner, President in the city, judges.  So, you know I've done a lot of political work that way, just basically crafting their messages, getting in front, getting them in front of, of the news media and allowing the, you know, the, the viewers and the voters to get to know who they are.  You know it's been, it's been fun.  It's been a challenge.  Obviously a little different because now I can take a partisan, you know, view and stand.  I don't have to be so impartial and so standoffish.  So, it's been good.
Speaker 1: And with the candidates whom you've coached and supported, have you had winners?
Speaker 2: No winners, no winners.  That's, that's you know, but again it, it wasn't you know--my position isn't the only one in the campaign.  While it--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --May be significant, you, you have to have other people, you have to have you know lots of workers and staff and folks who are--know what they're doing and you know can, can get you, you know elected.  It takes votes, you know, not, not just simply you know a, a nice message, but you've gotta be able to have the troops out there to get the votes, and in this town you gotta have friends.
Story_ID: 159333
Speaker 1: So, Chicago [Illinois] is a very interesting place including this is the place where [HM] Barack Obama, you know, hailed politically.  As he is making his way politically, where are you?
Speaker 2: Well, I am basically transitioning from television to, you know, this political and media consultancy business [John E. Davis Media] and I, I do get a chance--I, I don't have much contact with him.  I mean I know people who are working with him in Altgeld Gardens out doing community work and activism work.  I know some people of course [HM] Valerie Jarrett and a lot of other people who are working with he and Michelle [Robinson Obama], but you know I don't have much contact with him.  He goes to the state house [Illinois General Assembly], he's not there long.  I didn't do any work for him until he ran for president, and I, I worked on doing some canvassing and some work for him in Indiana and I'm telling you I went to some places over there that I mean they had dogs, unfortunately they had some dogs with more sense than, than some of the people that I, that I met and they were very vicious, very vicious.  But I, I was, I was, had all that tempered by, by a guy who didn't want me in his yard or in his, his property.  He had all these dogs, but I talked to him, gave him some material and he admitted that, "I ain't gonna vote for him, but my wife is" and I thought, "Man if I got 50 percent in that household, Barack Obama's got a pretty good chance of winning this thing."
Speaker 1: Well, interesting that you mention you, you were canvassing in Indiana 'cause Indiana is very different from here, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know it's a red state, right?
Speaker 2: That's true. But there are even in Illinois you think that there are some enclaves in this, in this state that are as red as Mississippi and so you know again having, and that's the great benefit of having been raised at a time in the South as I was because it's all real.  You, you know how to deal with it.  You know how to take it with a grain of salt and let it roll off your back and keep going.  You know that it, it really does not need to confound you and confuse you and bother you to the extent that it will upset your life.  It, it's just not that important, and I will never give anyone with those kinds of sentiments toward me or black people you know any, any credibility at all.
Speaker 1: So, you know nationally different parts of the country people are reacting in lots of different ways to Barack Obama running for president you know who is this young man who, who had been seen in 2004 on the national stage at the Democratic [National] Convention.  I'm curious as to you as a newsman who now as a political advisor seeing him here.  It's his hometown and as you say you're canvassing around in Indiana, but what was, what was the temperature like in Chicago as he's revving up for this campaign?
Speaker 2: Nothing but excitement.  I mean he had the blessing of the mayor for one, [Richard M.] Daley, and, and the Democratic machine.  I mean he basically has his, his godfather in Emil Jones [Jr.], former state senator, so he's, he's got the best of both worlds.  I mean he is, he is a shoe-in.  I mean he will carry the State of Illinois.  He will carry Cook County [Illinois].  He will be exalted in, in this, in this arena, in, in the hotbed you know of politics in America, Chicago.  And so you know it was, it was exciting just to, to be here at a time when all of this was, was building up and he was developing a name for himself on the national scene and, and it made Chicago very proud.  It made all of us, you know, very, very proud.  I couldn't--my, my friends and relatives in the South and all across the country you know they were calling me almost daily you know as if you know I was walking with him every day hand in hand.  You know, what's he doing today and how's he doing?  What do the numbers look like you know?  It was, it was great.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Where were you on election night?
Speaker 2: On election night, I was at Grant Park.
Speaker 1: I was there too.
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean I was at Grant Park.  Now, I wasn't close to the stage, but we had just come back.  All of us had come back from Indiana and we started pouring into, into that part of Grant Park and I had my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] and father [Felley Donaldson] on the phone in Texas and let them listen to what they were watching on television, of course, but I was, I'm letting them know and let them here that I'm, I'm in the presence of, of this historic event.
Speaker 1: Now, I remember, I, I was also in Grant Park.  I was working for Ebony at the time and, and a group of us who'd been there all day decided to take a break because we needed to use the restroom and there were so many people there the bathrooms were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not usable anymore--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so we went back to the Ebony offices and as we are walking.  It's early.  We could tell something had happened.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And the something happened so quickly.  He had won at the moment that it was eleven o'clock Eastern, which is ten o'clock--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Central.  Where were you, where, physically where were you when you learned that he won (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: When he'd gone over the top?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I was right there in Grant Park.  I was, I was sitting with the people I had been working with all, all day in Indiana and it was just--I, I saw, I saw people of all races and backgrounds you know embracing and cheering and, and celebrating and it looked like a totally different Chicago than the one that we went to sleep on and woke up to that day.  It was a magical moment, and when he and the girls and Michelle stepped out on that stage, I mean it was deafening.  As you were there, I mean it was, it, it was like they were--we were trying to break the sound barrier.  We wanted people in Washington, D.C. and in Washington State to hear us.  It was a great time.
Story_ID: 159334
Speaker 1: So, you are at what point?  You, you have your political company [John E. Davis Media], but you're also doing radio now you've transitioned.
Speaker 2: I've done radio.  I've done several programs.  I even did, I did a real estate on radio show at WLS [Chicago, Illinois].  I've done variations of that same kind of format at WVON [Chicago, Illinois], but yeah I've, I've done some radio.  I like radio, but you know not, not a lot.  I've been basically concentrating on the political end.
Speaker 1: And, and so Chicago [Illinois] for you is the place.  You're not looking to move to another place to do media?  This is--
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I mean I know this landscape.  I'm comfortable in this landscape, and you know you, you gotta stay, play to your strong suit and this is it.
Story_ID: 159335
Speaker 1: As you look back on your career, wha- what do you believe your legacy is?
Speaker 2: As someone who gained a tremendous amount of favor with, with people who just simply wanted him, and saw in him, you know something that perhaps he couldn't see in himself and that he became the caring compassionate, you know, (unclear) person that they thought he was.  I wanna be able, you know, to look back and have people assess me as, as a person who really honestly and truly cared about them, particularly as a reporter.  I mean I just didn't do a story superficially just to have a story on the air at five o'clock.  I, I went, and sometimes I went back on my own time to spend my time with these people.  If a mother had lost a child to gang violence, I mean I went back.  I've gone in the middle of the night to, to help to try to negotiate a settlement between two gangs on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] in the middle of the night to let them know that the buildings that they're fighting over don't belong to them, you know.  I mean I told them you don't own a building, you don't own a brick in the building, you don't own a bush or a blade of grass outside of the building, you own nothing here.  America is about ownership.  If you want a stake in this society, become an owner, a responsible owner.  And yet I saw bags of money, I mean shopping bags and, and garbage bags filled with cash money and most of it went to casinos and buying fancy rims for broken down cars, but nobody thought to buy the buildings.  So, I cared.  I was conscientious about how I, I went about my job and, and I didn't just simply go to take advantage of people either in their suffering or their joy.
Story_ID: 159336
Speaker 1: What are the lessons that you hope you've taught your children?
Speaker 2: Well, the good thing about my, my children you know as, as a public person they got to see my life in full relief both privately and publicly every single day.  I didn't shield my children from my joys and certainly I didn't shield them from the problems that I may have had from day to day.  They knew everything.  I wanted them to know.  I didn't, and, and I, I remember a friend, a neighbor of mine, Len Bernstein [ph.] said, said one time, said, "We teach our children our history.  We don't want anybody else teaching our children our history," and I taught, I, I took that and, and I applied it to my own life and to my own children.  Nobody is going to confuse them with what they know to be the truth.  They lived with me every single day, every, along the way they saw it, they internalized my pain, they internalized my excitement and joy and they're, they are very smart today.
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: I, I guess I, I do have a regret that I, I perhaps could have tempered some of, of my stance, some of my positions to, to get along, to go along, to roll with the punches and play the politics, but I was never very good at that.  It was, it ran counter to everything that I believe in and everything my, my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson] and father [Felley Donaldson], you know, believed in, even though they were humble people working in the homes of people that had a lot more, they would walk away if somebody disrespected them.  So, I, I in that regard I guess I could have played the politics better just to, to be, to get along, but that wouldn't have been me and that wouldn't have been a good example for my sons.
Story_ID: 159337
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a nice, fun guy.  A guy who, who loved to sing, who loved great art, who loved great wine, who loved spectacular works of, of, of literature and who loved to sing, loved to dance, and just enjoyed and loved life every single day.  I have no regrets really.  I just really enjoy this ride.  I mean going from all those black hair and, and all those big bushy afros to this gray and what little I have left it has just been wonderful.
Story_ID: 159338
Speaker 1: Is there anything you wanna share that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: I have, I have so many friends around the world, in Africa, Europe.  I, I have such a great time now going to visit my friends and they come to visit me and, and how we can reminisce on so many different levels.  You know in Europe there's a whole different conversation about what we remember and enjoy about each other after twenty, thirty years.  You know I go up in the mountains of Greece I, I spend, when I go to Greece, and I've been going now for, for more than thirty some odd years, that I spend a lot of time in monasteries.  There are twenty-six monasteries, Greek, Serbian, Bulgarian, and Russian on Mount Athos.  While a lot of people like going to Mykonos [Greece], you know Skiathos [Greece] and Skopelos [Greece], I like going to the monasteries and, and I find a tremendous amount of peace and for a child who was raised in the South as a Southern Baptist going to, to church every Sunday, but not really feeling you know this religious experience spiritually, you know to have that spiritual awakening.   I went to these monasteries as far back as 1977 and I experienced the presence of God.  I mean he basically manifests himself to me in so many ways.  That when I left the home that I stay in with my relatives in Greece when I came back after that experience my mother-in-law who doesn't speak English she looked at me as I came through the door and says, "Oh my God he has a light," you know, and I believe it.  I, I just believe that, that if you humble yourself that God in fact will, will manifest himself to you, and all he wants you to do is to tell people that he is alive.
Speaker 1: Do you speak Greek?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Nai, nai is yes in Greek.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Efharisto, efharisto para poli [Thank you, thank you very much].
Story_ID: 159339
Speaker 1: This is at Christmastime in 1968.
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, not yet.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh no I'm--am I supposed to be describing--
Speaker 2: You can tell all that you want.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I mean, not every picture has as much of a story probably, but--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: --so go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh this is my stepfather [Felley Donaldson] and my mother [Myrtle Davis Donaldson].  My stepfather is seated to the left (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Let's go top, left to right.
Speaker 1: Okay, from the back to the front?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is my family.  This is my brother Frank to the left.  I was, I'm in the middle, and my brother Phil, Felley, Jr., is to the right.  And my father, my stepfather Felley, Jr., is seated left.  My mother Myrtle is seated in, in the middle, and my deceased sister, Beverly Ann, is seated to the right.  She passed away at thirty-three, thirty-four years old.  She was a nurse in Oakland [California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: She died of sarcoidosis yeah.
Speaker 2: And when was this picture taken?
Speaker 1: 1968 in Wichita Falls, Texas, in our home and it was one of my, my trips from college [at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] back home at Christmastime.  I had a chance to work with my father at serving a party for some very high-ranking social and political leaders in Wichita Falls and one of them was Senator John Tower, and I remember walking through the home carrying a silent butler and a handkerchief over my wrist as I emptied ashtrays and Senator Tower asked me to tell my, tell the man at the bar, who was my father, to mix him a drink, scotch and water, and I told my father, I made my rounds again up to the bedroom where he was with Mrs. Sykes [ph.] and several other high powered people and I said, "I thought I told you to get me a drink."  And I said, "Well I'll, I'll go down and tell him again."  I said, "Dad look Senator Tower needs a drink."  He said, "I'll get to it.  I'm only one person down here."  So, when I went back up the third time Mrs. Sykes says, "I'll go get it," and she kind of blast my father out and I went out to the driveway and told him I don't have to take this crap, you know I'm, I'm in school, I'm, I'm a revolutionary student, I don't have to take this.  My father came out and he says, "Look stay with me tonight.  You never have to do this ever again in your life, you know, but stay with me tonight," and I did.  He was a great man, 33rd degree Mason.
Speaker 2: This is my best friend, number 41.  That's my best friend Robert Reed [ph.] who passed away five years ago.  We were so close as kids.  We met in, in Vacation Bible School at Seventh Day Adventist Church, and they had an old school bus that was used as sort of on the playground for us to get in and pretend we were driving and I wanted to drive the bus and Robert wanted to drive the bus, so we got into a little pushing match and, and Mrs. Thompson [ph.], the teacher, brought us inside and we couldn't have recess.  We had to sit and look at each other for the rest of the period, and from that moment on we became very good friends.  I'd walk him home.  He'd walk me home.  We would you know, went back and forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where is this?
Speaker 2: Wichita Falls, Texas, Booker T. Washington High School 1966.  We were state champions in the State of Texas.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: When I first went to work in Fresno, California, my first job in television out of college, the guy that picked me up at the airport was the only African American cameraman in all of Central California.  His name is Earl Bradley, and you see him with a battery belt across his shoulder and he loved good soul food and he knew all the places up and down Central California where you could get the greatest soul food and his wife Lu [ph.] also was a great cook.  But, Earl was a, was a great cameraman, very conscientious.  Earl and I went up to Merced Junior College [Merced, California] one time to interview this guy by the name of Alex Haley, and I had you know I read his books, I mean his articles, and, and thought you know, you know, you know 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' and when I got up there and after the interview was concl- as, as it was concluding, Alex Haley asked me if I enjoyed research and I said, "Yeah, I, I like research."  He said, "You like writing?"  I said, "Yeah I like, I love writing."  He says, "Look I'm working on this, this project.  I'm tracing my family tree," and in my mind I said, "Yeah a negro chasing his family tree how far is that gonna go," and of course that turned out to be 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'] and I still kick myself to this day that I didn't go along with the program.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: At Washington State University [Pullman, Washington], I had put together a little singing group, a musical group.  It was a Four Seasons Concert Band Plus One and I was the lead singer and had five guys that played with me, and we did a lot of the school functions at Washington State University and at the University of Idaho [Moscow, Idaho].  We also would play at various off-campus events in- including some conventions in Idaho and the State of Washington.  We made a little name for ourselves in the brief time that we were together at Washington State, but that was the Four Seasons Plus One and you can imagine who the plus one was.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: And this is, this is my wife Maria, Maria Ioanniodou, I-O-A-N-N-I-D-O-U, and Ioanniodou it sounds complicated, but it's just Johnson.  Her name was Mary Johnson, but Maria Ioanniodou, and we got married, we got married in college and, and this is at, at Bill Kurtis' house for one of his Christmas soirees.  He would invite everybody, you know, in, in the city [Chicago, Illinois], the Mar- Marshall Fields' Junior [Marshall Field IV], the mayor, the powerful aldermen like [Edward] Ed Burke, and we couldn't wait until everybody had had enough to drink so we could actually break them down and fi- find out who they really were and what they really thought, and we often did that.
Speaker 1: Now mostly the captions are short, so you can just tell us.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is my publicity picture from Channel 2 or WBBM [CBS affiliate, Chicago, Illinois].  This is the second publicity photo that I, I took at WBBM during my twenty-three year career.
Story_ID: 159340
Speaker 1: And this of course is a photo of, of me, Nels- Nelson Mandela, [HM] Jesse Jackson in the mayor's office at Cape Town [South Africa] just a couple of hours after Mandela was released from prison and had the occasion to be able to, to be the first US reporter to interview him and talk to him upon his release from prison after twenty-seven years.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?
Speaker 1: This is February 11, 1990, Sunday.
Speaker 2: This is Mandela, Dan Rather, CBS anchorman at the time, and myself was sitting in the backyard of Nelson Mandela's old home in Soweto [South Africa].  This is only a day and a half after he got out of prison, and the, the national news media in America were given an opportunity to interview him and Dan Rather graciously brought me along to be a part of, of the network's interview.
Speaker 1: This is Jesse Jackson and, and me.  We're at a hotel here in Chicago [Illinois].  This is after Jesse Jackson had come back from freeing Lieutenant [Robert] Goodman, the Navy pilot, Navy flyer who was being held captive in the Middle East.  Had a number of interviews, of course, with Jesse over the years.  He's always been very open and so was his family.  I spent a lot of time at, at their house and had a great time and great relationship with them.
Speaker 2: This, this is a photograph of, of me in my formative years at KMJ-TV in Fresno, California, just out, out of college [at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] learning, still learning the ropes, interviewing the sheriff and, and his PR person from Tulare County Sheriff's Department.  The cameraman turned out to be a very good friend of mine by the name of Tom Allen who was a phenomenal guy, funny guy, and always kept us laughing, always kept the mood light.
Speaker 1: So now I have some smaller pictures, so I'm going to put three in a row, and you can start from left to right.
Speaker 2: His name is Ray Drew [ph.].  Ray Drew came out to Fresno, California, back in the '50s [1950s] to start and work with the, the Block brothers on starting H&R Block offices in Central California.  He worked for them and then left them and had to sue them because they didn't, didn't pay him, so he and a guy named John Gerald [ph.] started their own.  Ray became my accountant and one of my best friends.  He taught me the game of golf.  He introduced me to the game of golf, was one of the first franchise McDonald's operators, Art Bender and Ray gave me one of the greatest quotes of my life because I couldn't believe that here was a man who was, was, was not what he appeared to be.  He appeared to have a lot of money 'cause all the bankers knew him.  He gave his employees lavish parties, and yet he lived in, in a hovel of, of an apartment with an algae filled pool and I couldn't understand why he would, would do that and, and give the impression to other people that he was doing so well, but that was in the middle of his lawsuit and he didn't take any money out of his business.  He didn't deprive any of his, his employees.  And, but he said to me that if you--he had, his quote was, you never in essence fake it to you make, but, but the, the fact is, is that you have to show that you're prosperous.  You have to at least pretend that you're prosperous and, and if you never tell them, you know, they really never will know.  If you, if you just post- posture the prosperity then, then you don't have to ever worry about it because they'll never ever know that you don't have it because you always carried yourself as if you did.  He was a great guy.  He died of a heart attack on a golf course with Art Bender playing golf in Fresno.
Speaker 1: That is my sister, Beverly Ann Donaldson, with her little daughter, Renee [ph.].  She also had a son, Ricky [ph.], but my sister passed away at thirty-four years old from sar- sarcoidosis.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This would have been 1972.
Speaker 2: And that's me in my heyday in my all, in, in all of my polyester glory in Fresno, California, standing outside of KMJ-TV on Van Ness Boulevard across the street from the Fresno Bee newspaper building there and doing one of my stand-ups.
Speaker 1: You got to wear that red suit back then.
Speaker 2: Oh that was a great polyester suit, you kidding with those high, with the, I had shoes to match, platforms.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's me in 1971.  It was wonderful when they date stamped, you know, all the photos in those days, those old film days.  But, that's, that's me in, in one of my, my suits.  I, I had all of my suits handmade by my brother-in-law who lived in Greece who only took my, my wife [Maria Ioannidou] took my measurements.  We, we mailed him my measurements, and he would send me a suit almost every month, brand new suit, all handmade.  He was one of the greatest tailors in, in Europe.
Speaker 2: And the man in the middle is, is my grandfather, Albert Davis, when he came here to, to Chicago [Illinois] for my son's, Symeon's graduation, my oldest son's graduation.  And my grandfather loved to cook.  He loved to eat, but he loved to cook as well.  So, we had a little cook-off at my house, and that was my grandfather, Albert.  He was wondering if he had to put on that apron, and we told him that he did.  It was a woman's apron, and he just didn't like the idea at all.
Speaker 1: And of course this is, I think, the, the inaugural event for Real Men Cook, and Ben Vereen was in attendance and we had--
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: --We had a great time.  That's Midge Kimberly.  Midge Kimberly is, had a public relations agency here in Chicago, and she was a real mover and shaker socially.
Speaker 2: The year this was?
Speaker 1: This I don't know it would have been 19- about 1984.
Speaker 2: My wife and I adopted this boy.  His name is Tyrone Kemper, and Tyrone was having some problems at home, and he came to our house--he was a friend of my middle son Ioannis and fifteen years old and he came presumably to study one night, two days later the police came and accused me of harboring a runaway.  And I told them, "Yeah the boy was here, but he's long gone," but little did I know he was still in my basement.  Well I fished him up out of my basement, asked him what was going on.  He says, "Well you can kick me out, but I'm not going home" and that, so we called his mom she says, "If you got him, keep him," and we did.  We went to court.  We, we were the only ones that showed up.  We petitioned, we got him, and we raised him as our own.  He, he graduated from Evanston High School [Evanston, Illinois], and he went to Houston, Texas.  [HM] Art Norman, who is a reporter at Channel 5 and his wife, Ondina [ph.], bought him his first wetsuit because he loved swimming and he went down to Houston, Texas to the Ocean Corporation to learn how to become a commercial scuba diver.  In the process, he was called a lot of names.  He worked with a lot of Navy Seals, CBs, demolition experts, and you know they never had a black.  He was their first, and he is an accomplished commercial scuba diver.  He has made a tremendous amount of money.  He lost his house in [Hurricane] Katrina.  He was in Norway at the time on a dive ship, and now he runs a dive ship.  Two of his, of the, of the guys that he learned to, to commercial scuba dive with were, they died on, on some of their dives.  They, they, they, they died.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Tyrone Kemper.  He, his dive ship was one of the first ships to the Deepwater Horizon.  He sent me pictures that nobody else had.  I've got 'em.  I've got hours of, of the video that he shot from his ship of the Deepwater Horizon.  They, they rescued eleven people from the platform.  Again, now he runs his own dive ship, and he's worked all over the world.  He has worked for every major oil company.  He has put together pipelines off the coast of West Africa out into ten to twelve mile international waters to where people in some of those countries didn't even know that the oil that was below their feet was leaving their, their territory and going out to sea.  And they were so clever of how these, these pipe sections were put together that even if a storm came or even you know through manmade terrorism they, the oil would be captured in, in, in these cylinders in the pipeline that even if you disrupted it, it would sink to the bottom, but you could always salvage the oil.  And of course this is a photograph of my wife, Maria, along with our sons, left to right is my youngest son, Mario, my son, my oldest son, Symeon, and my middle son, Ioannis.  On the left, Mario is in the music and movie industry in Los Angeles [California], does a lot of producing and writing of music and, and introducing music to, to various television shows including 'Grey's Anatomy.'  He has worked with Shonda Rhimes.  My son, Symeon, is an attorney in Los Angeles.  He does a lot of media stuff as well as real estate.  He went out there to work for Sunshine Real Estate firm before the bust.  My son, Ioannis is an architect, graduate of, of University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois], and that's me on--
Speaker 1: When was this picture taken?
Speaker 2: This was taken in 2001.  Mario on the left is a graduate of Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  Symeon is a graduate, in the blue there, he's a graduate of Princeton.  Again Ioannis's University of Illinois, and it cost me more to educate him because he wanted all the other trappings.  He wanted a car.  He wanted (laughter).
Speaker 1: This one, I just, well let me just, just open this up a second.
Speaker 2: Yeah I wasn't sure where--
Speaker 1: Yeah this is, you know this was, this was one of--there were so many wonderful things in Fresno [California] that, that the Johnson's had this as, as a local magazine. It was filled with, with a lot of ads every single month.  It, it featured, you know, a lot of the so called movers and shakers, you know, in the, in the Central Valley [California].  This is me here in my polyester.  But this, you know, I, you know I was--because you are the only one you, you go, you vault to the, to the celeb- to the top of the celebrity heap, you know.  There were a lot of firsts, there were a lot of firsts you know during the '70s [1970s] whether it was in, you know, industry or whether it was in, in, in marketing or whether it was in whatever.  There were a lot of people who got a lot of opportunities in the 1970s and--
Speaker 2: And you were one of them.
Speaker 1: --I was definitely one of them.  But that was a great little magazine.  It was like, it was like Jet.
Speaker 2: Yeah it looks like it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but Frank Johnson and his family did that for years.
