Story_ID: 661902
Speaker 1: I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'll be the interviewer, Matthew Hickey is our videographer. I'd like for you to say and spell your name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your date of birth, place of birth, where we are and what day it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Michaela Angela Davis, M-I-C-H-A-E-L-A, A-N-G-E-L-A, Davis. My date of birth is March 31st, 1964, I was born in Landstuhl, Germany, and right now we're in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: And today is?
Speaker 2: And today is Thursday, August--oh, shoot. Today is Friday, August 15th, 2014.
Story_ID: 661903
Speaker 1: So I wanna start with some People magazine type questions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your answers can be brief.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is okra (laughter); fried, pickled, stewed, dried, yeah. Oh, I'm country, okra.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, my favorite color is black. I really was hesitating 'cause I didn't wanna say that, but it's the truth. My favorite color to wear is black. My favorite color in the world is blue, blue sky, blue ocean, blue flowers, like hydrangeas, so my favorite color in nature is blue; my favorite color on moi is black.
Speaker 1: Your favorite season?
Speaker 2: Oh, spring, my favorite season is spring. I was born in spring, but the metaphor that spring is, that winter comes before and everything seems quiet, almost dead and then the glory of life bursts through. And it, it's a reminder that this too shall pass and things get beautiful. So emotionally and spiritually I look to spring as, as an inspiration, and it's glorious, every time I'm, I am surprised at the beauty and the glory of God, every spring, and I've seen fifty of them now. And yeah, spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite travel destination?
Speaker 2: So far there's a whole lot of world left to go. So far my favorite travel destination has been North Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, yeah, that, that's a first in my favorite places. I like places that, that had full exciting civilizations that predated Christianity. I find not just the, not just the architecture but the people and the food and the culture just deeply interesting and deeply rich. So Asia is also a really interesting place for me to go, because again these are full intact creative intellectual civilizations that were in place before Christianity. So you see what--how Christianity could also join a civilization so, but North Africa because it's Africa.
Speaker 1: Your favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite quote or saying is: "This is the day the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it" [Psalm 118:24]. I say that every day to myself when I wake up to remind myself to be grateful for another day and to rejoice in it. Even, even in hard times, so that's just the--that's something that I say to myself every day, yeah.
Story_ID: 661904
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to look at your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let's start with your father. Can you tell me his name and date of birth, where he was born and tell me about him?
Speaker 2: It's interesting that you start with my father for my family history because that's where all the holes are. My father's name is Harold Edward Gregory Davis [Harold Davis, Sr.]. He was born in Camden, New Jersey on July 17th, 1935. His mother's name was Lucille Davis, the name of his father is unknown. There was very little desire to discover the name of his father, though you know with a lot of families, particularly my family because there's some cousins--my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] and my father are kind of related somewhere down the line and the people know. And rumor has it that my father's father had another family that he was married to, that was very close by, and presumably my grandmother, my mother's mother [Precious Tindal Butler], knew who that person was, but which is--they kept it secret and it's interesting, just recently I swabbed my father to find his African ancestry, I thought you know that would be a good gift to him. Because he doesn't know who his father was and that perhaps knowing his lineage would be helpful. And, and then I asked him, "Did you ever wanna find out, especially now you know with Facebook and all this technology?" And I just think that hole is so deep and that pain is so not addressed that it just didn't, it's, it just didn't register to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't want to know.
Speaker 2: He didn't want to know, and I think that he had been raised to not want to know. You know and he's very, my father was very, was a scholar, very early and so he went to Jesuit Catholic schools and so--and then went straight to the [U.S.] military and had a lot of identification with discipline and order. And he found, I guess that, I don't know the male energy in that--in those, in institutions. And he not--he never talked about it, he never--I wasn't, I wasn't even clear whether he and his sister had the same father, 'cause he had one sister. My grandmot- his mother died when I was quite young (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name?
Speaker 2: Lucille. We called her Grandmother Davis, and that in itself was so reflective of the relationship, it's very formal, very removed. I think she was, she's an incredibly brilliant woman, particularly for that time, she spoke several languages. But she had no power in the culture and so I think that her--she was very stoic, I thought she was mean, but I was a little girl, like that's how I--because there was real contrast to my mother's family.
Story_ID: 661905
Speaker 1: My father's history is very vague. And I, later in life he [Harold Davis, Sr.] really found his family, he really found the sense of family in the Native American community and he was adopted by the Eastern Band of Cherokees [Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians], so he's a card carrying member of the Eastern Band of Cherokee indigenous people. He spoke the language, he's rea- he had a stroke not long ago so all of his--he doesn't remember being able to speak that, that Cherokee tongue. But he did it at one point.
Speaker 2: And does he have Cherokee in his blood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well they identify--like he, he was brought into this community of, of Indians and they had elders come and they looked at his face and did all this kind of, I think their kind of--their analysis. And they decided that they--that with this group of elders that this was the band that he looked most like and the traits were most like. And they gave him the name of Laughing Bear [ph.], he did the whole ceremony, he hung from the tree you know. I don't if you'd seen those, some of the examples of Native American some of, I mean there are so many different rituals. But there's one where the men are pierced by their nipples and they hang from a tree and they're there and the community is singing and chanting and they're kind of in this trancelike state until their skin breaks. And we were there; I was there for that experience with my dad. He mar- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How old were you then?
Speaker 1: I was a teenager, I was, I was around sixteen years old, and my, my father took a wife who came to be--I called her Mama Carlota [Carlota Velarde Davis], she was very much like a--I wouldn't say that she was my stepmother, I never called her my stepmother. I called her Mama Carlota, and she brought a sense of family to my father, she brought a sense of community and the Native American, the indigenous community brought a sense--started to fill that hole that my father had. And never asked--again he never asked questions about his--I think there was a lot of shame, I think there was a lot of rage, I think there is a lot of hurt. There's nothing--I think that is one of the most core broken things that a person can be is to be abandoned by their parent. And for a father to be--I, I mean for a man to be fatherless. And that mean--then there's everything else, you have no father, you have no grandfather, like I don't anybody, like his, his aunt--my father's family, both my sides are, are kind of small but you know we didn't have very much--it was all about my mom [Helen Butler Delaney], and my mother's side. But my father found family later in life, and we were part of it, we went into sweat lodges, I've done, you know, I've gone to reservations. And it seemed to become--it seemed to help him find some peace, but I don't know I could have you know I could have, I could have brothers and sisters out there you know. And my sisters [Debbie Davis and Monica Davis] and I have--haven't really had a real conversation about it either. My daughter [Elenni Davis-Knight] and I have, whether we might start to look 'cause it's very probable, you know, that--not brothers and sisters, I'm sorry that I could have--
Speaker 2: Uncles.
Speaker 1: --uncles and aunts out there, and they could have children and yeah, it's very possible. So I don't, I don't feel that real tug yet, so I don't know. Me and my father's--my father created his family, I think.
Story_ID: 661906
Speaker 1: And tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother is Helen Jean Butler Davis Delaney [Helen Butler Delaney], and now she's, she goes as Helen Delaney. She was born March 16, 1938 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And tell, tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother is--wow, my mother is, my mother is, is, I mean when I say, I wanna say, oh like all the cliches are crowd--clouding my head, like my mother's phenomenal, she's awesome, she's--but my mother became herself in a way that really helps me to sort of understand that--the history of, of America, of feminism, of womanhood. Because she was born in a time, in raising time, in 1950s where there were very, very clear roles for who women should be. Who black women should be and my mother and my father [Harold Davis, Sr.] are both light skinned black Americans. And so there's all that, there's all the nuances and complexities and dynamics that go with that. So my mother was being groomed to be the proper light skinned black woman who's family--'cause my mother, my mother's father on--my grandfather, Papa [John Butler] was a police officer and he had brought most of his family out of the Jim Crow South and it--and became a policeman and moved them solidly into middle class life. Wasn't a burb [suburb], it was--they were good hardworking people who were then able to send their children to college. Like that part of that trajectory. And so my mother was--she played the piano, she was in pre-med, she had all the--she had that look, that classic 1950s--she was a beautiful young woman. And inside, there was a whole other person and she met my father, they married young--
Speaker 1: What's young?
Speaker 2: Nineteen.
Speaker 1: And where did she go to school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my father was twenty--
Speaker 1: And where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: My mother went to Girls' High in Philadelphia [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then she done, she had done a couple--not even two years at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], she had a double scholarship with music and pre-med.
Story_ID: 661907
Speaker 1: And much to the fury of my [maternal] grandfather [John Butler] that she left college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to marry my father [Harold Davis, Sr.]. My father was this bright, brilliant officer who was also pursuing a law degree [at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he was very handsome, very charming. My mother [Helen Butler Delaney] told me you know their first date, he took her to the opera. And like what young black man--what man even like today you know take--and that--she never you know she's lives in this working class neighborhood in Philly and there were few young men that even knew about classical music, let alone would take her to the opera. So you know and you're nineteen and she kind of got swept off her feet, and they were going to Texas first where my two sisters were born, but ultimately going to Europe. And I think that really was, really important, my mom wanted to get out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and get off of Park Avenue, which is where she was born, and she did to discover then that she was an officer's wife in a foreign country. When the Civil Rights Movement was exploding in America, they were in Germany. She was, she was in a very bad marriage, my parents had a very bad marriage and she felt trapped very early. Very young and had, you know and just like any kind of Catholic housewife, you turn around, and you have four children, and that's what happened. My mother was pregnant every year for six years, and she had my sister, Debbie [Debbie Davis], and my other sister, Monica [Monica Davis], who goes by Nikki, then my brother, Eddie [Eddie Davis], and then me and a couple of miscarriages in between. And then--so the marriage was very bad, very early, the life was very bad, very early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what, what does bad mean?
Speaker 1: My father unbeknownst to all of us--well my father was again very, he's probably one of the most brilliant people I ever met, and he had this sort of astonishing intellect that led him to a very interesting kind of groundbreaking career. But on the other side of that was a lot of rage and a lot of--he was a, he was probably never faithful, again he was a very--my father was very handsome, very smart and an officer. I mean and it was very easy for him to have all kinds of women, which he did, and my mother was the officer's wife and was supposed to be that. And--but inside there was a whole other person. Inside of that you know sort of tight '50s [1950s] dress was a full woman. And so there was a lot of emotional turmoil, violence and much later we learned that my father had bipolar disorder, but way later, like way, I'm talking like twelve years ago was it really clear what it was. We just saw you know brilliance and rage, kind of like that is often--it's not a new story for a lot of us in terms of seeing, whether you're a performer or you're an intellect, you see kind of these very extreme things out of very extreme people. And so my father was very extreme and, and my mother almost didn't make it, I think emotionally and physically, almost didn't make it out of that marriage. And, and she was Catholic and they were, they were bound--she converted to Catholicism in order to marry him, and in Catholicism there is no divorce. That is, there is no divorce and so it was a very big idea and big move for her to have a, to have a divorce. Which basically she had to admit to the church that she was mentally ill, there's all these old--there are very few reasons why you could get a divorce, right? And because she was, she was also discovering another spiritual part of herself, the--having to comply to whatever the church needed her to say to get the divorce, she did.
Story_ID: 661908
Speaker 1: In the midst of that, my brother [Eddie Davis] died. And--
Speaker 2: At what age (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's--my brother was seventeen, I was fourteen.
Speaker 2: So you're back in the states at this point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I can give--so let me--so I wasn't--we were in Germany until I was not even a year. My parents moved back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] very, for a very short time. My father [Harold Davis, Sr.] left the [U.S.] military because he was, he was an officer in a very special unit and they were working with nuclear weapons in the early '60s [1960s] and he decided to leave, he had an honorable discharge because he was having a very difficult time negotiating working with nuclear weapons. And so for political reasons, he left early and--so is it--I'm glad you add this because it kind of made some it, it, it was a devastating but quick turn 'cause my, my parents and my family--and I don't remember much 'cause I was quite young, went from being officers in Germany with German maids and whatever they had there to my father going back to law school and living in Philadelphia. So he went from being an officer to being a student and my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] having to work as a secretary, basically supporting us while he went to law school. So we got poor, it--you know for a while, I didn't know we were poor (laughter), but you know my grandpa, but, 'cause my [maternal] grandparents [Precious Tindal Butler and John Butler] lived up the street in a big house but we lived in two bedroom apartment with four kids and one bedroom and my father was a graduate school student with four kids, and my mother was the secretary. I didn't know we were poor until we went back later, like oh my god, we would--'cause I spent a lot of time at my grandparents' house, which was big and full of food and life and I had--my school was next door, I didn't, it didn't register to me. But it did to my mother who worked and supported us and made our clothes and tried to--one of the most significant things about my mother is that no matter how dark life got, she would try to find something beautiful, and she would sneak us to like the museum. Where she would like sneak some little treat in this life of poverty, and I think part of--it was significant for her to be in Europe very early because she got to travel and see new things and they would get--we had a, a big Volkswagen bus and they put the kids in the, in the car and just drive to Italy and drive to Spain. So you know you're from Park Avenue in Philadelphia and then you're ninet- in your early twenties and you're driving--you're backpacking through Europe basically. Which people didn't do that, black people (laughter) in the '60s [1960s]. So her world expanded, her, her imagination expanded through experience and, and then becoming poor and back on the streets in Philadelphia also didn't break her, but very--my father was very, very smart, got through, go through--he went to La Salle College [La Salle University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], he went to the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], he went to the University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and, that's where he went to law school. And he was very interested in mediation and litigation, there were no black litigators, there were no, for the federal government, or mediators. My father very quickly, right out of law school became the first black federal mediator for the United States. So we went straight from like the ghetto (laughter) I didn't know it was the ghet- it wasn't like--let me be clear. It was not the ghetto, it was poor people living together in a community and in Phili- in this area of Philadelphia, it was pretty mixed, there were Italians, there were black people, it became all black later. It was primarily black but it was, it was just poor working class people and everybody knew everybody, there was picture on the--actually one of the stops from the Underground Railroad were right on our corner, so it was a rich, it was a rich poor community.
Story_ID: 661909
Speaker 1: But then we went straight to the suburbs of New Jersey near Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in a town that was almost all white, which was the first time, by this time I'm about six years old, I experienced racism. I'll never forget it, I think most people, it's like your first kiss, you never forget your first encounter with racism. And mine happened in this town [Woodbury, New Jersey], we'd--so my father [Harold Davis, Sr.] had gotten this great job, we're in this like lovely house and there's a two car garage and beautiful you know. We go straight into middle class, BMW, everything. And my brother [Eddie Davis] and my sisters [Debbie Davis and Monica Davis] are more olive skinned than I am, they have dark hair, they have dark eyes, they look more kind of that classic light skinned black--but you can tell they're black, right, or light skinned or something. They've got that kind of Halle Berry--they looked like mixed kids, right? But I, here I am, I'm blonde, I'm really fair, I got these big thick wooly blond braids and--so people didn't really know, particularly white folks I, and, and their--they just had no, they had no intelligence for the vocabulary, for the diversity inside black culture, like how many colors and shapes we come--anyway. So my best friend at the time, was this little blonde girl, and she would--to be clear she was my friend because she had a massive Barbie collection, I had none. So I go to her house and play Barbies and her mom--I was fascinated with fashion then, fasc- like obsessed with paper dolls, I was fascinated. And so Barbies were everything, so it was worth that friendship. So anyway so her mother discovers that those kids are my brothers and sisters and then let's her know I can't come to their house anymore. And to--she discovered to whom I belonged, I belonged to that family up on the hill with those Afros (laughter) 'cause everybody, you know, early '70s [1970s] by then. So I remember that, I didn't quite remember how I negotiated that feeling, but I knew that I could go to her house and then I couldn't. And my mom [Helen Butler Delaney] trying to have that conversation with a six year old. And then it was interesting much later, maybe around twelve or thirteen, I got so mad because I remember they didn't have one book in their house, and I was like how dare she not let me in her--like we had like in our, in our dining room on the, on the trunk, there was like a dictionary on a pedestal, right? It was like (makes sound) there's the dictionary and we had a library in our house, and we read the classics and we would talk about what we read in the newspaper. I'm six years old and I'm talking about what was happening on the news or I looked up a new word at the dinner table. And I'm like and this woman, I can't come to your house? I remember just being, like it clicked to me when I was twelve, but anyway. So we moved into this all white neighborhood and it was for, for two years my mother didn't have to work in her, in the whole life that I, you know, my--as I said my father went quickly into this great job. And I remember my mother she painted that portrait of me, she painted everything, she would make bread from scratch. Like our lunches were like, you know, bread from scratch, mayonnaise from scratch like she, this creative thing just came out--she wouldn't--she practiced the piano, she, and she became, I remember she was the--they call them room mothers, like a mother would, would adopt their, kindergarten class and my mother would come in and like if it was a Halloween party, she would trick it out. Like do all kinds of crazy like decorations and stencils on the cupcakes and she made me up like a witch. And I was green, I had bumps on my face and my hat had like stars, like she was so creative, and it was so interesting that the community had no reference for a smart creative light skinned black woman. Like I remember we just, we were like freaks like and we were all very smart and kind of creative and kooky and, they just didn't know who we were, like no reference. There was no 'Cosby Show' ['The Cosby Show'], there was no reference for--you know my, my mother spoke French and like they just didn't know us.
Story_ID: 661910
Speaker 1: So I wanna go back, we--I was asking about your mother [Helen Butler Delaney] and her family.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace her family?
Speaker 2: We can clearly go back with my, my grandmother's parents, very clear- we can clearly go back to that. Then it starts to get a little sketchy because they were, you know they were all in the, in the South, in Jim Crow South and that's when the mixed marriages were happening. Like for, I've for, I've never met anyone that was all black or all white in my family that, that were blood, that I was blood related to. People had second marriages of people of white or black, but there was mixed marriages throughout until my grandparents' parents.
Speaker 1: And where were they living?
Speaker 2: They were living in Sumter, South Carolina, both sides, my mother's, my father's mother [Lucille Davis] and my mother's family all come from Sumter and the, and surrounding areas of Sumter, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And when you say mixed, what do you mean, tell me who you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Meaning like my grandmothers--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name is Precious, Precious Tindal [Precious Tindal Butler]. And her mother, her father was Native [Native American] and black and her mother was, I think German and Syrian, like so they were--and my grandma--grandfather, was also--
Speaker 1: What's his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name is John Stanley Butler [John Butler]. And so my mother's father, Papa, John Stanley Butler, his family was also mixed. His mother was Irish and his father was black. But, and they're not all black either, like my fa- but he's like black. And there's some Native but they don't know what it is, right? But beyond that, the marriages were illegal because--so it's like the paper, like the--my mother started to do some research at one point, and then you just stop. Interestingly enough, the Irish, the Irish in my family, she was able to go all the way back to like seventeen something [1700s]. And when she went to Ireland she found our family, and the funny thing was, apparently the Butlers were traders (laughter) or something, but she was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Slave traders?
Speaker 2: No, they were traders to the, to the Irish, Irish, they were, somehow they got--kind of have a sketchy history about being traders to the, I, the Irish Republic or something, so when she went there and start asking questions, they were like, "Ooh, the Butlers."
Speaker 1: And who's this person?
Speaker 2: So it, it was on my, my grandmother's, my grandfather's mother was Irish and so she was able to do--they were able to find out more. Because it was just more, it was just more records. And when she went to Sumter and she and her brother started this project, and they just--records just kind of like stopped about, of who married whom.
Speaker 1: So these records, what your family's discovering is not so much whether--coming from slavery or not, but it's the intermixing of races.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the, and the thing that's interesting is that part of, you know, my mother was the, the paper bag law was enforced on my mother, and was with a lot, it--the intention was, or what happened a lot was light skinned blacks married other light skinned blacks. There was not this intention that they wanted to be white, their intention was to stay light so they can stay alive basic- basically. When you live in the Jim Crow South that really was why they married each other because they discovered that the light people lived, where the dark skinned people who were part of their family, cousins would disappear. Cousins would be hung, people who went to a NACCP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meeting, if they were brown, they would just--they couldn't go to school, they couldn't eat at lunch counters. I mean then that was the experience with my grandmother and her family members that were cousins or--the sisters their, their blood relations all were pretty consistently light skinned. But they had you know very close family members that weren't and those family members could not participate in society and so for--their strategy for survival was stay light. You can go--my grandmother went to teachers college where her, where her, her dark skinned cousins could not possibly go to college. Could not go buy a sandwich, could not live and so there was a lot of mixing of mixed people. All the way to me, to my mother and father [Harold Davis, Sr.], you know, they, they were the last of that. But it was, it was genere- it was a generational family plan.
Speaker 1: And the family plan was?
Speaker 2: To survive.
Story_ID: 661911
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandmother [Precious Tindal Butler] had PTSD [posttraumatic stress disorder] as, as a result of living in Jim Crow South. Like she had, she had a very visceral real fear of lynching, even while living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. You know there was no lynching there, but when you've experienced that, when you've been sixteen or seventeen and you've seen someone hanging from a tree, perhaps someone that you know, that is traumatizing, they were terrorized. So you're dealing with people who are very much like the people living in the Middle East right now that were in, under constant generational terror. So my--and, and that terror gets passed along you know or, or it manifests itself in--you never get to know who people could have really been had there not been terror to adjust their mental state.  There was a lot--lots of mental instability in my family from that, from the South. I mean there was a lot.
Speaker 2: And when you say mental instability, what, what did it look like?
Speaker 1: It looked like everything from you know someone being eccentric to being institutionalized. From schizophrenia to, to just being like characters you know. But now with some, with some understanding and with some analysis, I think if--people were made to be crazy, because they were living in crazy, crazy, crazy circumstances. And there was no treatment, there was no--okay now that you've made it out of, you know, slavery or Jim Crow South, now let's take care of you emotionally, there's not--there was nothing like that. That was like okay now join this oppressive society and make it work. And so my grandparents' generation were probably, you know I, I look at it as like each generation from my grandmother, my mother [Helen Butler Delaney], myself, that there's this idea of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. My, my grandmother's generation really just wanted to stay alive. They were, they wanted to get out of the South, they wanted to get out of there without being killed or burned. And my mother's generation was about liberties, was about like really, real civil, civil liberties. The whole civil rights struggle and then I feel like my, my generation, my time is about being happy, you know, so this pursuit of happy. But I've been paid for this ability to try to pursue happiness because of what my grandmother did and what my mother did and has been doing. So our family--that's why we're--there's definite like cousins, my grand- my aunt, my dad's aunt Jean [ph.] is also my mother's second cousin's cousin. Because they--it was a small pool of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The light skinned--
Speaker 1: --light skinned people, and also then it became light skinned people that had a certain amount of education. So then the pool gets smaller, right, because this whole idea of advancement and survival. But they also, were also about staying black, you know. And it's interesting 'cause even my father [Harold Davis, Sr.] when I got to dating age, and my sister [Debbie Davis] had married a Fr- my sister got married in France and her hus- her husband was French, and my other sister [Monica Davis] is gay and, who never talked about marriage, we didn't--people didn't talk about marriage and being gay in the '80s [1980s] or whatever. So there's, the assumption was you wouldn't have children, but I remember my dad saying like, "Look, you, I want you to be happy, be with whomever you like, but you know," (laughter), "if you mar- if you go to France and meet a man and get married, it's done. Like the blackness is gone you know 'cause like look at you." And so we had, we had a joke about it, but he was serious. I think there was something very real about, you know, if, if and I, I think I internalize that too, I mean I very, I only dated--
Speaker 2: How old were you when he said that to you?
Speaker 1: I was a teen; I was like sixteen or seventeen. So this, this idea, I do think that there was a very clear agenda to get out, get educated, move up and, and this idea of how light, being light makes all that easier, makes all that easier.
Speaker 2: That's what you were taught (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 661912
Speaker 1: We'll continue with this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --for a minute. So, this notion of staying light in order to survive, was this, was this something that they consciously talked about?
Speaker 2: It wasn't articulated until very late, I remember, except for--my father jokingly said that to me, but I thought, I think, I thought it was very real. And I thought about it too, I mean I really didn't date white guys, I only had one boyfriend that I, that, and he wasn't even all white. His name was Raphael Sahada [ph.], like he was Middle Eastern, 'cause I was afraid of that too, like I, but I got, I kind of had this consciousness of you know I was a soul sister at ten (laughter), so you know, so there was that. But it was never clearly articulated because my--also I think my parents [Helen Butler Delaney and Harold Davis, Sr.] started to kind of pride themselves at being these '60s [1960s] children that lived in Europe and they were a little bit more progressive. But I still think that was underlying and then later when my, when my [maternal] grandmother [Precious Tindal Butler] was much older, I remember having a conversation with her and that--and then it became clear to me like she was just trying to stay alive. And that that's what that meant, you know that the, that she got, you know you're--it's clear who, who gets to go to school, who doesn't get harassed, who does--I mean even now like now like now, Renisha McBride got shot in the face because she was black, because she looked black. If she looked like me, she probably wouldn't had gotten shot in the face. And sorry, I think this is all Fergu- like I'm a little emotional anyway but--
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Speaker 2: --I think that reality is what they knew. In, in a way, I mean even talking about, Renisha happened in Detroit [sic. Dearborn Heights, Michigan]; imagine if you--that was happening in your neighborhood, in your community in your world every day, people disappearing. People being hung, no one ever going to jail for anything because you know it was like they were just--let's try to cut our losses, let's try to cut down the possibility of being killed for no, for, for what you look like. And so it was survival tactic and now I get, and I, I've, I have so much compassion for my grandmother at the time, because I was--you know young and I was feisty and I was, I was like this soul sister and, and she was all freaked out about my boyfriend [Ezra Knight], who's Elenni [Elenni Davis-Knight], my daughter's hus- dad who was brown with locs. And they were just like, "Oh my god," it trickled all their fear, even though this was, you know, it was the '80s [1980s] by this time. But he's a target, you know I get it, I get it, but so but I didn't understand it until, 'til later in life. But I asked my grandmother about it, so I feel like I have such compassion for that generation, I have such a deep understand- I, I never really allowed myself to understand the trauma and the terror under which they lived. Particularly until I became a parent and I had a child, I would do anything for her to survive; I would do anything to protect my daughter. And so if I thought in my mind, my daughter will stay alive if she is with a light skinned man, I would do that. Particularly if I had limited education and my society was in a certain place. I get it, you just--any, every animal in the jungle wants their, wants to protect their children, but every beast wants to do that. So of course--and that was, the, the terror of the Jim Crow South is so real, and so little do we use that word to call, you know the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] terrorists, to call what that was, homeland terrorism, like that's what it was. And we have this generation of people that live through that, and then they pass that on to their children, and then we, each generation, we cut it loose a little bit. But I get--it was very, it was very healing for me to understand that.
Story_ID: 661913
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to when you were a little girl--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and ask you: what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I know this for sure, my earliest childhood memory was learning that C-A-T was the word cat. I was three years old, and my sister, I don't know when she started sitting me down, was trying to teach me to read at three years old. I, it was like life began, it's like that, I remember, I remember like I can read, like so at--that's my first, I was three years old, C-A-T was my first word, and then the world was open to me.
Story_ID: 661914
Speaker 1: The neighborhood where you grew up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I'd like you to take me there and show me the sights, sounds and smells of your neighborhood and your home.
Speaker 2: So you know, as I say my--we moved around quite a bit in my early life, was my father [Harold Davis, Sr.] was [U.S.] military from Germany, to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to New Jersey, and then by the time I was about seven years old, 1972, we moved to Washington, D.C. I'll never forget this moment when we moved into the house because, okay so I'm still hurt from the pain of understanding that I couldn't play in this little girl's house, because I was black. I got that, I knew why and I remember we got to Wa- to Washington, D.C., we lived near, on Dahlia Street between Georgia Avenue and Piney Branch Road. We were right near the Walter Reed hospital [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.]. This beautiful little, looked beautiful to me, little black and white house. White house with black shutters, a big Japanese maple tree in the front yard, azalea, which I'd never seen before, which was everywhere in Washington, D.C. This very big azalea bush in front of the porch and the house looked so big to me then, it's not very big, but it looked so big to me then. And I remember the movers were coming in and we finally were able to go in the house, I remember my father unpacked the TV and plugged it in, which was weird because very rarely, we weren't allowed to watch the tele- a lot of television. So that the fact that was the first--and he turned on the television and Shirley Chisholm was on, running for president, and I was like, oh my god, like a black woman is running for president. And so that somehow canceled out, like I was no longer hurt from the, from the racist experience that I had, 'cause I went from this little rinky dink town [Woodbury, New Jersey] in my head to watching--and I don't know if that ti- that's how I remember it. I remember, the first thing I remember about moving into that house was watching the television go on and seeing a black woman run for tele- for, for president. And I connect those two things, like, I'm like we're--I felt like the Wizard of Oz, like (hums), like Washington, D.C. was like--and it's true, I loved, I loved growing up in Washington, I loved, it was Chocolate City at the time. My neighborhood was just full all these fun little brown kids with bikes and skateboards and you know, comic books and we listened to all kinds of music. There was something very rich about that time, that neighborhood in Washington, D.C., I found it, it was very middle class, and not too far from us where there're people with--they were quite wealthy, we won't---we weren't really in the Gold Coast [Washington, D.C.], but we were very close to it. Some of my friends were there, and which was a whole neighborhood of affluent black people, like I'd never seen that. It was, it was you know people just had so much pride in their houses and their, like all the lawns were meticulously cut, and on Saturday morning everybody was out like washing their cars. Their Eldorados [Cadillac Eldorado] and their Oldsmo- like beautiful long cars and, there were all like these handsome boys with big Afros. And every weekend someone would have a cookout in someone else's yard and, it was like, it was a kind of a utopia for--we were a little strange though, let me be clear.  Like we were still kind of hippies to this black community, like for instance, we drove to Washington, D.C. in a BMW, a 1972 BMW Bavaria. Nobody had a BMW in D.C. in 1972, very--people in America. Like we had to go to some dock to pick it up 'cause it was being shipped from Germany. Very few people in America had a BMW at the time, it was very boxy, so funny to think because now there's nothing but BMWs and--. But where everyone had these long big American cars, we got this red like (makes sounds), you know BMW. So they're looking at that, and then we have this yellow Volks- Volkswagen camper bus and my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] painted flowers on, so we're like the Brady Bunch, just, you know. So we are lit- we were still a little bit avant-garde for that neighborhood, but we were black--like but we, people liked us 'cause we were kind of kooky, right?
Story_ID: 661915
Speaker 1: Our streets were just filled with groups of children, just, we played you know community games, like whole neighborhoods would do like this kind of hide 'n seek, like entire neighborhoods. And what was cool about Washington [D.C.] is that there were all these alleys so kids would, we had all these great weird secretive games where people go through alleys and we all had bicycles and skateboards. Even--my brother [Eddie Davis] and his friend were like big on skateboards, and this in the '70s [1970s] like, and very few people talked about there were black boys on skateboards in the '70s [1970s] but they were, everywhere. We did everything every, every other kid did, and I was--I just felt, I felt so safe and nurtured and I had this very wide range of who people could be. Because everyone had every kind of different job--there were doctors there were you know postmen, entrepreneurs, people that owned a printing shop or, or dry cleaners that did well and. So we lived in this safe lovely community of black people and everybody--every kid knew they were going to college, like it was, it was, it was the break. My parents were the first generation to go to college and have children who were expected to go to college, right. Like we didn't, we didn't think about it. So my neighborhood--and my best friend was right across the street. My first day (laughter) my first day at my house, my, my best, still my best friend to this day, Debbie Chandler [ph.], I'm seven, I just--again had a traumatic experience with my last best friend, can't play at her house (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And where were you when your last best friend--
Speaker 1: Woodbury, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Trauma.
Speaker 2: So it's not far?
Speaker 1: No. I was, it was not far from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Woodbury wasn't far from Philly, so we're in D.C., so I just had a tragedy with my last best friend. So this little girl comes to my house and she literally has piece of chocolate (laughter), chocolate cake in her hand, not on a plate. She's about eight or nine and I open the door and she's like, "Welcome to the neighborhood," and she puts this cake out and starts laughing like, like a hyena and I start laughing. And we're friends to this day. I feel like, I think she like took her hand in her mother's cake and took a thing out and ran across the street. Like she's crazy like that, she was always in trouble; my girl was always in trouble. We had so much fun, so much adventure, so much imagination. We were outside all the time, we were either outside, I mean I, I did homework--I wasn't sent to school very early but, we were just kids together having fun. And we felt very safe in our neighborhood, like people--you could go in and out of people's doors, like for real.
Speaker 2: Was your father [Harold Butler, Sr.] there with you at this point?
Speaker 1: Not my, my father lived with us, but he traveled a lot because of, my father again, he was the only black mediator so he was, and he did a lot of union work. And so you, he, because he was black, he was very useful because a lot of unions were diverse and multicultural and he would go, he, he did some negation at Wounded Knee [South Dakota]. And I think that's when he first, when he went to Wounded Knee, the indigenous Americans [Native American] that were there were like, planted in his head, like, "You look like you could be Cherokee." So my father was traveling a lot, so it was mostly the four of us and my mom [Helen Butler Delaney].
Story_ID: 661916
Speaker 1: Smells, do you remember smells?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember smells. I remember the smell, and this is still one of my favorite smells to this day of oil paint. Because my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] would paint and then my sister and brother [Eddie Davis] were both artists. So I could smell paint in the summer, it smelled like grass, because everybody, it was, it was a lot of pride in how people kept their yards. So in the summer, people are cutting grass all the time so, smell like grass, it smell like oil paint. My house smelled like paper and paint. Yeah the summers smelled like grass and barbeque. My grand- my best friend's [Debbie Chandler (ph.)] house, I was there all the time, as much as much as my house was one of those house where they were cooking all the time. Like my [maternal] grandmother's [Precious Tindal Butler] hou- like the kitchen that--the stove never was off, like it was always something baking, cooking whatever and my friend's house was like that. So I had a nice balance of kind of the alternative kind of hippie family and the very traditional like southern, like my best friend's house there was always fried chicken, there was always cake under the thing. My mother was, my mother was kind of experimental, like she cooked in a wok, and everybody is like what is a wok? We're eating with chopsticks one night, and you know, she'd, she made paella you know, and in the, in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] like that was kind of a, that seems very exotic like 'cause, like so my girlfriend would come to my house for some exotic experience and I would go to her house for some greens and fried chicken. Like so I got to have this very wonderful balance of kind of avant or modern black life, and then this sort of traditional life. And her house just always smelled like food cooking like, there's just something cooking all the time.
Story_ID: 661917
Speaker 1: So your friend, Chandler?
Speaker 2: Debbie Chandler [ph.].
Speaker 1: Debbie Chandler.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did she look like?
Speaker 2: Debbie Chandler, wow, when she was little, younger, she was such a bombshell. She's very, she's light, little bit darker than I am, well, well she's kind of in the middle. She's light skinned but kind of closer to brown, curly hair. And when we were young, she was very, she's very athletic, but then she got very curvy, very early. And like literally, like boys would stop in their cars to look at her, she was like, like that. But she, and it was funny, becau- she didn't, she didn't really realize how sexy she was, 'cause she was such a goofball, but she looked--we looked like we could be related. We call, we always say we cou- you know like we always go, "Oh that's my cousin." So when we would say, "That's my cousin Debbie," everybody believed us. And I would go on family trips with her, she would come with me to my [maternal] grandmother's [Precious Tindal Butler] house, we really were like family. And she looked like family and you know, to be honest that part of Washington [D.C.], I mean there is some people across the street from us that were, I mean that, it's odd, people are either light skinned or like mid-tone in that whole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what I was getting at.
Speaker 2: Because that's what middle class black people looked like a lot in D.C. And if there was someone dark skinned, it was almost always the dad, and then the mother was like, very much like the mayor [Vincent C. Gray]. Like if you--that was, that's what it looked like and yeah. There were very few dark skinned people in my neighborhood, very few, and again, if there was, it was the dad. And then the dad had almost invariably a light skinned wife, so then the children were very midrange.
Speaker 1: Well, one of the sayings was white is right, but also the notion that marrying up is either marrying for money or marrying lighter.
Speaker 2: Yep. And the women, and it was very clear particular- I mean professional black men were so rare, they are now, but they were so rare that this idea of their, their trophy wife was someone that looked like--and they look the same thing--if you look at basketball wives, it's the same thing. It's--we're doing the same thing, that's why I think people were so elated with Michelle Obama, was because you saw his wife, she was black from a distance. And there was this kind of like relief because we're so used to everyone looking like Lonette McKee, like that's D.C. Lonette McKee is D.C. and so, or the perfect beautiful D.C. wife. And--or like your mom [Doris Irene Freeland Cole], like that look.
Speaker 1: My father's [Harry Augustus Cole] brown--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he was the most eligible bachelor.
Speaker 2: And there you are (laughter) and there it is (laughter). And I feel like that was how they created and things--we were a little too kooky for the society life, but we kind of could've looked that part. Like we could've looked like we're Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], but we were more, we swung way more toward the artistic side, and that's, we all ended up at Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.] and--
Story_ID: 661918
Speaker 1: So I wanna ask you about school.
Speaker 2: Yes. Ah, school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's start--
Speaker 2: I love school.
Speaker 1: --well actually even before school, I wanna ask a little bit more in your household. What were the special events and like where there holiday special events. What happened in your house?
Speaker 2: My house was full of turmoil, I said that before, but my house was full of music and full of books and stories. And full of music in a way, you know my mom [Helen Butler Delaney] again was, was a pianist, and so she would, she still practiced and she still played classical piano. My mother didn't play anything after Scott Joplin, and she mostly played Chopin [Frederic Chopin], and Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven], but mostly Chopin. But so, but we had everything from Chopin to the Rolling Stones to Billie Holiday to Parliament-Funkadelic like all of that music, all the time. And I remember my father [Harold Davis, Sr.], my father bought a very sophisticated stereo system where everyone else in, in my neighborhood had like those record players that were like part of the fancy TV console that you folded up, and there's--we had the you know the woofer and the Tweeter and the, the, it was like a, a very, I mean it's common now that people have these sort of stereo systems. I remember when my father went to this very special sound house, and in the '70s [1970s] people's stereos didn't look like that they, had record players.  We had a stereo system, right, because, because my dad also like, he liked kind of classical music and rock equally, and both of those require very intense volume. For instance--and this is why my neighbors kind of thought we were a bit of freaks, right. So Saturday morning, everybody's like mowing their lawns and we were cleaning, right? And we throw up the windows, 'cause my mother lived in Germany and that was a big thing when they clean the windows were open and fresh air, right. So the windows are open, it's Saturday morning and Wagner [Richard Wagner] is like blaring out of my house. In a middle class black neighborhood, Wagner, right, and we're vacuuming, it's like (makes sounds) I can't listen to Wagner to this day, without like looking for a vacuum, like what do I have to dust? It was cra- and I didn't realize that--my boyfriend way, way, way, later was a composer, was doing this record and was sampling Wagner and I literally was like, I got this feeling like I wanted to start cleaning. I was like, oh my god this is what we clean to on Sat- so that, so that along where everybody might've been more like Sarah Vaughan or, or Al Green or Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland] was coming out of their house on Saturday morn- Wagner, right? But then after Wagner, could come--like I said my dad loved Rolling Stones but there was something about, and, and Janis Joplin, and I love Janis Joplin too. But there was something about growing up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at that time you were kind of allowed, like my friends and my brother [Eddie Davis] liked Led Zeppelin, just as much as he---and Pink Floyd, just as much as he like--you know Parliament were from D.C. so funk was very important. But there was this expansive ta- that was a very expansive time to be in Washington where you were allowed to be black and be cosmic, there was a lot of that kind of talk, like from Parliament-Funkadelic to Patti LaBelle and LaBelle [sic. Patti LaBelle and the Bluebelles], they wore space costumes and, and Earth, Wind and Fire was big, and so Earth, Wind and Fire talked about you know meditation and transcendental stuff and so that was in the air. So well yeah, my house was full of--it was all about books and music, it was all about--
Speaker 1: What about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) books and music, politics too.
Story_ID: 661919
Speaker 1: What about religion?
Speaker 2: Not so much because we grew up Catholic, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then at about twelve or thirteen, I got kind of asked not to come back (laughter). Okay so we got a choice--we had to go to Mass, I went to the Catholic--my, my sisters [Debbie Davis and Monica Davis] and brother [Eddie Davis] went to Catholic elementary school, by the time we got to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], our Catholic school was, was overcrowded, so I went to public school. So we--they were all Catholic schooled all through elementary sch- elementary school. Because also that was a way you could afford four kids to have a decent education, in elementary school. But we got a choi- around twelve or thirteen, we didn't have to go to Mass anymore, and the Catholic church was full of--we started to question some very big things in the church. And I remember I was in CCD [Confraternity of Christian Doctrine] class.
Speaker 1: Which is what?
Speaker 2: Its catechism, I don't even remember what CC--so it's kind of like bible study, I mean bible school for like preteens, and I remember going, well challenging this whole line notion of the devil and hell. And I was like well you know they were talking about that God is the father and God is love, and I remember asking that, the nun, I said, "Well if you're telling me that God is my father, if I make mistake--," and literally it was like, "okay, let me think, let me get this straight, so if I make a mistake, he's gonna douse me with like gasoline and set me on fire forever? He's gonna throw me out the house, set me on fire forever? That's what hell is, right? That's what you're saying? I'm gonna, I'm gonna burn forever? How does that, how does that square with this father of love, how does that square?" And I was like--my debate things was starting then, right, 'cause I wasn't, I was like ready, let's go, let's talk about, and she was like, "How--you're just not supposed to question a nun," and go--. And I'm like, "Well, I can't," so I just kind of never went back after that. It was, it was just full of scary weird stuff, I still love to go to Mass in like in Latin and all the pageantry and it's beautiful, and I, but, but it was just so oppressive to women. I remember my mother couldn't take communion because she was practicing birth control, and she already had four kids and I was--so it was very oppressive with what--it just, a lot of it just didn't make sense. So when we were old enough to question is when most of us stopped going to church. We started to believe after my brother died, I started to--that's when my spiritual life began, my religious life ended around twelve or thirteen. Even when I went--I was--I would go to church with my friend they were Seventh-day Adventist, my friend Debbie Chandler [ph.]. I would go to church with them just because we were bad and it was kind of fun, like she had some cool friends that were go to church and we like sneak out and hang out, smoke weed [marijuana] and stuff. So I would go to church with them, and I like ritual, I do, it's one of the things I liked about her house. It was like; again it was fried chicken and collard greens and church and you know and soaps that matched the towels. And my house is like Wagner [Richard Wagner] and, and books on pedestals and I--oh, a funny thing I remember when we first moved into our house, they had just put new carpeting in, because they had just sold the house, and my mother had people take the carpet out, and like had, we had wood floors, and pe- and I remember people were getting out of their houses to look, like what are they doing? Like why don't they have wall to wall--this is the '70s [1970s], like everybody has wall to wall carpet. And my mother was like polishing the wood floor, having the wood floors polished and it was just like, "Oh my god, those are weird people." And so there were times I really loved that those, that I was like that and there're other times I just wanted to fall in and, "Can I just be regular black pe- like everybody else?" But then when we got to school, all the creativity and all the music and all the literature. My--we had to read classics at home, and we were encouraged to read the newspaper. And even though I was six or seven or eight or nine, I was encouraged to be in the conversation with my older sisters and, or there'd be music on and we'd ask to identify it like, "Is that Chopin [Frederic Chopin] or is that Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven]?" "Is that Brahms [Johannes Brahms] or is that Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach]? Or is that--," so that was kind of, that was what my house was like. And in terms of ritual, we didn't have a lot, but Christmas was very special, Christmas was where nobody fought. Like my parents [Helen Butler Delaney and Harold Davis, Sr.] were like together and we went to Midnight Mass and they made it very fun for us, my mother would decorate beautifully. So I remember Christmas being--and I loved Christmas to this day now for that very reason.
Story_ID: 661920
Speaker 1: You spoke about your brother who died (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about, who, who was he and--
Speaker 2: My brother, Eddie, his name is Harold Edward Gregory Davis, Jr., we called him Eddie [Eddie Davis]. My brother was an artist, a, a great thinker and was, and he practiced martial arts, he's very funny, very handsome. And he, he and I were very close, there were four of us; me, Debbie Chandler [ph.], my brother and my cousin Jeffrey [ph.]. He wasn't really my cousin, but we grew up together in Germany, so they, they, my parents [Helen Butler Delaney and Harold Davis, Sr.] were very good friends with their parents, and they were in the [U.S.] Army, they were in the service together.  And we, the four of us were like the Four Musketeers, we just, we just ran through the neighborhood, we had adventures, very, very, very, very, very creative kids. We had our own language, we had our own words, Debbie Chandler and I, she's fifty something, I'm fifty, we still have some of those words that we say to each other, that we made when we were seven. So my brother, my brother, it's interesting because my brother was close to all of us differently. And all of us feel like we were the closest to him. Only son, and he, at, he went to Duke Ellington--we, we all went to Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.], which was an extraordinary, extraordinary experience. I think that that high school, had I not gone to that high school, I would not be here, I would not be talking to you at this moment, I wouldn't be, I probably wouldn't be consid- I don't know who I would be. Because that school allowed me to be free, and taught me how to exercise--how to use my creative energy and how to use my creative intellect, which was more advanced than my academic--I, I realize I had, I had an intelligence that was, I had an intelligence, but it wasn't solely or clearly academic intelligence. And there I was nourished in my creative intelligence in a very big way. I was given like, this is a power creativity, is a power, imagination is a power, imagination is an intelligence and so I was nurtured in a way, and I was in an environment with beautifully, brilliant talented young black people, like everywhere, everybody, we, we worked together, we made art together, we, we created culture together, so, so it was an extraordinary experience. And it's still an extraordinary institution, but it was, when we went there, it was still relatively new, so young black artists built this school to teach young black artists how to be professionals in this, in creative careers. And so my brother was a visual artist, immensely talented. And he graduated high school, he was on his way to art school in, and he was gonna go to art school in the fall in San Francisco [California]. And he was at my cousin's, Jeffrey's house who lived in Southwest area of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] on the waterfront, and he fell from their balcony in, at six o'clock in the morning. And the cause of death was extreme trauma to the head with no--the autopsy revealed that there were no broken bones. That there was no increased adrenaline, so they thought either perhaps he was sleepwalking from which he had no experience of, but they thought more accurately he probably fainted on the way down, because when you're--his body was in a relaxed state, devastating. That--my mother describes it as her life is split into two parts, like, like we look at things, like the world kind of looks at, or the Christian world looks at things, that you know B.C. like, like time starts after Christ. My mother looks at her life when Eddie died, something split in the world, something broke open. And she quite literally, literally describes what it feels like to have your heart break open. And so when my brother died, something broke in the family--we were already starting--my sister had moved to Paris [France], my sister Debbie [Debbie Davis] had gone to college and then went to Paris to be a singer. She had already started this career. My other sister [Monica Davis] was already at college, and I was still in high school.
Story_ID: 661921
Speaker 1: And I remember I didn't believe it, this happened, we got the call on a--we found out on Sunday. I went to church, and I had stopped going to church, I went to church--I went to school the next day. I didn't believe it, I literally didn't believe, and they announced it over the, the PA system [public address system] that former, you know, student, Eddie Davis died and I fainted. And that's--'cause what--there's something about being in school--and this is a testament to that institution [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.]. That's where I felt safe, those were my--that's, you know when, when all the chaos or whatever was going on at home, school was where you could create. School was where I could use my imagination, my energy to make things, to be things, to--I was a theatre major, and when they announced it over the PA, I was like this is real, and the next thing I know, I was surrounded by my friends in one of the art studios. And somehow they got me home--there's a lot of blackouts in that time. And I remember, but I remember standing behind my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] at the funeral and watching her like stand up and faint and stand up and faint, and stand up and faint, and she did that thirteen times. And I remember, I made a, I did a piece after that, like kind of like a dance, kind of--like that was how I he- I healed, was trying to negotiate this stuff creatively, what can I do?  And that is when my spiritual life, something broke, I said, as I said, but then something else gets put back together, and when my brother died, I could not accept the fact that my brother was gone forever, for good. I could accept that things were gonna be radically different and things were gonna change, and, or that he was somewhere else or something else. So I began--my mother was the first to really start looking at metaphysics and the idea that no one ever really dies, and that life is forever and that we are these living spirits. And we are like the living, that love is everlasting and that this whole idea like energy and god energy. And it's interesting because some of, the more I learned, the more of it, some of it square with some of my early Catholicism about everlasting love or that, that the, you know, the Christ spirit was something that was forever. And so we, we started to, I started to really begin studies in metaphysics and so, and that's what I consider myself now is that I practice, I have a metaphysical practice. But I think it was either that or I was (laughter) I was also con- at that time I also was, started doing drugs (laughter) and drinking. So you know was doing it as a teen but then this pain--what had happened was so, I just didn't have any tools for it. My mother was barely alive, and my father [Harold Davis, Sr.] was gone, my father still hasn't really dealt with it. I didn't see my father cry, I didn't see, I didn't, it's very weird, but my friends, the school was dev- people were just devastated. And I remember we just all got together and smoked weed [marijuana], like we all got high you know. And, you know, you're fourteen years old trying to fig- negotiate this, and so--it's interesting so things started to hap- like my art career was happening, I was starting to discover this spiritual life, and also I was getting high. You know like I was, and I, and I was very interested in fashion, like all this stuff--what you, what I, it's interesting and kind of having this conversation is that you understand how you were built, how you become complex. How all the, how your life and other people's lives and your parents' lives and your experiences and your, and your traumas create the complexities of who you are. And why do you like all these things, and why are you able to talk about--because all the other things happened. And so, or you respond to tragedy by trying to find more art or trying to find God or you, you respond to celebration by creating or writing. So my brother's death was a gift because I think to be honest if he didn't, if he didn't make his transition; A, I don't think my, my mother would have, I don't think my mother would have put her, picked her life back up. Because what happened, when my brother died, the worst thing--and this is what my mother says, the worst thing that could possibly happen happened, and she didn't die. So, therefore, she literally became as close to fearless as one can be. And she felt the only way she did survive 'cause she had three more children [Davis and her sisters, Debbie Davis and Monica Davis], and, but it was at that moment when she was at her lowest and her darkest that her life began. And she started to pursue who she really was, and so we broke and then we put ourselves back together in the way that we wanted to construct ourselves. Not in the way that she was supposed to be from some script that someone gave her or that I put myself back together to be, you know, this proper--I, I, when you're, when there's just pieces, you put them, you get to put them together in a new way, and I think that's the gift in having something that traumatic happen, and surviving. 'Cause some people you just don't get ov- you just don't survive. But when you, when you get shattered, you get to then look at those pieces in a whole new way.
Story_ID: 661922
Speaker 1: So you're, you're in high school [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --putting the pieces back together.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said that you were coming into yourself as an artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: I was a theater major, and I, I found a power, like I realized that--I don't know how to say this without sounding weird, but I'm just gonna say it anyway. I realize I could, I got instructions on how to do things, I would hear things instinctively about like how to create my character. Like I would, I knew I wasn't making--I knew this wasn't me talking. Like, for instance, I played Medea, and I remember being told like what she smelled like, where she'd go, like I felt like I was getting this kind of instruction part--maybe--I started meditating like at that age you know. Again I was searching, I was hungry, I was, I didn't know what, I didn't how to get through this time. But as a result of me kind of meditating, I would hear things about how to do my work. Like how to, how to build this character, how she should walk, how she could talk like, and so I got, I was good. Like and I didn't know why I was good, like I didn't know why I was able to choose interesting choices at fifteen to play this, you know, very complex Greek tragedy ['Medea,' Euripides], and I was drawn to those kind of plays. So as an artist, I was hearing those voices, I was, I was hearing, I was hearing, I was hearing these other people who I was supposed to play come through me. And I was like oh my god, I am at--and then I would stop every performance, I wouldn't completely remember what I did. I allowed myself to be that character in that moment, and, and so it got, I got, I got work early, I did work at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and, as a kid I was really starting to work as an actress. And I got into all these really good schools, and I was a national arts scholar, so yeah, who--the power of my art came and I knew it wasn't me. I felt like some other, like this is what it means to be an artist, some other energy comes through. And you just allow it and you listen and you trust it, and you take chances and you, you roll around, if it says roll around on the floor, that's what you do you know. And also I was fifteen and sixteen and there were all these other kids doing the same thing. They were dancing for their lives, they were creating art and, they were bold and, and brave and so I was encouraged to be bold and brave and not be afraid of what you hear, or what you think you're seeing.
Story_ID: 661923
Speaker 1: Along the way you're accepted into Stella Adler--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) acting conservatory [Stella Adler Conservatory; Stella Adler Studio of Acting, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--Duke Ellington had prepared me so well, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole]. I was, I--there's something called the league audition [League of Washington Theatres], where all the major theatre schools and--you, you audition for like a jury and all, there all there. And I passed all the league auditions. I went to, I auditioned and got accepted to Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], but I couldn't, I didn't accept it because you could--there was something about, at Juilliard you couldn't dance, you could only, you could only train there, and at the time, I started to dance too. And I got accepted into this kind of feeder program for Ailey [The Ailey School, New York, New York] for pe- I wasn't like a good, good dancer, but I was good enough to be in this kind of secondary scholarship. I think I was afraid of Juilliard too to be honest, but so I, I did this workshop with [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards and he, I wanted to go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] to study with Lloyd Richards at the time, who was like the--and he advised me to go to New York [New York]. And he said, "'Cause if you, if you go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], you could see theatre every day," so and he's like, "Yeah, you don't, you don't get to me 'til graduate school anyway." So I went, I went to Stella Adler. It was weird because I was the only person of color there and they didn't know. Because by this time, I was a full fashion '80s [1980s] new wave crazy, I looked--dressed different every day. And by the time I got there, my hair was cut very short. I bleached it blonde, I was wearing finger waves and I shaved my eyebrows off (laughter) and I wore bright red lipstick and I wore rice powder. Kind of like Annie Lennox-ish, I was that, I was feeling that for that time. And the people at my acting conservatory had no idea I was black, and I remember I was doing all these very complex characters. I was doing, 'Richard III' [William Shakespeare] as, Richard [Richard, Duke of Gloucester] you know Sir Rich- and I remember--and this is the second thing, this is the second time I really remember being confronted with racism. First one was the little girl and the Barbies, then it's here at Stella Adler. And somehow in conversation, I reveal that I'm black and I went to this Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.]. And my next character, they asked me to play Mama [Lena Younger] from 'A Raisin in the Sun,' and like no shade on Lorraine Hansberry or Mama, but that's not the kind of artist I was. I was doing 'Richard III' last semester. Like I'm trained in classical Greek theater, this is what y'all--you know and, and I could see if it was, if he was trying to stretch me, right? And I, and I was like, "Why didn't you ask Biff, the white guy from Connecticut, to be Mama from 'Raisin in the Sun'?" Like that was the kind of conserve- it was supposed to be very progressive, like cool plays and very, I mean it--Chekhov [Anton Chekhov] was the ma- was the main scene study that we did. But I, I was just was like, I was so blindly offended and, and that's when I started to disengage.
Story_ID: 661924
Speaker 1: But what was happening parallel, I was starting, I was assisting my aunt as a fashion stylist to help pay my sup- pay through school, I was getting fifty dollars a day, which was like huge in nineteen eighty- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And who is your aunt?
Speaker 1: Joanne Baker Butler. And Joanne Baker Butler was the, was literally the first freelance stylist, she had been a fashion editor. In the '70s [1970s] most fashion ads or, or things that you saw on television or in the magazines were done by editors or people, or art directors that work at advertising agencies, right, the people on staff basically. My aunt was on staff at Harper's Bazaar, she had worked with Richard Avedon several times, and by this time Richard Avedon was huge, the biggest fashion photographer in the world. He loved her, he thought her taste and his taste were completely symbiotic and so he said, "I want you to work with me all the time." So he literally pulled her off the mass- and he was so powerful at the time, that he could do that. And so she worked exclusively with Richard Avedon and then more people started--but even when I started assisting her, there were very few freelance stylists. They're very pe- you would tell people you're a fashion stylist, they, you had, they had no reference for what that was. So, I was assisting her, Joanne brilliantly trained nothing but black women. She trained me, she trained Mary Ann Tobin [sic. Mary Hobin], and Mary Ann ended up being the costume designer for 'The Cosby Show.' She, she trained Debbie Medeiros [Deborah Medeiros-Baker], Debbie Medeiros ended up also being a big stylist. She worked with Vanessa Williams, she, she just recently went on the Wendy show ['The Wendy Williams Show'], she worked with my friend Johnetta, my best friend that I went to, we lived together here, Johnetta Hamilton [Johnetta Hamilton-Vasquez] who now does costuming almost exclusively for Tyler Perry, and she trained me, and she trained Patti Wilson. Like so there, all these, like five black women who have careers in fashion and costuming all came from Susan--from, from Joanne. And so I was Joanne's second assistant, Johnetta and I, we were both in college and we were making fifty dollars a day. And then I remember we made a hundred dollars a day to assist her and I left the conservatory [Stella Adler Conservatory; Stella Adler Studio of Acting, New York New York].
Story_ID: 661925
Speaker 1: You were working with your--
Speaker 2: Aunt (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aunt--
Speaker 2: As a--
Speaker 1: And you left the conservatory [Stella Adler Conservatory; Stella Adler Studio of Acting, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: I left after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which you were working, you're now a working stylist.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Sorry. And I, I, realized that the kind of artist that I had developed into, as an actress, was very--I was never, I, I was not going to be on soap operas or movies, I was, I literally was doing this very avant, as I said, and my classical theatre was Greek classical theater, then I got into this whole group of like experiential--Liz Swados [Elizabeth Swados] kind of, I was this arty--like there was no career path for what I was doing. I was, I was, I was either going to be really a fine artist, that was probably more like a Yoko Ono kind of chic, and then there was this fashion world. That was just so fascinating and, and rich and it was also storytelling, and it was also acting, it was also, it was pulling on the same interests. But then it was sexy and glamorous and it was the '80s [1980s]. And the fashion in the '80s [1980s], and the artists in the '80s [1980s], and models in the '80s [1980s] were--the photography the life, the downtown New York [New York] scene like, it, it just made that weird, it just was so bright and so interesting and so sexy and fascinating and fun. And things were happening really rapidly in terms of just fashion and pop culture in the '80s [1980s], like it was all about pop culture. And then at the same time, I was, I was paying attention to what was happening in street culture, so there was the emergence of hip hop. I'll never, I remember, I remember the day I went to Washington Square Park [New York, New York] and we, 'cause we used to go to this club called The Loft [New York, New York] and the Garage [Paradise Garage, New York, New York] 'cause I was a house head. And I remember one--no, no, no, this is earlier, I'm sorry. This is probably my second day in New York when I go in to NYU [New York University], I go to--I'm walking through Washington Square Park and I see these kids, mostly Puerto Rican kids open up these boxes and put down a big radio and literally start to spin on their heads. And I thought I'd seen the second coming of Chr- I'd never seen dancing like that; I had never seen people move like that. I never seen people dress like that, and it was this, that was starting to fascinate me more than going like to this institution, right? So I, I didn't even tell my parents [Helen Butler Delaney and Harold Davis, Sr.], I don't think I told my parents I left the school until like two years, for real, like. And I was still taking class; I was still, 'cause I'm still have this academic kind of interest. So I started taking classes at The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], some political thing, so, but I was fascinated with what was happening on the street in terms of fashion and also these stud- I was working with you know Richard Avedon and Hiro [Yasuhiro Wakabayashi] and like these big stars that were in Vogue, I was in the dressing room you know packing boxes but--
Speaker 1: When was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1983, 1983, '84 [1984] that's when I started as an assistant in 1983, so I was eighteen. And the most incredible--my first, the first shoot I was ever on, and I don't think I was working by this time, 'cause I think it was early. I went to visit my aunt and she was doing the Virginia Slims campaign, when they do, "You come a long way baby," and, oh my god, what's her name, black model? You were really good friends with her.
Speaker 1: Peggy?
Speaker 2: Peggy, Peggy Dillard [Peggy Dillard Toone] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Peggy Dillard.
Speaker 2: Peggy Dillard was the model on this, so it was--there were doing the black ad, and they were, and Peggy and the clothes were, and I was a kid. I hadn't starting working with Joanne [Joanne Baker Butler] yet, 'cause I think that was probably seventy something, maybe '78 [1978] you know. I was up, came up for the summer to visit her and I was just like, wow! I'll never forget that long flowing scarf, so, you know, so she worked on like that and she worked on the campaign with Grace Jones and the motorcycle and, and we worked with the Calvin Klein ad with, with Mal- she became a big actress, the curly hair, Mical- McDonald, Mc--
Speaker 1: A black woman you mean?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: MacDowell.
Speaker 1: Andie MacDowell.
Speaker 2: Andie MacDowell, we were on the set with Andie MacDowell, I remember being in the back room with Andie MacDowell helping her develop a, a southern accent. I forgot, she was about to get this role in a movie and she was going over her lines and, you know, I was an actress. And I remember doing lines with her, so like moments like that, I was, then I was taken, it was all about fashion.
Story_ID: 661926
Speaker 1: And as I said very early I was fascinated with paper dolls, paper dolls, Barbies, clothes, fashion. So my world opened up when I started working in fashion, and my friend Johnetta [Johnetta Hamilton-Vasquez] and I were both her [Joanne Baker Butler] assistants. Johnetta and I started to create accessories together; and we sold in these little boutiques in the, in downtown. I had, I had so much fun, and so I was working at fashion, I wore outrageous outfits all the time, because--often Johnetta could sew, so I could have an idea and like in two days, I could have an outfit. And we spent all our money on clothes and materials, and we went to clubs and worked. And Johnetta actually went to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], where I was just, I was still, I was working in fashion and I was interested, and I was kind of secretly interested in like politics. But more justice than politics so I just, I would just take these very random kind of classes to keep my brain going. But it was all about fashion, and it was all about cul- pop culture, it was all about being downtown, it was all about being disco culture, dance culture. And I used to go to The Loft [New York, New York] and the Paradise Garage [New York, New York] and those--and that's when I got very in, much more into the culture of street style and, and why people dress the way they dress. And why people dance the way they dance, and why were they, these people different from the Studio 54 [New York, New York] people, and I was in both of those worlds. I was at parties with Basquiat [Jean-Michel Basquiat] I was, it was just so fascinating, it was like the most amazing time to be in New York [New York] and I was in the most amazing career. And it was everything that it looks like it was. You know when people look at the '80s [1980s] and they look at the club scenes, and they look at the fashion scenes and was it really that cool? It really was that cool. And I remember the day it ended; it was like, like someone flicked on the lights at the party for me. And also drugs were starting to happen a little and, and it, what was interesting was when I first start going out dancing, 'cause I'm so into dance, I didn't do drugs and I didn't drink 'cause that made you sloppy, right, so. But towards the end, the whole coke [cocaine] scene was getting very popular and it was very much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year are we talking about now?
Speaker 1: This is late '80s [1980s], it was like '87 [1987], '88 [1988], '87 [1987], '88 [1988]. And they were very much connected with the fashion scene. I mean very easily you're at a fashion shoot and they're cutting lines on the table. Very easily you're at Mr. Chang's [sic.] and there, I mean Mr. Chow's [Mr. Chow, New York, New York] and they're cutting the lines on the table. Like I don't remember going to any restaurant really eating. And it was part of the whole scene and it was part of being chic and it was part of being skinny, and I was all that. And then I remember--and it was very kind of diverse, you know there weren't that many black kids there, the ones that were there, we were cool and everybody thought we were cool. And we were just a little bit cooler than everybody else, like Basquiat, he's just a little bit cooler than everybody else, right? So, but I remember Michael Stewart was murdered. And Michael Stewart and Keith Haring were both these very well known street artists. And Michael Stewart was in the subway on his way home, he had some cans, some aerosol cans with him, his ankles were cuffed, his hands were cuffed and he was beat to death by eleven cops. The lights were on, the party was over, because I was so into downtown scene, I didn't real- I didn't really know what was going on, I didn't know the Bronx [New York] was burning, really. I didn't know the politics of New York City and what was happening and the whole, like I, I--Koch [Ed Koch] thing, I didn't, I was downtown, I was at the hottest parties, I was wearing Stephen Sprouse and Gaultier [Jean-Paul Gaultier], I was like drinking champagne. I didn't, I was young, I didn't know the, what was going on, until this artist that we knew and we loved was killed and we--by the police, and we knew that that was never going to happen to Keith Haring. Like it was just all of a sudden, all you're--it all was clear. And also at the same time, people were disappearing, AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] had started to be, to become really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well and that (unclear), because he was not white.
Speaker 1: Right. Michael Stewart was black and beautiful, and he had locs, he was kind of like a Basquiat type. Beautiful, young, one of, like he was cool. And he was killed by eleven police officers, they beat him to death.
Speaker 2: Well what happened?
Speaker 1: No one was pros- I mean there was, there was a trial, and I remember going down to the courthouse a couple of times. And it was interesting; most of the people that went to the courthouse were white women, and a couple of us that knew him in the scene. But it was funny, there was no black men, there was--it's not like what we're seeing today, and I remember I went a couple of times and I just stopped going, nobody was indicted. But then at the same, this is right--this is 1988 [sic. 1983]. So the people were--like drugs all of a sudden were a problem, like you heard about people losing their practices, you know people on Wall Street going crazy, people were starting to freebase and smoke crack [crack cocaine], like, it was literally just like, oh my god, the party is so over.
Story_ID: 661927
Speaker 1: Then the word AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] was very real to us, and Michael Stewart (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] had been around for about nine years--
Speaker 1: Or the gay cancer, like, but by nine- something about--
Speaker 2: It was around for a while, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988] it was predominate.
Speaker 1: It was, by '88 [1988] people knew what it was, they could say it, you knew somebody who had died--like so--it was all these things that were bubbling under the surface, somewhere around 1988 they get very real to me. Like and I, I was, I was afraid that I was get- and just to be very candid, I was afraid that my drug use was gonna get very real. And so I left--'cause my boyfriend, at the time, had gone from being this very smart, amazing beautiful young man to--he was freebasing and he had turned grey and lost thirty-five pounds and I was kind of into--I was just so young. And so I was so into him and I was so scared that he was gonna die and that I was gonna somehow get, die with him, that I went back to Washington, D.C. to just like, "Mom [Helen Butler Delaney], I gotta come home." Like, I felt like the best party in the world was just set on fire, and so I went back to Washington, D.C. And what was interesting is that when I got to D.C., I was a young woman who had worked in the fashion scene in New York [New York] for years. So all of a sudden, I went from being this assistant, like a high level assistant to being the bomb, right, 'cause I worked with a--my resume was great, I had this portfolio and lot of people didn't even have portfolios in, in that market. And so in, in not too short a time I was working a lot in the smaller market as a lead stylist. So I kind of, I didn't know that I was making a good career move at the time, I thought I was leaving to survive, to just, you know pull myself together. I always knew I was coming back to New York, but I went to D.C. and they were doing lots of catalog work there at the time, for Garfinckel's [Washington, D.C.], Heck's [Heck's Department Store], Woodies, I had all those accounts and was working all the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Woodward and Lothrop.
Speaker 1: Woodward and Lothrop. I was working all the time, I was doing editorial for the Washingtonian and The Baltimore Sun, and I met--two, two big things happened. I started dating my de- my son's, I mean my daughter's father [Ezra Knight] and I became pregnant [with Elenni Davis-Knight] and I accepted the pregnancy, and I also met Ruven Afanador who was a photographer that was, a young photographer start the--in Washington, and we had started creating together. So we started working together in Washington, I had, I was pregnant, and I was twenty-eight, at the time, 'cause I had had a couple of years in D.C. that was successful. And I was, and I was on my way back to New York when I discovered I was pregnant, because we had started--Ruven and I had started to become too big for that market, and we were starting to do some work in New York together. And enough to merit moving back, and we had the same agent, and it was all this stuff. But I was pregnant, and I moved back anyway, and very concerned because I thought--so this, this is 1990, and this was not a time where it was cute to be pregnant and be in fashion. First of all, I was rare, there weren't that many you know black women--the, the fashion industry was very much run by gay men and so now I had come, I was the lead stylist. I had done this work and I came back and I had--I was starting to slow down because I was pregnant, and, but I worked all the way through, and I worked enough that it was okay.
Story_ID: 661928
Speaker 1: And what happened when I had--there's something about life and death that makes things different. And having my daughter really was the beginning of me wanting to have a life with purpose. And also I met [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and I met you [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole]. But I met Susan first and I remember I gotten back into the, I'd gotten back into fashion, and I'd--Ruven [Ruven Afanador] and I had gotten, we started to do some stuff for a couple Conde Nast magazines right? We're first with Brides and then little bit here and a little bit of Vanity Fair, and we had finally done this portrait that was in Vogue, right, of an opera singer. And I remember I met Susan at this, Susan Taylor at this event, and I had on some outrageous outfit and, I was feeling myself, and she asked me, you know, we're in a conversation, she asked me who I was, what did I do, and I said, "Oh, I'm a stylist," and I'd just gotten this picture in Vogue. And she, she's like, "Oh yeah," you know, "amazing. And so what you're doing for your people?" So Susan, right? Out of--my head went off, and I remember I went home and I thought about that. And I thought about how I felt when I saw Shirley Chisholm run for president, I, and, I, and when I saw that, I thought there was something about that moment that I identified with it. It wasn't just that, you know, that she healed this idea of me feeling unworthy for being in that little girl's house. It was something about seeing that image of Shirley Chisholm that, that, once you know something, it's hard not to know it. And there is something about, or like you know when you meet someone and you can't unmeet them, it happened, the, the information is there, it is imbedded in your heart.  Something got embedded in me; I know when I saw that image of Shirley Chisholm. And when Susan said that to me, that thing that was embedded in me that I had covered up with disco glitter and cocaine (laughter) woke up again. And two weeks later, I was in her office and then she was introducing me to you, and Elenni [Elenni Davis-Knight] was one years old, one year old and there I was at Essence magazine. And a purposeful life in fashion began because I realized what we were doing with loving our community through this amazing thing that I already loved, which was fashion. And that our job was putting out images that, that excited, that healed, that expanded the narrative of who black women were. It was tremendous and I had never had been around all these black women in, in a fashion space before, it was kooky and fabulous and wonderful and--. And then, but I felt a little bit--but there's also that moment again with those kids spinning on their heads on the boxes and these outrageous clothes, I started looking at people a lot on the streets, from that moment on. I looked at the runway and the street concurrently, and I was finding that the energy that was happening on the street was much more interesting and much more layered and complicated and innovative than what was happening on the runway. And actually was starting--I was realizing that what was happening on the street was happening on the runway, the street was in- totally informing the runway, not the other way around. Ha- ha- which is how we were always, cultured that that fashion went from the big houses down to the street. Hip hop changed that whole trajectory and so while I was at Essence, I got a phone call from these people over at Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] going, "We're putting together this magazine called Vibe and it's gonna be about hip hop culture. We're gonna do what Rolling Stone did for rock and roll, for hip hop, you down?" I'm like, "Yeah," like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's get a timeframe here, so--
Speaker 1: That was 1992, so I was at, I was at Essence with you from late '90 [1990] to--might've even been '91 [1991] 'cause Elenni was one. But I do, I think Elenni turned one when I was there, so it was probably, yeah '91 [1991]--
Speaker 2: I think it was '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was '91 [1991] to '92 [1992], it's just, it was a year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So and, yeah 'cause Vibe launched in '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So I left Essence, but there was--something happened in that year of being focused on loving this work and creating images from a sense of love versus a sense of power and the brand, which is, which is one way to be an editor. That was one thing I think that I got from Susan, or this is what she communicated, that she was there to serve black women. That we were there to serve them, that we were there to love them. And then there were other editors, like the ones that I encountered at Conde Nast, they were there 'cause--for the love of the brand, they were there for power, they were there to create style, they were the arbiters of style. Like it was a very different philosophy of what--they were, they were setting the taste of America. Like that's what they believe.
Story_ID: 661929
Speaker 1: So when I was called, I felt like I was called to ask to help define my generation, and when you're called to do that, you answer, and also I just felt that it was, that that was more my aesthetic, was, was what was happening in hip hop. That I could also bring that sort of high end fashion there too, because that's what was happening too. We were seeing people mixing and wearing high end with sneakers and, and no one was really putting it together in a way that would say to the world this happened. These young people did this, this style changed the world. And I so I was so excited to be part of the initial team that created Vibe, and--
Speaker 2: How did they find you, do you know?
Speaker 1: George Pitts was at Entertainment Weekly and this was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And George Pitts became the--
Speaker 1: Photo editor.
Speaker 2: Photo editor.
Speaker 1: So George Pitts recommended me because when I was freelancing before I worked at Essence, I had done some work with Entertainment Weekly with Ruven [Ruven Afanador], and George hired me as a, as a stylist, with Ruven. We were kind of a package, and so he recommended me to Jonathan Van Meter who is the editor in chief and, I think there are only like three people, it was him, George; Jonathan and one more person and, 'cause it was this little kind of boutique company at Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] that had Martha Stewart [Martha Stewart Living] and Vibe those were, it was called Time Ventures Inc. [sic. Time Inc. Ventures] and they had these two kind of pet projects; one with Martha Stewart, one with Vibe. And at the time, I think they were calling it Volume, yeah it was called Volume.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And I went in, I met with the guys and they were like, "Yes," and that was it.
Story_ID: 661930
Speaker 1: And it was incredible; it was incredible because when it began, we really believed that our job [at Vibe magazine] was to show this culture that we knew was changing the world, beautifully. And to be, that we could be both things; that we could be raw and elegant, that we could be dignified and badass. And that we could, that we could be complex and that the culture was complex and that, also that people were talking about the music at the, in an intellectual--like people like Greg Tate and Hilton Als and Lisa Jones and dream hampton and, and, and Joan Morgan, these great minds were talking about our music in a way--because also the music merited that, like the way that you talk about Tupac [Tupac Shakur] or Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] or Tribe Called Quest [A Tribe Called Quest] or, or all the women that were in hip hop. There was, there were metaphors, there were, there was psychology, there was politics, there were all these things to unpack, to intellectually and artistically unpack. That we are able to--and also there was what was happening in the world and how this music and this culture was defining and telling the world what was happening with youth culture. What was happening with black culture, what was--what and how, we were letting everybody know that this that black youth culture is going to change the world, get ready. Because all your kids are gonna start wearing these clothes, listening to this music, talking in this way, buying these records, this a game changer, this is not a trend. And, because when it first came out, people looked at, "Oh, this is trendy and it--," we were like yeah, you all don't understand. While no one was looking, an entire generation is doing some things and it wasn't unlike--what was interesting about hip hop and still is, unlike other great music movements, whether it be jazz or rock and roll. Rock and, rock and roll did have a culture in politics that went with it, that seem to be finite, you know like in the '60s [1960s] there was, there was the Vietnam War, there was women's movement, there were, like very clear political things that their music and their culture and the way that they dressed attached itself to, but seemed to end when some of those things started to get addressed. With hip hop it was everything; it was music, it was literature, it was language, it was fashion, it was commerce, like the way that they connected commerce and capitalism when--you know when Run-DMC put that sneaker in the air and said, "My Adidas," the advertising world changed. When kids starting buy--going into the Gap [Gap, Inc.] and buying jeans three times too big, the, the denim industry changed. When, when graffiti artists spun their caps backwards so they could see while they were painting, it changed the way people were--no one wore baseball caps really, like that, you know what I mean?  When you think about, these are just; these are iconic American fashion vocabulary that these kids made you wear. They made you wear sneakers on Tuesday, when before people only wore the--they were athletic shoes, we called them tennis shoes growing up. You didn't have a, you didn't have a closet of fashionable sneakers; you had tennis shoes that you loved. But the, but this culture made people wear denim during the day and, and I mean denim at night and furs during the day.
Story_ID: 661931
Speaker 1: This was game changing so we knew, we knew it and we knew that the music was gonna, wasn't gonna stop because when you've silenced a whole community for generations and then you pass them the mic [microphone], they're not giving it back. There--this is it y'all, like, and so when we've and we wanted to make sure that the culture was treated respectfully, so we hired the best photographers that we could. We hired the best writers that we could, we talked about it thoughtfully, we wanted to create images that were iconic and some of them are. That cover of Treach, people won't forget that by Albert Watson (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was the first one.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And that was our intention to look at these people that most people thought were thugs, to look at them through this lens that was dignified and sexy and, and, and clear that they are running the youth culture right now.
Speaker 2: Now Albert Watson speaking of him--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to get him to shoot Treach--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --was not necessarily the easiest thing was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No but, yes and no. Because, again this was edgy, this was, this was considered kind of sub downtown culture to some people, so--
Speaker 2: But it didn't exist yet.
Speaker 1: No, but there was enough music and there was enough 'cause we were--Vibe was not the first magazine, Vibe was the most polished, smart--you know there was--the hip hop began in the '70s [1970s] so there's, we already to know---we already got ten, fifteen years, but it was still considered, kind of--so we, we played on the exotic kind of side of it. Like, "Yo, these are the cool kids, and you wanna be cool don't you?" And, and it was, and the guys were amazing looking too. Like there--at the, like there's also just as a visual person, you look at a Tupac [Tupac Shakur] you look at Treach, you look at Snoop [Snoop Dogg], they were just amazing subjects. You know Snoop was all skinny and weird and like, like ugh and Tupac was amazing and beautiful and sex- and Treach was so sexy that there was, there was no equivalent on the other side. Like who was as sexy as Treach? Like you know and even, even like Kurt Cobain and, like they're--so the sort of white youth culture, wasn't producing anything as interesting. Kurt Cobain didn't come 'til way later. So even that, at the time in the '90s [1990s] what was happening in mainstream culture was not nearly as interesting as it was happening in hip hop. So just as creative people, as artists, these were the interesting kids, so it wasn't that hard of a sell (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were able to sell that to--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --the big, the big dogs who were making the image.
Speaker 1: Yes, and the biggest, but the biggest sell was advertisers. The biggest, the biggest job--and we still have it, we still have to tell advertisers like, like black women market, why black women's markets matter. But if you, if you remember, the urban market exploded, there were fashion houses and sneakers and people were selling everything from--they still are. You know whether it's Sprite or French fries or anything, they use hip hop culture to sell it. But it was a hard sell in the beginning, like I remember they didn't even know, I, they didn't even know how.
Story_ID: 661932
Speaker 1: How long did you work at Vibe?
Speaker 2: Just a year. So I worked the first year cycle and this is when my activism began. I challenged--something very scary started happening in hip hop, 'cause again, we're so excited by this culture, by being a part of hip hop, being a part of defining, this defining culture was very powerful. But by the time we got to '92 [1992], '93 [1993], you started to see this very disturbing wave of--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: They were talking upstairs. Wave of, the plethora of voices because we had all kinds of hip hop. Whether it was you know Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] who was this like so talented but kind of nasty and talking about, you know, shooting people and all kinds of crazy sex, but his lyricism was amazing. To you know Wu-Tang [Wu-Tang Clan] to Pharcyde [The Pharcyde] to sort of what people consider conscious rap. And all these, you know Monie Love and Queen Latifah and MC Lyte, you had all these different voices. And then what you started to see happen was the voices were beginning--very narrow very, very quick, very, very quickly. And you saw women's voices just dropping off and the, the men's voices--and this is in mainstream and the records that they were selling and promoting were getting hyper violent. And what, I don't--what some people called gangsta rap, we never, we never called it that in, internally, inside. But it was, it was a very disturbing, disturbing quick trend of hyper violent images with hypersexual images of women. And then all these women's voices going, falling away and the only ones left standing were Lil' Kim and Foxy Brown, Lauryn [Lauryn Hill] came later.  And they were really playing on the hypersexuality, which we didn't mind before when they were all these other voices too. Like that's, that's a voice, that's real, but we saw that what was happening to the music, or the music that we were being asked to cover and sell and promote, was so narrow and it was--it's like that's that kind of the opposite of what we came here to do, right? So, I got into very clear philosophical--I resigned because I remember one of the older white executives from Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] coming in and, at the photo editing, was like going, "Yeah, like show the picture of him peeing on the wall." And like, "Yeah that's like, you wanna see the dirty shit, let's see the dirty shit," and I was just like, who are you that--you old man in a suit like. I was like this is it--we came here to tell our story, right, like if this is--and, and it was something very significant. I saw--our editor in chief was a very smart, white gay man, right? I remember this same executive was at Martha Stewart [Martha Stewart Living] and I heard Martha Stewart in the hallway like letting him have it. She was like--'cause what had happened is both these magazines were hot, right? No one was paying attention to us 'til we got hot. Then it's like. "Ooh, I'm gonna come down and play with the hot magazines from my little office." I heard Martha Stewart saying, "The day that you know how to cook and," and blah, blah, blah. She's like, "This is my culture, either you give me this magazine or you get out." Like she defended her--she's like, "You don't live in Connecticut, you don't know about--," like she was like (makes sound), she defended her, her brand. But he's, I don't know what he was telling her to do, but she was literally out in the hallway. And I was like nobody's defending us, nobody's going, "Why are you--what's happening to this magazine [Vibe] that was supposed to be about this big bright culture, or breadth of the culture?" Not to say that those rappers didn't exist, but to silence the others was problematic.
Story_ID: 661933
Speaker 1: And I realized, oh, our leadership isn't going to bat for us like this. Like no one, so for, I wasn't the editor in chief, but I was going to bat, 'cause we--something very--I remember was it, like three things were happening at the same time. Spike [Spike Lee] had a movie out, I don't think it was 'Malcolm' ['Malcolm X'], Madonna had a record out and some other big thing had happened, maybe Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], and we were gonna run a Madonna cover because--they were so excited that we got a Madonna exclusive. I'm like excuse me? But Spike has a movie, like I think it was, anyway something, there were two other big things that were happening in hip hop culture. And I remember getting on to like what the, what is this, how--I'm like how we even gonna--how, how do we survive a Madonna cover, like how does that fit in our brand? Then I realized, oh they're, this is just something cute for them to do too, like when you asked me that question, how--why this album wasn't interesting, because it's the sexy cute thing to do at the time with these like edgy hip hop kids. But they don't love the culture, they're not gonna defend the culture, they're not gonna say, "No, I don't wanna just show people with guns," and you know? So the media, and this is what, this is what got real for me, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], is that I realized who tells our story and how they tell our story matters. That's, that's how we're framed in the culture, that's how we're framed in the collective imagination. So if you're gonna frame us only as gangsters and strippers, I can't do this, without, and especially without a fight. And you gonna know that I know what this is gonna do, this is gonna take this culture that, that gave the voiceless a voice, that gave a culture power, and you're gonna reduce it to guns and hoes, that's what happening here 'cause this is the one magazine [Vibe], this is the only one that had that kind of like gravitas.
Speaker 2: So question, when Lil' Kim was on a cover that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Were you there then?
Speaker 1: I was--did I do a Kim cover? Unh-uh. I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know you didn't do this one.
Speaker 1: No, no, no. I ended up doing a Kim cover for Honey, but I didn't do the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So do you, do you remember, there was a, there was a Lil' Kim cover where she is seated with her legs--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --wide open and it--basically the focal point is her crotch.
Speaker 1: Her crotch. I was gone, the last cover I did was when Tupac [Tupac Shakur] had the, the straight jacket.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember seeing the Lil' Kim cover and thinking they have gone too far, that I was ashamed.
Speaker 1: And that's what I felt when I left, I was like I'm gonna be, I can't do this, and look at--I can't do this. And they were like, "Well peace out," Jonathan [Jonathan Van Meter] was. Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] was like, "Don't leave, don't leave, get--," because you know what I realized Harriette? There were a couple of times when we'd go to executive meetings, I'm the only person that would, if I wasn't there, no one would say the word black. Like we would like be and talk about what hip--and I was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Urban, they would say urban.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or like they just thought, oh look at these here, these are these cool kids. And everybody was getting paid, like people, the money was coming like right? Remember the '90s [1990s] just all this money and all these like very big flashy parties and--and I was like oh shit, they're just in it for the money, this is like you know, I, and what, what became very; very disturbing to me was what was happening to women, and the women's voices.
Story_ID: 661934
Speaker 1: So I resigned from Vibe, but the great thing was, is that by that time I had met all these people and I started working with artists and artist development. And I had an extraordinary freelance career that happened afterwards. Actually when I left Vibe, I got call from Conde Nast and literally they were like, "Where do you wanna work?" I'm like, "Excuse me?" And they were like, "You know, because Vibe was the hot magazine." And I said, "Well, you know I'd love to meet Polly Mellen [Polly Allen Mellen]," and I just wanted to meet Polly Mellen. So I was, I was like, "So I'd like a meeting with Allure and a meeting with Vanity Fair." And I met with Polly. I'll never forget what she said, she was looking through my book, and it was beautiful, we had done--I had done the shoot in the cotton field and it was just, I had this beautiful portfolio, right? She's looking, she's like, "Oh my god," she's like, "darling, the day of the great white WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] is over, you have to go--." She's like, "You have to do you," she's like, "this is done here." Basically, meaning like this isn't where the hotness is anymore, she's looking at these images, and I, she was like asking me all these questions, I realized she'd never seen really black images all together that were artful in this way. And she told me, "The day of the great white WASP is over," she's like, "this a mausoleum."
Speaker 2: She was a great woman.
Speaker 1: She was great, right? And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And like say a little about Polly just so--
Speaker 1: Oh, Polly Mellen was and is one of the great fashion forces of nature. She had an intellect and an eye and a passion--I remember watching Polly Mellen and watching Bill Cunningham at the shows. They would get electrified, they would look at things with excitement and passion and, and in, deep interest and like they, like they were at a rock concert or something. They would get so excited, where a lot of the other editors are sitting there like, "I'm not moved, I'm too cool to move."
Speaker 2: And where was she at this point?
Speaker 1: She was at Allure. She was editor in chief at Allure.
Speaker 2: And even as--
Speaker 1: And she was like I'm just bidding my time, like she wasn't that excited about being at Allure.
Speaker 2: She had been at both, three years.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And Allure at the time was, they were kind of hot.
Speaker 2: They were hot. She, as an old woman, she was one of the only editors going downtown to spot new talent.
Speaker 1: Yep. And she was old, but she was so full of life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Remember seeing her, she would get on the edge of her seat and be like, "Yes" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Only old in age.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and cr- and just like chronological.
Story_ID: 661935
Speaker 1: You left Vibe.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You had this sort of anointing from Polly Mellen [Polly Allen Mellen].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What did you do next?
Speaker 2: And then I began a freelance career, and I was working a lot with artists and artist development. Because being at Vibe when you're, you know, a music magazine and music journalism you get to meet a lot of record people, so I had, I had started to work with artists that they didn't quite know how to position, and it was very exciting for me. So I worked with Seal and worked with Maxwell, and I worked with Meshell Ndegeocello this kind of--they were not even ne- neo soul there was just some--they, there were these black artists that wanted an artful kind of positioning, and so I worked with them. And then this magazine called Honey came out. I remember looking at it, and I remember the first kind of cov- cover that was, it was, I don't know if it was a prototype or it had actually made it to newsstand but with Lauryn Hill on the cover. And I remember like reading it front to back and there was like--people that I knew had contributed; Karen Good [Karen Good Marable], dream hampton.  Because also all these women's voices that we used to hire at Vibe, they were gone too. So what happens is when a magazine like that chokes off the talent, a lot of people are left, you know. And so I remember reading this magazine and going, "Oh my god, there's so much potential, it's so great, I wish the fashion was better." I remember that, it was like okay, put it--and then I was like oh they're startups, hard to get fashion, we all know that. And so I put it away and then--but I kept, it was still in the, in the back of my mind, I was still kind of watching it. And I remember I was looking and going through--it had gone through the change, like it was no longer Kierna [Kierna Mayo] and Jocelyn's [Jocelyn Dingle] magazine.
Speaker 1: The founders.
Speaker 2: The founders, who, who, they had the spirit, they were looking at these women, the new modern woman, the new urban wo- like the Lauryn Hills and the Faith Evans and Mary J. Blige. And there was just all these women that were coming that were really so exciting and so trendsetting and interesting, and enough to merit, you know, you had enough covers to get through the year of, of these women. Destiny's Child, all these women and these groups and so that the mag- the magazine sold and then I watched--it still had the name and still covered the artist but something, it was--just had lost that soul that I saw that it had in the beginning or like the intellect, quite honest. And I started to talk about it like, oh my god, I was so frustrated. I had missed being in magazines, I had missed making beautiful pictures, I had missed, you know, I didn't have Essence or Vibe. Like at least Essence is like, "Oh these black women, we love them," and there was something, like we, you worked with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou you worked like with like [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni and you have these amaz- my first job at Essence was Anita Hill. You know you're just like (gesture), so I didn't have that, I didn't have Vibe.
Story_ID: 661936
Speaker 1: So I'm watching this magazine [Honey] and--I thought had all this potential and I'm just like, "Oh my god, it's missing the mark, it's so you know, so lightweight, it's stupid," blah, blah, blah. And then I thought you know I'm not doing it, I've never asked them can I help, I've never said you know, I've never even met these people before. So I thought that it would be much more powerful for me to at least try to contribute than talk about it. And so I met the then editor in chief Amy Barnett [Amy DuBois Barnett], who was just like, "I can't believe you even wanna talk to me," she was very nice to me. And I said I would love to contribute to the fashion, but only if I can do the whole thing. Like I'm just gonna hand you a story, I'll tell you what it is. But I'm gonna lay it out, I'm gonna pick the models and I'm gonna pick the photographer, I'm gonna pick the, like--because there was nothing in the book at the time that looked, made me think that they had the team or the aesthetic to handle it--but Sydne Bolden was the fashion director, she was lovely. I just don't think they had, it just wasn't--
Speaker 2: And this is now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --under Vanguarde Media--
Speaker 1: I think they had just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) correct?
Speaker 1: Yes, it wasn't--
Speaker 2: So, so what, what's interesting is Vanguarde Media was [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and Len Burnett [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] who had been running the business--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of Vibe.
Speaker 1: And you know what, thank you for bringing that up, because when I discovered that they had it, I, because Len--Keith on the slide, used me as a consultant around Vibe for a long time. He was like, "Michaela [HistoryMaker Michaela Angela Davis]", da, da--'cause he didn't, there was no one there that he trusted to understand the aesthetic. And like I said I was often the only one in a meeting with the editors that talked about it being black culture. So, and you know Keith was down and Len, and Keith, Len, Nelson.
Speaker 2: Right, Nelson Boyce.
Speaker 1: Boyce. And launching Vibe was an extraordinary moment, like let me not make--let me be clear what that first year felt like. And that we were, it was, it was big news in media, it was big news in the industry. We were--you know [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was connected to it, so we had this great legend of music to kind of validate what we were doing, but we were all like these new smart amazing you know tal- media talent and we had these partisan--parties and events. We did events like nobody else, and this was at the time media brands didn't have this multiplatform experience, you just had this book. Vibe was the second magazine to ever have a website, first one was Mother Jones, the second magazine to ever have a www dot address was Vibe. We were, we were new, we were edgy--we knew that we were gonna be on the World Wide Web, so we would had the magazine, we had World Wide Web and we had these amazing on the ground events. So we knew that we had this multiplatform experience that we would touch people in a guerrilla style and a high tech style. Nobody, no other magazine was like that.
Story_ID: 661937
Speaker 1: So now you go to Honey, totally different kind of experience--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --that was toward the female audience--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that would be complimentary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who, who had been abandoned by hip hop, 'cause all these women were now feeling some kind of way (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When you see, you know, if Kim is the only artist, Kim and--you see only certain kinds of women were now allowed, like there was, there was no more Queen Latifah, there was no more MC Lyte, there was, there was no one coming behind them--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --there was just Kim you know. And I love Lil' Kim, but that can't be your only voice when you had this whole choir. So you have all these women who felt abandoned, but at the same time, they were running this other side of culture, other side of trends and style and, and kind of like, I said Lauryn, Lauryn Hill was kind of the queen of the moment in, in terms of this , this new woman. That she had a voice, that she was badass, that she was stylish, that she was pop, meaning that she had, she had interest globally and that she was affecting the way that people dressed in the world. So, so when I got to Honey it was a much smaller group, but again these were familiar people, these were people--we made history with Vibe and now this possibility of doing this with the women's magazine. With a magazine called Savoy, which is kind of like a Vanity Fair and then they had a women's health mag- they had bought Heart and Soul from Rodale [Rodale Press Inc.].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So I had a very good experience of contributing to Honey, the fashion, and I did another one, maybe I did three stories. And then, and the love of magazines was, was kind of reignited in me. And then within a couple of months, I remember Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] was like, "I want you to take a ride with me," and we get in his town car and he's like, "Look, Amy's leaving." Amy was the editor in chief at the time.
Speaker 1: Amy Barnett [Amy DuBois Barnett].
Speaker 2: "Amy Barnett is leaving and, in a big way, and I want you to help me figure this out. Like who's our next editor in chief?" He was so sly, "Like who's our next editor in chief and what are we gonna do and," da, da, da. And I was like, "Oh my god, let me go think about it." And he you know (laughter), so he drops me off, we have dinner on the next night, I was like, "Keith, I'm your next editor in chief. Like I'm, I, I know this, I do this," and da, da, da. And it was so funny, like he, he played it very well, it was very interesting experience.
Story_ID: 661938
Speaker 1: And so I then became the editor in chief of Honey and there was something about that moment. It was like we became not just this magazine that was gonna cover this new culture of women, but it was also gonna be a, a, a nurturing ground, for, for women in the industry. Whether you're a writer, photographer, creative director, photo editor, makeup artist, hairstylist, all the places where I saw there weren't enough women. I was like okay, we--if I get to hire--if we get to hire, we're gonna, we're gonna hire women, or we're gonna at least make sure that--cause I would literally ask photographers, if they were big photographers, "Do you, are--do you have women assistants? Like is there someone in your pipeline?" You know, so it was very empowering to--and I had the best staff ever. It was small, it was lean, but Kenya Hunt was my managing editor, Michelle Willums [ph.] was my creative director, oh shoot, wait a minute, hold on, I'm trying to remember. Oh, Lisa Montoya [ph.]--well, funny actually by the time, I didn't even really fully get to hire my fashion director, but there are, there were, I had a staff of like twelve and we turned it out. And I got so in love with the women--that's what, that's when the, the, the love of young women really happened. Like it was kind of the next generation of what had happened at Essence. It's like I, I felt like I was connecting to this audience in a very real way. And they wanted their stuff now, they were doped, they had been to school, they were on the, they were like fully on the Internet, you know, where we were still calling it the World Wide Web. They were unapologetic, they were diverse and worldly and fly and they wanted a place and they, they wanted a place in the world. And this magazine was their place in the world, and I didn't realize how hungry this audience was until I started to serve them. And it was empowering and exhilarating and, and Honey was the fastest growing women's title for two years in a row, not black women's, but it was--this market was the market, this was, these were young progressive urban influenced women. So, because at the time, I remember, I wasn't even the editor in chief yet, but I pitched a cover including Pink, who was white. But Pink was an urban artist, so we also were willing to say, you know--was Pink, Kelis and Joi, and these were all kind of like these edgy new artists. And though Pink was white, Pink was part of this movement and, just as Gwen Stefani was part of this movement. We knew that it was black and Latino girls that were the heart of it, but there were these legitimate other artists that were part of it. Arguably Gwen Stefani was important to this, to this audience and so we also made ourselves clearly different from Essence at the time. Essence would never put anyone white on the cover. So we were really covering a culture and not a color, even though we were very clear that we knew that black and brown girls provided the culture in which we were reporting, and, and defining and this idea of self definition became very, very, very important.
Story_ID: 661939
Speaker 1: How long were you at Heart and Soul? Excuse me, Heart and Soul (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Honey.
Speaker 1: --excuse me, Honey.
Speaker 2: So let's see, I was there, I was contributing for about six months, and then I was the editor in chief for about a year. Like it folded in, in about a year (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, now during that same time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're political stirrings--
Speaker 2: Started.
Speaker 1: --continued
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And you contributed to, so, 'Everything But the Burden: What White People' ['Everything But the Burden: What White People Are Taking from Black Culture,' Greg Tate] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know what happened was when, when Honey, this is--I'll tell--when Honey folded, like I said I was only there for a year. I got a call from--yeah, I got a call from Essence, Asha Bandele called me and she's like, "Girl, I know you don't have a--you know, you lost your job, we're going crazy over here, would you consider coming back to Essence?" And--
Speaker 1: And was Essence still owned by Essence at that time?
Speaker 2: No, the sale had happened, but they were in that transition that weird--that had a good like five year transition period where it kind of looked like it was the same, but it wasn't. They moved offices by this time but there was still--like the Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] thing hadn't moved in but it was starting to. It was one of the reasons why I was asked to come over, because you had all these editors who literally weren't on email, they had--they weren't ready to assume part of this Time Warner, and--you know exactly what I'm talking about. They, but also there was--so there was this need to kind of bring some synergy and some modernity to the way Essence was being produced. So I was asked to be the--it was a new title, I kind of made it--I was like here's what you need, cause I was--Diane at the--Diane.
Speaker 1: Weathers [Diane Weathers]?
Speaker 2: Weathers was the editor in chief and she just asked me, "Can you come and like just help me figure out what's going wrong over here?" And so I kind of did three months or two months of this observation. I recommended that they needed an executive, and an executive fashion and beauty and culture editor, and so that's what I became. Here's when my activism really started, and this is when I literally gave myself the title of, of image activist. While I was at Essence we had, we had--all started talking about what was happening to the music and really concerned about our girls. Because of these images, right, we were very concerned and you know Diane had a young daughter at the time, and so did I [Elenni Davis-Knight]. And so I think we were very passionate about what was happening to the images of young women as they were being portrayed through music videos, which was the most pervasive images of young women of color were coming from this medium. They were everywhere and everywhere there they were there was hypersexual, hypersexual images with no balance of anything else. There was no 'Cosby Show' ['The Cosby Show'] on the air anymore, there was no 'A Different World,' they were not being these you know magical fairies or these snooty school girls, there were nothing, there was mostly these videos, right? So we're very concerned about that. We'd heard that some students at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] had challenged Nelly. Nelly was coming to do a bone marrow drive at, at Spelman for his sister [Jacqueline Donahue] who had bone marrow disease but the--Moya Bailey and three of her colleagues, I can't remember their names. Moya who was on the, it was a feminist group of scholars, it was just scholars at Spelman. They had organized for Nelly to have a conversation with them before he came there, because he had just put out this video called 'Tip Drill' where he had a credit card going down the crack of a young woman's behind. And they were really challenging him and his images of women and wanting to come to their all women's college. They asked him for a conversation, he denied the conversation and they were like we can't nego- and we found them so brave, we had started--Akiba Solomon and I, Diane had asked us to just think about what we could do to talk about this, to have an ongoing conversation about the images, because we were bringing this up every month. And so Akiba Solomon and I started this campaign called Take Back the Music. It was very new, we'd just given it this name, we decided that we were gonna go to Spelman and help them have a public conversation, a town hall with--here we are the black woman's magazine, we had these brave young women in Spelman--
Speaker 1: Who had rejected Nelly, so he could not do the fundraiser (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and it wasn't so much they rejected him, they were like, they just asked, they just asked him for a conversation, they're being very clear and strategic about--they--it was just they'd looked like they were having a sense of self respect.
Story_ID: 661940
Speaker 1: We recognized Essence was the media brand, or the brand for black women, and we saw these women at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] you know to--this historical black women's college being so brave. So we decided that we should go wrap our arms around them and just give them a platform, help them elevate what they're doing. And we really just thought we would come and, and, and just help them facilitate it, what we discovered--something very powerful happened at that moment on that stage. And I was, I was moderating this conversation and, and it occurred to me what I was doing. I was like, I'm being an activist for the image of young women. And at that moment I called myself an image activist. I'd never heard it before (laughter). And Take Back the Music became so popular, it became the signature campaign at Essence. Essence had never had that much press, ever, I was on MTV [Music Television; MTV], FOX, VH1 [Video Hits One; VH1], CN- CNN, I remember the press department showing me the stack of press--and at, at the time, of course we know that Essence was groundbreaking and breakthrough when it first happened. But we're talking, and this is 2006?
Speaker 2: Five [2005], '6 [2006].
Speaker 1: Five [2005], '6 [2006], so it had not become this relevant--something had happened, right, and all of a sudden Essence had this relevant position in challenging the images of what, of black, young black women in media. And the interesting thing was, is that we were, we were challenging this, but with love, again this is that, again working from this core of loving who you're serving. And because we were coming from love we got very little backlash, I thought--the PR [public relations] was so scared that like the record companies were gonna hate us, and--because we weren't saying we hate hip hop, we were saying we love hip hop and we love it enough that we're gonna challenge it because you're not loving us. So we're having this very real conversation on multiple platforms, mostly town halls and then, then the, the television started to happen. And I was doing a lot; I ended up doing a lot of the television. This is where I guess some of that acting kicked in, like I can talk, I can get sound bites. But also at the same time as doing some 'Full Frontal Fashion' commentating, so I was talking about the fashion shows one day, and then the next day, I'm talking about the images of black women. So my television, being in front of the camera started to happen at this Take Back the Music time, and also at you know when 'Full Frontal Fashion' had a television show. But it was, it was very, very, very powerful and it was very clear that this is where all my paths, the intersection was right here, was right here and in talking about expanding the narrow narratives of who black women were. And who they could be and who these young women are because of--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I realized that other, another light came on, this is the work, this is what you do. You have had all this time, had all this career, created all these contacts, have a platform and a voice. And this is where you're best served and where you can best serve, so that's what I do. That's, that's what I do.
Story_ID: 661941
Speaker 1: And you have been doing that, you, you--it was born at Essence--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which is very interesting that it would be born there, and from that point on you have engaged the media very specifically in that way.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Talk about that journey.
Speaker 2: So, so when we began Take Back the Music, and I, again it was--Akiba Solomon and I were both kind of the spokespeople for it. I ended up doing more television, where Akiba and I would, would be on panels together. So what happened is, and this is the way media works, right? So once you become someone in front of the camera that--then people either like or listen to, or producers like, you--'cause here's what's clear, I never had an agent, I never sat down and strategized that this is what I wanna do. And I want to try to get to this point I want to try to get in front of this producer, I wanna be on CNN, I wanna--I just was showing up where I felt like I was needed. The campaign was strategic, but how I was positioning myself wasn't. So what happened was the more I started to speak and the more I was started to be--I was requested to speak and I got, I did get with this speakers bureau so I was making my way through college--the college scene. And what's so interesting 'cause this is also the time when Facebook and social media started to evolve. And students were seeking me out, they were, they were--
Speaker 1: And this is around what time?
Speaker 2: This is like 2008, no, no, no, before that, because it was before, way before the election, so around 2007, '6 [2006], '5 [2005], '6 [2006], '7 [2007]. So I had--I didn't do that long at Essence again but what, so what happened was young women were asking for, like they were asking for me. So I was ending, I was going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], so I started this speaking circuit. And then whenever--then I became someone that could talk about issues around race and gender. So media outlets if--because this became the, the, an issue, right, this became a hot topic of hip hop and, and what was happening in images and hip hop and, and mainly conservative people wanting to bash it. Then I became someone they thought would support that, so it just became one of those sexy topics in media, and I was one of the, the people that could talk about it. So, so then it just kind of it, it expanded.
Story_ID: 661942
Speaker 1: So you were talking on TV One.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you--when did we get to CNN?
Speaker 2: Okay, so CNN, what, what I really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or am I jumping the gun?
Speaker 2: No, because you--we kind of got to--2007 I was, I was actually looking for that segue, you helped me to that. So what happened was I became someone that you, that was, that spoke on race and gender. Then Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] became--hit the scene in 2004, right, in two thousand- and this idea of race in America became, started to grow as, you know, this is the way that media and pop, and pop culture works. Like issues become popular and so the issue of, of race and power and image were starting to accelerate because this senator was becoming a presidential hopeful. So what was happening was the media was scrambling to find people who could talk about it. Because we weren't being nurtured as anchors or as commentators or any--so I just, because I had been in front of some of these producers before talking about hip hop, they were like, "Oh, but can, can you talk about this, you know, this race thing?" And so there was, there's a black woman producer at CNN so there's that, when there's someone who is a gatekeeper that looks like you and understands you, and, and her name's Josanne Lopez. Josanne could tell that I could talk about politics too, so a sister did bring me in, particularly when the campaign started to amp up. So I was really there and I talked a lot about Michelle Obama and the image of Michelle and what Michelle was doing to the landscape of women in images, right? So this became kind of this special thing that I could talk about, or that I talked about consistently even before the campaign began. I was talking a lot about Michelle and the image of Michelle, and how important that was for black women and how important it--and how this was gonna be a game changer, the first lady was--so and then just the way politics started to come up all that crazy stuff. So I was just one of these people that they knew could talk, because again no one's looking for us, no one planned for us, no one was nurturing, "Oh, let's get these new black voices into media."
Speaker 1: To CNN's credit--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they very quickly found a lot of black people.
Speaker 2: They did, they did, Roland [HistoryMaker Roland Martin], me, well they look to academic--but also there was a black producer there, all these people came through Josanne. Me and Roland and Michael Eric Dyson and, and MSNBC has a black woman over there too, Yvette [Yvette Miley]. So they were, so the people that knew where the black people were could--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, so that's--it really was this 2008 campaign that really put me in news media because they needed people to talk about this phenomenon that was happening. So where I talked a lot about Michelle and image, so that got me in front of all those producers and then it became--but interestingly enough, which is what you understand, how I got into Anderson Cooper's camp. Which is--Anderson Cooper at CNN is like the elite crew, right, 'cause it's Anderson and he is probably their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, very much, (laughter) very much so.
Story_ID: 661943
Speaker 1: Wait before you get there, I just wanna point out that you started being honored for your activism.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Like people started noticing you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --just, just to make a point, you know the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] acknowledged your work in 2011 with the phenomenal woman award. And then you, you were featured in a number of anthologies--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so Rebecca Walker's ['Black Cool: One Thousand Streams of Blackness,' ed. Rebecca Walker] was another--
Speaker 2: And this is all after--so this point is critical 'cause all that came after, and there's very interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really? Came after what?
Speaker 2: The--what I'm about to tell you why, how I got to 'Anderson Cooper' ['Anderson Cooper 360'].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How I got to 'Anderson Cooper' was I challenged Essence, that--
Speaker 1: I didn't realize it came after, okay.
Speaker 2: And I was, I was being recognized, I wasn't being honored, but I was being, I was becoming a voice particularly on these campuses, right? I was talking about image, image activism and, and being empowered and challenging images and, and being, having media literacy, particularly as it came to women and how they perceive themselves and how the world perceives them. Because they were being treated based on these music videos, and that's what we were finding when talking to girls that traveled, people thought--would solicit them for sex when they're in Italy as a scholar, because they think that their video--so we understood something was happening in the culture, and I was helping to facilitate those conversations and giving us tools to deal with them. When--and this--at this critical moment too, I discovered the power of Facebook. So Essence magazine had a new editor in chief for a while, who had hired a white fashion director. And I had had that, this job and I knew what a fashion director was. A fashion director was someone that didn't just pick out dresses, for Essence particularly because it was the only magazine for black women, the fashion director was in the community. The fashion director spoke on behalf of the community; the fashion director would be you know if H&M [H and M Hennes and Mauritz A.B.] opened in Harlem [New York, New York], or a MAC store [MAC Cosmetics] opened in downtown Detroit [Michigan], the fashion director of Essence was supposed to be there. The fashion director at Essence sits at the front row at the fashion shows with all the other fashion directors. So when a white woman was chosen for that one spot, I, I was appalled, but I didn't act until a group of young women--I had started, I started to have mentees by this point, right? Young women that I was nurturing and were talking to me and I was talking to them, I started to host salons in my home with young women, mentoring them. And a group of young women called me and they were crying, they, they said to me, "What does this mean to us?" And they were, they were all fashion professionals, one just finished fashion history at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], blah, blah, blah. And they're like, "So if Essence doesn't think that we can do this, where do we go, what does this mean to us?" And they were crying and I was talking to--and that's--I didn't act until I felt the hurt and I wrote on my Facebook page, "Essence magazine has hired a white fashion director. I feel like I lost my best girlfriend," right, something to that effect. Hundreds of comments later, in an hour or two Clutch magazine had written a blog.
Speaker 1: Which is an online (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) An online magazine, a popular mag- online website for this audience. So be clear that the first people that covered this story were the young women who were being most affected. So Clutch did it first, then, then New York Magazine picked it up from Clutch. Then from New York Magazine it went viral. Twenty-four hours later, I was on 'Anderson Cooper,' right? I had no idea Facebook was like that, I was really naive, I was really new, I was having like these conversations that I thought were very contained with like couple thousand friends and, I was talking to young women, most I would ask ques- and what I realized that my Facebook page was, was the open for some news stories I was like OMG. So I learned a lot by then, but so what hap- so it's very challenging and very interesting and very full circle to be in this moment where you are challenging home, 'cause Essence was home to me. But I, I had gotten the blessings from my mentor like this--'cause I called, I guess it's okay to say now--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in public. I called Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] before I accepted that interview, and I said, "Look, I'm getting calls from the media, and what do you think?" Because I knew I was gonna--this was basically going to war with Essence. I didn't know how big it was gonna be, I didn't know it was gonna be this thing. And I got, I got, she told me, she said, "Michaela [HistoryMaker Michaela Angela Davis] you're my hero," and that's, I said that's all. So if my mentor says that it was something--and I had all these young women, and, and they were like nobody stands up for us. And I didn't have anything to lose; I wasn't trying to get that job--like, so I felt like they couldn't do it, because they might want that job one day. They're new in their career, I understood that, so I felt like I could speak for them, and I wasn't afraid.
Story_ID: 661944
Speaker 1: So I ended up on 'Anderson Cooper' ['Anderson Cooper 360'] and then that kind of started a very clear message that I really--this was really what I was doing, even when it was something that was difficult and that was hard and it was hurtful. I was willing to stand for these young women and their image, no matter who it was, and so after that, the accolades really started to come. Because I think that was really like, "Yo, this woman is really about this--," and what was interesting is the young women wanted to be activists in their own, for their own image and we, we state that--we stage this silent protest at the fashion shows. About twenty young women dressed in all black with signs that said, "I am a fashion director," very much out of the spirit of I Am a Man, with the names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: From the Civil Rights Movement, where, the sanitation department's protest [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]--with all the names of the former fashion directors on their signs. So it was [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, it was [HistoryMaker] Michaela Angela Davis, it was Agnes Cammock, it was Kevin [Kevin Stewart], like all these names of all the black fashion directors. And they walked, dressed in all black with you know with black sunglasses for anonymity, but also giving you this sort of moment, this fashion moment. They walked from the offices of Essence to the steps of the, Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] where the fashion shows were. And they just stood silently, we did a little bit of media, and that was it. And when it was over, when we regrouped, you could see they were different, they did something for--whether the fashion director changed her job or not, they acted on behalf of their own image. And they had been so frustrated watching them become these hoes (laughter) on TV and then this one place that was supposed to be safe, they felt was telling them they weren't even good enough. And, and, and, the thing is it was very, it was a very destructive thing to do to the fashion industry. Because that fashion director was the only black fashion director in the entire community of women's magazines. So when you, so it wasn't just that it was affecting the women, it was affecting the industry. Because now you don't, you didn't have one and only--Nina Garcia was the only other fashion director who was not a white person. So, so there was a, broader damage in that move, and it also made you question what had happened to the core value of this brand that was the only brand for black women. So it was a very hurtful experience, but from that, this whole new generation of young women recognized that they had a champion and I recognized that I could be that. And so from that the accolades start to come, some from smaller, like sororities, but then you know the NAACP Wom- for the hundredth anniversary, I got, I got a citation from the Manhattan borough president, a proclamation. I have two proclamations; one from the City of New York [New York] and one from Brooklyn [New York]. And then, just, you know, Human Spirit Award [Brooklyn Community Services Human Spirit Award], I started to get recognized for the activism and the spirit from which it was coming.
Story_ID: 661945
Speaker 1: And so then there are two other kind of lines that that occurred, you began having these MAD Free conversations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure. So, and also while this was all going on, I also started to write again, so I am a writer even though it's, it's hard, but so, but I realized if I'm talking about things sometimes, I have to write about them too. But so I, I was having these salons in my house where young--have you ever been to one of them? Oh my god.
Speaker 1: Well, I went to a bigger one, not at your house.
Speaker 2: So I used to have salons in my home where I would have a woman, one of my, just a friend who had an amazing career. And I had about twenty, anywhere from twenty to thirty young women would come once a month and we would have these conversations about building career, building character. And just giving young women intimate access to filmmakers and stylist and designers and surgeons, just--'cause I was like look at all my friends--like I looked at the richness of my life and I have amazing women who were friends. So I was gathering here having these monthly conversations, monthly salons, and then I realized that it was, it was getting too big and I, it had to be managed and I wanted to make the conversation have a little bit more residence. So I started a conversation project called MAD Free, where--and interestingly enough the first name was called Free the Girls, which was the initial tag line for Honey. But I couldn't use it because it some like trafficking tee shirt company, whatever, sex trafficking tee shirt. So I turned it into MAD Free which was, I was reluctant to use my name, but then it became and made a lot of sense. So I started this conversation project and it was called, we called them liberating conversations with revolutionary women talking about image, power and beauty, so it was to organize around image activism and to encourage image activism and, and help define what it is in this more organized way. And so I had conversation--the first official one was at the Brooklyn Museum [Brooklyn, New York] with Beverly Bond who had started Black Girls Rock [Black Girls Rock, Inc.] and we were friends, and Black Girls Rock was across the street from me. And so we had this first very big conversation and it was, it was interesting, it was healing, it was innovative, there's these young women who wanted to talk about who they said they were. I had conversation with Janet Mock, the transgender activist before she even started writing her book ['Redefining Realness: My Path to Womanhood, Identity, Love and So Much More,' Janet Mock]. I had conversation with Isabel Toledo--
Speaker 1: Fashion designer.
Speaker 2: --fashion designer, had conversation with Rebecca Walker when her book 'Black Cool' ['Black Cool: One Thousand Streams of Blackness,' ed. Rebecca Walker] came out, which I also contributed to. [HistoryMaker] Melissa Harris-Perry, the week before her show ['Melissa Harris-Perry'] premiered, we had a huge event at the Brooklyn Museum. I've had conversation with [HistoryMaker] Lisa Price from Carol's Daughter, I had a very, very interesting conversation last year with, Joan Morgan and I invited these young women to ask us questions about being in our forties, like we were like, "We're gonna tell you the truth, 'cause there so many things that no one told us." And we, we wanna make sure that we were like, so that was very, very interesting. And so the conversation also happens in a mat- multiplatform way--the main thing is really having human interaction. But it's, when there's an online presence, there's a Facebook presence, so it's about having sort of multidimensional and multigenerational conversations too about image and beauty and power. Because I realized these con- these assaults also don't stop, we've had--I mean since, MAD Free started, there's been so many stories about whether black women are beautiful enough or whether--what's happening through reality television, I have a conversation called Bury the Ratchet, where we really do--but generally talking to younger women how they manage their image of being violent and petty and, emotionally violent particularly through, through reality show television. It's almost like the target moved in the, you know in the early 2000s it was about music videos, and now it's reality television in terms of having this very narrow image of who young black women are in the dearth of other images. Because I think what is really important is that I don't wanna ever be in the place of policing black girl behavior or saying we only have to have positive images. I believe it's important that we become complex--that we are complex and that we are allowed our humanity, that we allowed our paradoxes. And I think black women more than anybody embody paradoxes and complementary complexities more than any other group of people. Because of all the different things we've had to be and all the different things we had to manage, and negotiate is made us infinitely interesting people. And so I wanna make sure that I am in a position that allows people to love 'Love and Hip Hop' and love Melissa Harris-Perry because that's real. But we, it's not--what's damaging sometimes is if you're only ingesting one image, who do you think you are? And also equally importantly, who do other people think you are? Because they don't, they don't know how fly you are, they watch 'Love and Hip Hop' and think that's who young black girls are. And that's what I'm concerned about too, it's like how do these images allow our girls to move through the world? And who are they told who they are and how, why so much in the popular music they're a hoe, they're a hoe, they're a hoe, all the time. Like what is that doing to them and what is that doing to others like because there, we're not hearing other girls being called hoes continuously, almost as another name for girl.
Story_ID: 661946
Speaker 1: To that end, another project that you've been working on for some time is helping to redefine the brand of BET Networks.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you know historically BET was known as the booty shaking network that that you know created the video hoe--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they didn't create it, but they gave it a platform.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in recent years under [HistoryMaker] Debra Lee's stewardship, it's changing and you've been a part of the leadership of that change.
Speaker 2: And, and to--helping to be part of the creative team that rebranded BET has been a very, very rewarding experience. Because they really were the belly of the beast in terms of the images that we were challenging, the images that we were interrogating were coming from this source almost exclusively. And what was diabolical about it is because the name of it is Black Entertainment Television. So it was telling you this is your destination, this is the one network for you because at the time, we didn't have a TV One or a Bounce or Revolt or all these other networks for, that say that they're for black people. BET was it, and so if the one pla- it's kind of, again it's this idea of like what happened at Essence, you've got this one thing, and if this one thing starts to feel like it's turning on you, the pain of it is very different. And the experience of it is very different than you would see a video say on VH1 [Video Hits One; VH1]. So BET was the, was the source of where these images were that we were challenging. However, it was also the biggest media brand in the world for black people, so the notion of being able to help them redefine and redirect who they are was incredibly rewarding. And it was the same experience that I had at Honey where I felt like I was challenging them, but I had never asked them to help, could I help. And what I, what I, what was critical was they were protesting in front of Debra Lee's house every Saturday for an entire year. There was a church group--
Speaker 1: This was after she took over?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At her house, every Saturday, rain or shine, and I thought you know what? I understand their passion, but they didn't do this to Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson], right? And why aren't they protesting the, the headquarters, why they, they're at her house, where her children are going in every day. So, so I felt like it was a powerful move on their part, but, but there was something about that that struck me and I, I very rarely would ask Susan for any favors, and I asked [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor could I have a meeting with Deb, Debra Lee, because I had been working with women for all these years, right. So now I had this trust and I had my ear to the ground of young women who and this is mainly what these protests were about, were the images in the videos (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when was this?
Speaker 2: This was two thousand- early 2008.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right before the election 'cause I--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I, I met with Jeanine Liburd [Jeanine D. Liburd] and, and Deb Lee and it was kind of the same thing I said at Honey it's like how can I help? And then, then if they didn't want my help then I can go back to (laughter) you know challenging them. But I, I feel like it's not powerful to criticize or critique or judge if you don't ever offer help first (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 661947
Speaker 1: When I went to BET [Black Entertainment Television] to ask how can I help, little did I know that they had begun this process of rebranding. So I came in right at--I act- I came in right at the right time, and so the first thing I did there was actually help them build a campaign called Fly Girls Vote. Where we were encouraging women, young women, to not only register to vote, but bring their dudes to vote. For, we didn't say for the president, for Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], but that's what were you know, we were encouraging. So I had this event at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], but Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] all the--so it's kind of full circle, and we had this amazing event, this fundraise- this campaign to encourage young women to vote. That was the first thing I did at BET and, and then I became part of the creative services team who was working on the rebrand and, and the creative lead, Kendrick Reid and I had started doing projects before. I'd--so during my image activism, so I got known to be this person that was kind of plugged into women and pop culture and history and style. And so I had also, and I don't even know, really know how this began, but I'd done some campaigns for VH1 [Video Hits One; VH1] around Black History Month. I was consulting people on how to talk about black history and culture in this sort of modern way. And so Kendrick Reid and I had done some very successful promo campaigns at VH1 and somewhere else, and so now he was the creative lead and the SVP at BET, and he asked me to come as a consultant. And it was so exciting to work on a--to rebrand a network is huge work and it's a lot of work and it's a big deal and that's why anybody wants to go anywhere so they can rebrand it. And, and this network really needed it, it was one where you can tell, you would tell the difference and that's why we were so excited. We were like even if we fail, the challenge is so incredible, and also it would be so noticed. For instance, if HBO [Home Box Office] did a rebrand, they're already so fabulous and wonderful, like you would be like, "Oh, that's a cool new logo," but you wouldn't feel a cultural shift, or it wouldn't be this major moment. And so for someone that who has, who's life had become about media and black media, and, and healing through media and challenging through media, and activism through media, to be part of helping to change the biggest media platform in the world for black people was, it was dreamy. I couldn't even believe that I was that, like this is really what I'm doing, this is really what I'm doing. And I didn't--it was really very intensive, thoughtful work. And it work- the interesting thing is, it worked. As a result of rebranding, not just what it looked like and what they said, it was also just trying to change the culture and also what kind of shows they did, and what kind of shows they didn't do. And in the year of the first rebrand, they had a huge success with bringing 'The Game' onto their network, never before had a show gone off the air, had been on network television and then have almost double the ratings on a cable show. It was history. They had 7 million people tune in for the premier, that's a huge number in cable, and so they broke history, I mean they broke, yeah they made television history. They used social- they leveraged social media in our strategy, in our campaign strategy that had never been used before. We activated real people so what was so powerful is to say that we can be better, we can say things that are better, and still have better ratings, right? 'Cause there was this whole idea well sex sells and you know, and so that was very, very powerful.
Story_ID: 661948
Speaker 1: And now to, now the second wave of that work, which is--all of it really, full circle in a very targeted way, BET [Black Entertainment Television] has a second network called Centric [BET Her] that was initially going to be like the VH1 Soul [BET Soul], it was literally, VH1 Soul was supposed to go away. And VH1 Soul and BET J were to merge and become this sort of music (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because it's--BET is, BET is under Viacom [Viacom Inc.].
Speaker 1: BET is under Viacom. So it never quite did that, it became kind of like a--
Speaker 2: Movie channel.
Speaker 1: Yeah and nostalgic like--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'The Cosby Show,' kind of, kind of this vague network. So just very, very recently they had decided to rebrand it as the first network designed for black women. And so I've been the creative lead on that effort in and it, it's also an incredible experience. It's bringing it all together and, and we're in the very beginning stages of it, there's no, it won't be activated until the fall. But it's, it's been an incredible journey that I really didn't plan, and as, as a result of also talking, being part of the CNN experience, the Trayvon Martin case where I was--again I look, I look at things that happened, particularly around race, I still look for where's the, where's the woman in this. How, how's this affecting the women, how's it affecting our girls? So I did this campaign for Sybrina Fulton for The Huffington Post when we did a Mother's Day campaign for her that was very powerful. It was the first--we wanted to support her in her first Mother's Day, facing her first Mother's Day without her son Trayvon. And so I became very active in the conversation around Trayvon Martin on CNN and as result of that I became a contributor. And, and none of this was planned, it's all--it's listening to that voice, I guess still. And the--also the, my spiritual work has become critical too, so that, that praying and meditating that I started because I was in so much pain when I was fourteen has now become just part of how I live my life.
Story_ID: 661949
Speaker 1: So when you think about the legacy of [HistoryMaker] Michaela Angela Davis, what do you hope and, or intend for it to be?
Speaker 2: You know when I think about my legacy, I guess first, first I know that I helped, I helped. And I also know that I have allowed an amazing young woman to be my daughter [Elenni Davis-Knight]. And that is my proudest accomplishment; the thing that I'm most proud of is how I became a mother and who my daughter is. And being able to raise a black girl that was never broken, it feels like something in my whole family history has been healed. I feel like there's this broken, there's this lineage with like these broken parts, in each generation it was trying to heal, you know, like who would we be if we didn't have some pain to overcome, some deep pain. Like of course she has her own story, right, like no one's perfect, like worries about whether she's five pounds overweight or what. She's not broken and she never was, that is a miracle, because every woman in my family I've ever known was broken and had to put themselves back together. So many of our heroes, you know [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was broken and lost her voice, and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was broken and was raped and found her voice. And, and we celebrate this idea of you know women being broken and then rising, and that's amazing. But how about we never get broken? Like how about that, and I was able to do that, and I, a lot of it was because I'd done a lot of work on myself be- while I was a young mother but before, so that to me is the most remarkable thing.
Story_ID: 661950
Speaker 1: But I wanna be remembered by the stories that I tell and the stories that I allowed to be told. Because I believe that we are our stories, that's how people know we're here, people know what we believed and that, that we're in a time now that we get to tell our own stories. That we're not living through someone else's imagination, that we're not living through someone else's fantasy, that we can challenge it and say no. Like for instance, when I saw that hashtag, if I were down gunned down [sic. if they gunned me down], and I saw what these young people were able to do on social media and show the picture of this is me in a uniform and this is me with my friends smoking, you know, smoking. If I was gunned down by the police, they wouldn't show this picture of me in my officer's uniform that to me is like, I think I helped, I helped to frame that. That, that we're able to say this is who we are, this is our image, this is our story. That's what I hope I'm remembered by like--
Story_ID: 661951
Speaker 1: As you look back at your life do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Do I have regrets? Sure. I have, I guess and this is so weird Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], and I don't think ever said this out loud, I regret that I didn't finish school. I regret that I left, not so much that I left that conservatory [Stella Adler Conservatory; Stella Adler Studio of Acting, New York, New York], but I remember, I remember I was speaking at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] in their, in the catacombs, you know it's like this very exclusive place where Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] spoke and, and I remember pulling up. And I was like who are you, like you didn't, you left school, I don't have an advance--and I'm always on these panels with Dr. So and So and da, da. And, and here I am speaking at probably one of the most prestigious colleges in their most prestigious program. And I was like, like who do you think you are? And then I remembered who I was, and I was okay with it. And, and, so I regret that, I regret it just because I did, it's interesting because I don't feel like it's something that I need to go back and fix, but just is very--(cough) excuse me, very weird 'cause I'm, I'm always encouraging and--on campuses and it's all about, you know, your education is your way out. My path is just very different, but I regret that, I regret some of the years that I lost due to my drug use, but I had so much fun. I don't even, I don't fully regret it, everything, because also had I not been in that nightlife, I had, I wouldn't have seen and done what I did. So I have bits of regrets but then on the other side of it, there's something that is like if I didn't do that, that thing didn't happen I wouldn't be here. I guess, that's part of the gift of being fifty, you go, you know what, that thing got me here, so I'm not, I don't have any shame, I know that. I don't think I have any real regret, I did, I've done a lot of therapy and a lot of personal work, so I do, so I feel sort of clean inside.  And when I do something off now, I, I correct immediately, I know, so I've built some character, so I feel like I, oh I have a current regret. I regret that I don't write every day.
Speaker 1: You can change that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to share that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: Gosh I feel like I tol- I, I can't believe I said that about this, I've never said that in public. So first of all, I think I just had a little moment with you, and I think part of it is, part of this is, I don't feel ashamed of it, but I just feel there's a part of me, and this is just you and me talking too. I, I feel like I don't know whether people will be disappointed if they knew that, you know, I didn't have a bunch of degrees you know what I mean, I don't know. I, I hope that my work is my work and whatever. And, and particularly when you're an artist, when you start working, you start work--you I never planned to be teaching artist so when, once is started working in fashion and was on my career. And at the time there was no you--there's nothing, there was no fashion stylist to even major in. It wasn't even, it is now, but it wasn't even a major before. So, and the fact that I write and I'm published and, you know, so I feel blessed, I guess. So I just, so I feel, I don't know, I don't think there's, I don't think there's anything critical because--here, I do think that it was so important for me to see my mother [Helen Butler Delaney] at forty years old change her life, it gave me this idea that I can keep doing this again and again. Like there's no end to this, at, at seventy-six, she's about to move to Arizona, she just finished her first book. And she's excited, and we get on the phone and we're excited about what we're doing the next day. Or what our move is or what her next book is, and, "When you gonna write some more?" "When you gonna do yoga?" I believe, and this is also with the metaphysics, this is an everlasting, never ending adventure, our life. Even when the skin is gone or it sags or it folds or whatever it's gonna do, there's a spirit that will keep going and that will keep growing, that'll keep--I, I, I, and I feel, I want everyone to feel that, that--this possibility every day. "This is the day the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it," [Psalm 118:24].  Every day, and I rem- another actually of something that my mother said to me, she said, "You can restart your day anytime." So you can restart your life anytime, it ain't gonna be easy, but you can do it.
Speaker 1: (Whispers) Thank you.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 661952
Speaker 1: So these two pictures are my maternal grandfather and his mother and father and siblings. And my maternal grandmother, her mother and most of her siblings. The photo on the left, I guess, that's my, my grandfather is standing in the back. He's the tallest next to his mother, the stern Irish woman, and she's mixed with Irish and something. I'm gonna--I got my mother scrambling for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us their names? Of those that you know, your grandfather?
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's my grandfather, that's John Stanley Butler [John Butler].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the left with the hat?
Speaker 1: That's his father, that's his, that's his--
Speaker 2: Let's go from the left to the right.
Speaker 1: His name is John [ph.] too, but I think, but they called him Pop.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, so there's Pop and oh, my god, what's my grandmother [sic. maternal great-grandmother], what's her name? Oh, gosh. I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there's my, Aunt Hazel [ph.] is next to him, my uncle Leland [ph.], but we called him Uncle Bootsy and I don't--what's interesting is you see these photos, the two smaller ones that are sitting down are very blonde. And I think that's where I got my blonde hair from even though I didn't see any other blonde people in my family. I was the only blonde. And the young daughter in the center had some, she had some mental challenges, and I can't remember exactly what they were growing up. And there're a couple more children that aren't in that photo.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you name everybody you could?
Speaker 1: I named everybody I could.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So there is my [maternal] grandmother Precious [Precious Tindal Butler], who's the tallest girl standing next to her mother.
Speaker 2: Are we going from left to right?
Speaker 1: Oh, so we can go from left, left to right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So left to right is, that's Aunt Eva [ph.], next to her is, oh shucks, I don't know. Next to her is John [ph.], then mother is seated, then that's Aunt Collier [ph.] is the baby. Oh, wait a minute no, that's not Aunt Eva, that's Ruby [ph.] at the end, then there's my mother [sic.] Precious, then Aunt Eva is the little girl with the brooding eyes next to aunt--to my grandmother. And then I don't know the name of it, the other sister next to Aunt Eva. Will there be a chance--can I, will there be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --chance because I have to ask my mo- this is--I'm going blank.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Left to right, older sister Debbie [Debbie Davis], that's me in the middle, brother Eddie [Eddie Davis] and sister Monica [Monica Davis], but we called her Nikki. And that's that BMW.
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Their names are Harold Edward Gregory Davis [Harold Davis, Sr.] and Helen Jean [Helen Butler Delaney], did I say my mother's name, yes, I did. So Helen Jean, oh, shoot.
Speaker 1: Wait stay here.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry that's Helen Jean Butler.
Speaker 1: And then down at the bottom that's Helen Jean, Helen Jean Butler, then the children left to right are Eddie, Harold Edward Gregory Davis, Jr., that we called Eddie; Deborah Ann Davis that we called Debbie; Monica Jean Davis that we called Nikki; and Harold Edward Gregory Davis, Sr.
Speaker 2: So my mother's name is Helen Jean Butler, so this is Jean and this is Helen [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, which one is Jean?
Speaker 2: Jean is the mother sitting down. Jean Tindal [ph.] and then--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And left to right, that is me, [HistoryMaker] Michaela Angela Davis, that's my daughter Elenni Davis-Knight in the center and that's her dad, Ezra Knight.
