Story_ID: 165755
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Matthew Douglas, Senior, J-A-M-E-S, M-A-T-T-H-E-W, D-O-U-G-L-A-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 11th, 1944, a small town of Onalaska, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Presently I am Distinguished Professor of Law at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have been the president of Texas Southern [University].
Speaker 2: Yes I have been.
Speaker 1: Okay, twice in the past I believe, right?
Speaker 2: No.  I was president once in the past, provost twice in the past.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] in the past.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 4th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're located in Martin Luther King [Humanities] Center at Texas Southern University in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 165756
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I like a lot of different kinds of foods.  I would say no, I don't have a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: God, you know I'm one of those people, I, I just like so many different--I, I don't distinguish one over the other.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like it hot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Probably St. Thomas, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably the one I like better than any others is, sometimes you have to do what you don't wanna do in order to be able to do what you wanna do.
Story_ID: 165757
Speaker 1: Alright so now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Mary Lawrence Dirden.  That's M-A-R-Y, D-I-R-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  D-I-R-D-E-N, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden] changed the spelling of the name.  So it's D-I-R-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: What, what was it before?
Speaker 2: D-U-R-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Is there a reason why she changed it?
Speaker 2: According to my mother, her oldest brother came to Houston [Texas] to work and they misspelled his name.  And so he continued to spell it D-I-R-D-E-N, and so she changed everybody else's spelling to D-I-R-D-E-N to coincide with her older son's spelling.
Speaker 1: You know it's a spelling you don't see and it makes the name unique.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Somebody would have to know you, know that's how you spell it, so.  And what is your mother's date, date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Point Blank [Texas], I'm sorry, Coal Spring, Texas.  And you know to be honest with you, I'm not exactly sure of her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would it be in the, let's see, would it be in the 1920s?
Speaker 2: Sure, it was in, it was in the 1920s.  I think it was '26 [1926], but you know, don't hold me to that.
Story_ID: 165758
Speaker 1: Okay so what can you tell us about your mother's [Mary Dirden Douglas] side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: My, my mother's family were all farmers.  They, they all grew up in the Onalaska [Texas], Point Blank [Texas], Coal Spring [Texas] area, which is out in east Texas and all farmland.  Mother had thirteen brothers and, and sisters.  She married very young.  She married my father [Desso Douglas] when she was fifteen years old.  Her family as I said earlier, were farmers.  My grandmother was a real feisty, strong willed woman.  I think which is where I got a lot of my, my personality from was my grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden].
Speaker 1: What, what, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Annie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anna Dirden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she was a, basically like a, a wife on the farm too?
Speaker 2: She was, she was a housewife.  My, my, my grandmother was in her late forties when my mother was born.  And so I only knew my grandmother as being a retired person.  She lived with, with us most of the time after I was born.  My grandmother lived with us most of the time.  At least the whole time I was growing up my grandmother lived with us, so I spent a lot of time with, with both of my grandmothers, my maternal and paternal grandmother.
Story_ID: 165759
Speaker 1: Oh, are there any stories on, on your side of the family from emancipation or Reconstruction or anything?
Speaker 2: 'Bout, bout, bout the, the one that says, probably funniest and I always tell people this story.  My, my oldest uncle, my, my mother [Mary Dirden] oldest brother, the one who changed his name, it appears when he was young, he got into a fight with a white man and, and beat him up pretty bad.  A few hours later, one of my grandfather's [Lawrence Dirden] friends who happened to be white, came by the farm and told my grandfather, he said, "Lawrence," he said, "they're, they're getting a group of vigilantes together and they're getting ready to come hang this boy."  You better get him out of town.  And so my, my uncle left.  He ended up settling in Seattle, Washington.  So he got as far away from, from Onalaska [Texas] as he could get.
Speaker 1: That's pretty far away, yeah.  So was it--
Speaker 2: So I have, I, I have a, a group of my family--most of my mother's brothers and sisters moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but her oldest brother moved to Seattle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was there any story about what the cause of the conflict was?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I--all, all I know is that he got into a fight.  I'm not sure what the cause of the fight was.
Story_ID: 165760
Speaker 1: But as far as you know, your mother's [Mary Dirden Douglas] family, the ancestors on that side, they don't claim to be from any other place other than Texas?  I mean there's no story about them being--
Speaker 2: There's no story about it.  One of my brothers did some research.  They eventually--they came from Georgia.  That's about as far back as we can go, is, is Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so that's, you know cause I know Texas would have been a frontier of the slavocracy, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Before the Civil War, and that's about as far west as you can get with, with slave culture and that sort of thing.  So, all right.  So the--
Speaker 2: You know my grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden] never really talked about her parents.  She was born in 1880, so she was born after slavery, but obviously her parents were, were born in slave.  But she never really talked about her parents.
Speaker 1: A lot of people, people don't talk about that period of time at all.  Now when your mother was growing up, were they celebrating Juneteenth in--
Speaker 2: Not, yes.  Juneteenth was, was a big celebration in, in Onalaska [Texas].  There were, there were two big celebrations.  I always tell people.  There was Fourth of July and, and Juneteenth.  And as a kid, I spent most of my summers in, in Onalaska, so Juneteenth was a huge celebration in Onalaska.
Speaker 1: I guess that's about the on--that's a formal recognition of the fact that slavery existed, you know, having the emancipation celebration, but other than that there weren't--
Speaker 2: Yes, and it's, it's a pretty big celebration.  Even in Houston [Texas] Juneteenth was a, was a pretty big celebration when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 165761
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Dirden Douglas] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my mother did not.  My mother dropped out of school in the eighth grade.  And that's as far as my--as she went with her formal education.
Speaker 1: Now did the school go any further than eighth grade?
Speaker 2: It went to the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eleventh grade was as far as the school went.  My, my mother later went back and, and became a beautician, but she never finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you--does the name of the school survive?  Was, was it named after any black person in the area, or--
Speaker 2: No, the school is, is long been torn down and it's, it's--it no longer exist.
Speaker 1: I know that, but I didn't know it, but I suspected it.  But did--does the name of it survive?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, and in fact, it--I can't remember, it might have been Onalaska Colored School.  In fact the school now is just Onalaska High School, Onalaska Middle School [sic, Onalaska Junior Senior High School, Onalaska, Texas].  It's not--none of the schools were named after any person.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so, so your mother stayed in Onalaska after she--and, and she got married after high school--after, af--
Speaker 2: She stayed in, she stayed in Onalaska really until about '46 [1946] or '47 [1947].
Story_ID: 165762
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Desso, D-E-S-S-O, Desso Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Desso?
Speaker 2: He was named after one of his uncles.  In fact his name is actually Jed Aubrey Carter [ph.] Desso Douglas, but he only uses Desso Douglas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no story about Desso that survived--where that comes from?
Speaker 2: No.  Just it was a relative.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  It could be a last name, you know, used as a first name.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or, you know, a middle name, or--in this case, it was--this would be his fourth name, right?
Speaker 2: Right, but it's the only name he live--he goes by is Desso.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born--it was August of '21 [1921].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in--
Speaker 2: He was born in Onalaska [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 165763
Speaker 1: Now what are the stories about your father's [Desso Douglas] side of the family?
Speaker 2: They were farmers.  My grandfather [Wiren Douglas] was a farmer.  And in fact I, I spent a lot of summers working on my grandfather's farm.  He grew cotton and, and corn.
Speaker 1: I didn't ask this about your mother's side and I should have.  Did your mother's [Mary Dirden Douglas] side own their own land?
Speaker 2: They, they owned their own land.  But remember at one point I told you they, they dammed the river up and made a lake.  Well all my mother's family's land is, is in the middle of the lake.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was--the land that they owned is now like--was a, I guess attached by public domain I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they got some compensation for it, but--
Speaker 2: They got some compensation, but the compensation was at the value of, of farmland, not resort land.  Now my father, because where my father's parents lived, they lived on twelve acres that was a hill.  They actually got to save the twelve acres that are, that's on the hill.  So my father still owns the twelve acres that's now resort property.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--is it, is it valuable now in terms of--because of some of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The lake.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And when did they build the lake?  I mean when did your parents have to get rid of that land?
Speaker 2: Well my grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden] had to get rid of the land in the late '60s [1960s].  They actually opened the damn probably about '75 [1975], '76 [1976], somewhere in that area.  Once they finished all the construction and all of that.  So it was in the mid-'70s [1970s] that they actually flooded the, the valley and built a lake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But when you were growing up, it was farm.
Speaker 2: When I was growing up it was farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 165764
Speaker 1: What did your, your father [Desso Douglas] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: You know my, my father enjoyed growing up.  He didn't enjoy farming, which, which is one of the reasons he left the farm and moved to Houston [Texas].  He didn't think it was any money in farming.  So--plus knowing my father and I tease him all the time, I, I think it was the, the hard work of the farm that, that, that caused him to, to wanna seek another way to make a living.
Speaker 1: What is--I don't know when he was--let's see, if he was born in the '20s [1920s] I guess he was a little boy I guess when they--when the Dust Bowl hit.
Speaker 2: Well see the Dust Bowl didn't hit Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that was north around Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: I know Oklahoma was hit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Kansas, you know.
Speaker 2: But it, it didn't hit east Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So they still had good farming going on.
Speaker 2: They had good farming.  My grandfather [Wiren Douglas] was a moonshiner also, so they, they, they made a, a pretty decent living.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But now did your father have a chance to, to finish school?
Speaker 2: He finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, in fact it was--I have eight brothers and sisters.  We all finished college, and it was really a lot was due to the fact that he never had a chance to go to college and always wanted to go.  And, and always told us he made a promise to himself that his kids were going to college.  Because his, his father talked him out of going to college.  He said the first year he was, he was ready to go to Prairie View [Normal and Industrial College, later Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] 'cause at that time that was the place for African Americans in, in Texas.  And his father talked him out of it two years in a row.  And he finally decided I might as well go ahead and get married.  So he got married and never went to college.  But it was--
Speaker 1: Did, did your father have to finish high school in another place, or, or did they consider eleventh grade--
Speaker 2: Eleventh grade was, was high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You, you have to remember I guess back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], most African American high schools didn't go to twelvth grade, especially in, in rural areas.
Speaker 1: Right, I've heard that and I've heard that people having to, in order to qualify for college, sometimes they'd have to be bused to another town to go to a--to finish the senior year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the eleventh, eleventh grade, was, was it.  He, he qualified to go to Prairie View after, after eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did he want to be?  Do you know if he wanted to be a teacher or a, or a--I don't know.
Speaker 2: You know we never even talked about what, what he really wanted.  What he really wanted to be.
Speaker 1: But he, but he wanted to go.
Speaker 2: He wanted to go to college.  He liked to talk, I know that.
Speaker 1: Was your father involved in--was, was he really involved in a lot of organizations in the black community?
Speaker 2: You mean when--once we moved to Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe I'm jumping the gun here.  But yeah, yeah.  When you say he liked to talk, I'm, I'm thinking of a man maybe who, who would be a Mason or be involved in the church, or involved (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He, he's extremely involved.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], politically, Boy Scouts.  I mean he was, he was extremely involved.  Once he moved to Houston.
Story_ID: 165765
Speaker 1: And is there a story about he [Douglas' father, Desso Douglas], how he and your mother [Mary Dirden Douglas] met in Onalaska [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father saw her, he liked her.  My father was kind of a player.  And he spotted my mother who because all my mother's brothers and sisters were, were grown, grown, out of the house and he just thought she was an attractive young lady and he liked her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how, how long was, was it before he--I guess they got--do you know what year they got married?
Speaker 2: I wanna say it was in '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1941, okay and, and how soon was it before they moved to, to Houston?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father, you think your father just wanted to get out of farming and to find--
Speaker 2: I know that, yeah.  Yeah, he, he--my father managed a farm for a guy who was the warden at Huntsville Prison.  And he just, he say he managed the farm for a couple of years and one day he was talking to the guy and he said, "Look, this is not what I wanna do and I'm not making enough money.  And I know I can do better than this."  So he said I'm--he and the guy had an agreement.  After the fall crops were in, they had an agreement he'd come to Houston [Texas], look for a job.  If he found a job, he wouldn't come back.  If he didn't find a job, he'd go back and, and manage the farm.  But he said he, he knew he could do better than managing a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he moves to Houston.  Did, did, did he have work when he moved to Houston?
Speaker 2: He didn't have work when he moved to Houston, but he found work soon after he got here.
Speaker 1: Did, did he stay with relatives or something before he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because my mother had already been in Houston for about nine months working.  And they both had relatives in Houston, both my mother and my father had relatives in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so what did your father wind up doing?
Speaker 2: He ended up as a steelworker, working for Armco Steel [later, AK Steel Holding].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did he do that for the rest of his life?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 165766
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Mary Dirden Douglas and Desso Douglas] personalities, their dispositions, how, how they walk, how they talk, what their talents were, I mean who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: My mother was a control freak.  My mother had to control everybody.  She was high-spirited, but real kind lady.  My father is very thoughtful, very low-key, very soft-spoken.  I just--we, we had a--the same personality.  I guess when, when I was young, talking to--actually one of my mother's older sisters.  And hearing her describe my father as a young man made me know that he and I had a lot of the same personalities, and a lot of the same characteristics because hearing her describe my father as a young man, was like hearing her describe me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what are some of the, of the things that your father--that you, you and your father share in terms of personality?
Speaker 2: My father, like I say he's a very thoughtful man.  He really studies people and really understands people.  He is really kind.  I mean very kind, very caring, very giving individual.  Very involved in the community.  Believes that, you know and, and one of the things my father used to always tell me was, "I understand you better than your mother."  Well I didn't know what he was talking about.  But as I grew older, I came to understand why he said I understand you better than, than your mother does because we are so much alike.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you share a lot of similar ways of thinking and, and I guess he could see that.
Speaker 2: Right.  Never--I've never seen my father angry.  I'm, I'm--I can't remember the last time I've been angry.  You know it just--life is too good to be angry.
Story_ID: 165767
Speaker 1: Now you have brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: I have eight brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you name 'em starting from the oldest and, you know, tell, tell us a little bit about 'em and you know put yourself in the order, bir--birth order too.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister [Icy Douglas Hardey], my oldest sister is probably the only one that really got off track educationally.  Extremely smart, excellent grades coming out of high school.  But she got married right out of high school.  Got married out of high school; did not go to college until later in life.  In fact, I guess she was married for about five years, got a divorce, moved back home.  And my father [Desso Douglas] said, "I don't mind you living here, but you gon' live in my house, you're going to college."  So, so she went to college, got a degree in pharmacy and, and became a pharmacist.  My next brother--
Speaker 1: Well this is interesting.  I--just to dwell on this for a second.  So the qualification for living there after you finished high school is that you go on to college.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He said you couldn't live there unless you're going to college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That, that's unusual.  A lot of parents don't say that.  They say go--you can't live here unless you have a job, you know.
Speaker 2: Well remember now my father from the time he lost his opportunity to go to college, was committed.  And I always tell people my father and I only had two conversations about education.  And the first one was the story that he always wanted to go to college and therefore he was gonna provide an opportunity for his kids to go to college. So that was, that was his desire was to see us all go to college.
Story_ID: 163948
Speaker 1: Now you were telling us about your siblings.  Now your older sister, what, what's her name, the first one?
Speaker 2: Icy [Douglas Hardey], I-C-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, Icy.  What a name, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She was named after an aunt.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Aunt Icy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well it's a cool name, everybody know that.  But okay.  There's a--is there any--no story behind that one?
Speaker 2: No story behind that.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.  All right so, and, and so she went on to be a pharmacist.
Speaker 2: She's a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you got a second--who's the next one?
Speaker 2: A brother, his name is Aubrey, A-U-B-R-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, Aubrey and what's his story?
Speaker 2: Aubrey, from the time we were--god probably ten, nine or ten, always wanted to be a surgeon.  In fact I, I, I joke with people.  One of his best friends died recently and I spoke at the funeral.  And the, the area we grew up in at the time was, was kind of rural, city rural.  But, but rural.  I, I told him about how many snakes and frogs Aubrey and Bobby [ph.] killed.  They, they, they started practicing as surgery when we were about ten years old.  They'd be operating on frogs and snakes.
Speaker 1: They use anesthesia?
Speaker 2: No they didn't even know what it was.  But, but he la--he later went on.  And he did become a surgeon, orthopedic surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where did he go to school?
Speaker 2: He went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay the next one, number three.
Speaker 2: Number three is me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: I, I went, I went to Texas Southern.  I, I remember earlier I told you my father [Desso Douglas] bought me a, a car when I, when I got out of high school because one of the things I, I did was--like my father, I was kind of independent.  And so I, I told my parents that I did not want them participating in my decision of where I went to school; that I would tell them when I had decided where I was gonna go.  And so I, I went in one day and talked to my father 'cause at--my parents really didn't know anything about college.  And in high school, most of the teachers that really I guess ran the high school, that were the better teachers, either went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] or Fisk.  And so that's where they wanted everybody to go.  So I went in and explained to my father, I said, "Look, I've got a plan.  I can go to college and you can buy me a car, and it'd be cheaper than me going to Fisk."  So he said, "What?"  I said, "I can go to college, you can buy me a car and it'd be cheaper than going to Fisk."  And he said well where is that?  And I said, "Texas Southern."  And he said, "All right."  So that was the deal we made.  I would come to Texas Southern.  I was already--I fell in love with Texas Southern when I was twelve years old.  The other thing was TSU had what at that time we call it three/three program.  You could do three years in undergrad school and then go to law school; you didn't have to get the degree.  So three years in undergrad school and then three years in law school.  So you could get a law degree in, in six years.  And so TSU had it.  I was committed to going to law school and so I came to Texas Southern.
Story_ID: 163949
Speaker 1: Who's number four?
Speaker 2: Number four is Ellis.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ellis, okay.  Now what did he do?
Speaker 2: Ellis was an industrial architect.  He was in public education.  He was a principal of a number of schools and he retired as athletic director for Houston Independent School District.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Who's number five?
Speaker 2: Micah, M-I-C-A-H, Micah.  Micah is--he's one that I could not convince.  I tried to get all my brothers and sisters to go to HBCUs [historically black college and universities].  Micah is one that he and I used to argue all the time about whether you're--it was better to go to a HBCU or go to traditionally white college.  He went to University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  I always tell people under the guise that if, if he was educated by the white man, he'd be able to do better.  And I, I remind him every day that I got him his first job.  But he was, he was a stockbroker.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Who's number six?
Speaker 2: Number six is Emma [Douglas Smith].  Emma went to Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and she's a nurse and owns her own home health care service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seven is Mary [Douglas Carroll].  And she's an educated principal of a elementary school and retired educator.
Speaker 1: And where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to Prairie View.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My two sisters are the only two that went to Prairie View.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who's eight?
Speaker 2: Eight is Larry.  He's a lawyer and he went to Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he get both, get both degrees there?
Speaker 2: He got both degrees at TSU.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay so that's eight, right?
Speaker 2: He was, he was one.  Larry and I fought over--I mean Micah and I fought over Larry.  Larry started at Rice [University, Houston, Texas] and I finally convinced him--well I, I convinced him before he got there, 'cause he was, he was one of the first African Americans to go to Rice.  I told him he wasn't gone like it and what it was gonna be and all of that.  So he went, he went to Rice, but later he found himself and came back to TSU.  And then my baby brother is Keith.  He's an engineer, and he went to the University of Texas [Austin, Texas].  I was out of the house and so I wasn't able to influence him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he went to the University of Texas.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right so that's eight, that's, okay that's, that's nine of you all altogether.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Story_ID: 163950
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood.  The earliest childhood memory I have, I was two or three.  And in fact my mother [Mary Dirden Douglas] claimed that I couldn't have remember--we got into a debate once about something.  And she said, "You don't remember back then."  But I told her about a situation that occurred and it had to do with a squirrel.  We were on the farm and it was just the two of us.  And when I told her the story about the squirrel, she remembered and so then she knew--and that's my earliest childhood memory was, was my mother and I trying to catch this squirrel.
Speaker 1: Well when you trying to--why, why were you trying to catch him?
Speaker 2: I was a little kid.  I wanted to catch the squirrel.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: We were in the--we were on a farm.
Speaker 1: Seems like a tough job.  I mean it seems like a, a daunting task.
Speaker 2: It was impossible, but, but at that age, I had no reason to believe that I couldn't catch the squirrel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Story_ID: 163951
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time, or did you move around in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Okay, now we, we, we moved to Houston when I was three.  We moved in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas].  And stayed there until I was nine.  And then we moved to a area of the city called Kashmere Gardens [Houston, Texas] and lived--and that's where my father [Desso Douglas] still lives.
Speaker 1: So it's called--
Speaker 2: Kashmere Gardens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what ward is that in Houston?
Speaker 2: It's not in a ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's outside of the, the wards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were out--actually outside of the city.
Speaker 2: Right.  In fact when we moved out there, everybody used to tease me in elementary school and said I lived in the country 'cause it was--even though it's right inside the loop now, at that time, it was kind of rural.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did people who lived out there go to high school in, in Houston?
Speaker 2: People who lived out there went to high school in Houston, but they were white.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I mean but you--okay, so you were out in a ru--in a white community basically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so all right, so the schools are segregated then, right?
Speaker 2: The schools, the schools are segregated then.  But I, even though we lived out there, I, I went to school in Fifth Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I, I continued to go to school in Fifth Ward.  There were no, there were no schools in that area period.  Well let me take it back.  There were no high schools in that area.  There was a white elementary school in the area.
Speaker 1: Now how, how did you get to school?
Speaker 2: On the bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first year we rode the bus, which took all day.  And then after that my mother [Mary Dirden Douglas] found a person who had a, I guess a station wagon that would pick kids up and take them into the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they made the round to, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Ensure the, the kids, there were other black kids in Kashmere Gardens, I take it too.
Speaker 2: Not at that time.
Speaker 1: So you were the only ones.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so now this is unusual.  You know we hardly ever have a situation like this where you have like black family in a white community during segregation.
Speaker 2: Well you ever heard of blockbusting?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was it a--was that the strategy?  It was a part of a strategy?
Speaker 2: No.  My, my mother just saw a house and liked it.  And my father bought it.  You know I've asked him, I say why you sitting there with--they didn't even, they didn't even think about it.
Speaker 1: So nobody tried to stop them, none of the white neighbors?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean the--not to say that every now and then there were not signs, but nobody did anything, nobody tried to stop anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would there be like angry notes or something, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Nobody would, nobody would--
Speaker 2: No.  And in, and in fact because there were white kids, we all played together and there were never any racial problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were the only black family out there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 163952
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know I, I, I really, truly enjoyed growing up.  I really enjoyed when I lived in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas].  But you know it was, it was fun.  I loved going to school.  I really enjoyed my friends.  I truly enjoyed my friends.  In fact until I was in the fifth grade, I thought the reason you went to school was to have fun with your friends.  I didn't know, I didn't know I was supposed to be studying and learning.  Not to say that I didn't, but I thought the real reason for going to school was, was to have fun with your friends.  I was a [Boy] Scout.  My father [Desso Douglas] was involved with the scouts, the Boy Scouts and got us involved with the scouts.  I, I loved the Boy Scouts.  I loved camping, and so I spent a lot of time at, at camp.  I, I truly enjoyed growing up.  I, I tried to be an athlete and I played basketball and football.  You know all I can say is life was, life was good.
Story_ID: 163953
Speaker 1: I was not ignorant of race.  The only real racial I guess at that point in time, the only real racial conflict I had was in education.  And it, it, it's one of the reasons I was committed to the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  After 1954, Brown [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954] decision, Houston [Texas] was probably the last major city to integrate its public schools.  And it--Houston didn't, didn't really integrate until the very late '60s [1960s].  I guess I dealt with race 'cause I'm, I'm--every day I'm, I'm listening to the news.  And I'm reading the newspaper, and the fathers of HISD [Houston Independent School District] was saying, "Well the reason we won't integrate is African American kids can't compete academically with white kids."  Well I'm pissed off.  And I really want a chance to prove that I'm as smart as the white kids 'cause I'm playing with 'em every day and I know that some of 'em dumber than I am.  But--so by the time I graduate from high school, I, I, I had made a commitment to myself that I was gonna go to an HBCU because I didn't want a white teacher being able to take credit for my success.  I knew I was gonna be successful, and I didn't want a white person taking credit for my success.  So I said I never wanted anybody white to teach me anything.
Story_ID: 163954
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  What, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: Atherton Elementary School [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Atchison?
Speaker 2: Atherton, A-T-H-E-R-T-O-E-N [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Atherton Elementary School, is in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] still, still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were there any special teachers or, or mentors there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably the teacher that turned my life around name was Mrs. Sledge [ph.].  She was a fifth grade teacher.  Ms. Sledge was kind of teacher that when you arrived at Atherton in kindergarten, every night when you said your prayers, you say God when I get to the fifth grade, please don't let me be in Ms. Sledge class.  So I prayed for four years not to be in Ms. Sledge class.
Speaker 1: She was a tough teacher.  She had a reputation of being a tough--
Speaker 2: God, she was tough and you know I didn't live far from school.  So sometimes we'd be playing at a--around the school at, you know, four or five o'clock in the evening and you could see her in class with students.  She still had students in that she kept after school.  So every--nobody wanted to be in Ms., Ms. Sledge's class.  But I was always--and, and in the fourth grade I outsmarted myself.  We had--the fourth grade teacher said, "Look, there are twenty-five of you, all right.  Twenty-two of you are gonna go to Ms. Pendleton,"--now that was the fifth grade teacher that, god everybody wanted to go to Ms. Pendleton [ph.]--"and three of you are gonna have to go to Ms. Sledge."  So she said, "Line up so I can count you off."  So everybody start fighting to get in the front of the line.  So I said to a cousin of mine, and we had been in the same room from kindergarten, I said to Cornelius [ph.] and Darryl [ph.], Darryl was my best friend.  I said, "Look at those fools fighting to get to the front of the line.  She's gonna start counting from the back.  So I'm gone go to the back of the line."  So the three--the two of them went to the back of the line.  So the three of us went to the back of the line.  Well she wasn't as smart as I was, 'cause she started from the front.  So, so we end up in Ms. Sledge class.  It turned out to be great for me because it turned out Ms. Sledge was not mean.  She was extremely, extremely, extremely demanding.  Scared the hell out of me.  Made me start to study.  And made me understand what I was in--what school was all about.  So much so that I mean when, when--at the end of the fifth grade, they wanted to skip me to the seventh, but my father [Desso Douglas] said no.  Which I thank him for that every day.
Story_ID: 163955
Speaker 1: So you were ten in '54 [1954], the year--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Of Brown [v. Board of Education, 1954] decision.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Were you aware of that at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes because one of the things that happened was that the teachers all talked about it.  I mean we had been through all--we had been through Jackie Robinson and the [Brooklyn] Dodgers and so everybody, everybody was into this whole race thing.  And remember the year before, I'm living in--I moved to a white neighborhood.  So I, I know what rice, what race is all about.  I had never really thought about it living in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], but now I know what it's all about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now did you have a middle school?
Speaker 2: We didn't have--back then it was junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started to junior high at E. O. Smith [Smith Education Center, Houston, Texas], which is in Fifth Ward.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we've heard of that one before too.  Hadn't heard of Atherton [Elementary School, Houston, Texas], but E. O. Smith, yeah.  So once again, was it, was there any special teachers or experiences at E. O. Smith?
Speaker 2: Experience, yes maybe it was the, was the--they, they took I guess the--I don't know how they picked what they considered the top twenty students coming into E. O. Smith and they put us all in, in one class.  Which was really nice; it was really challenging.  It was a lot of fun.  I mean we, we had some of the best teachers in the school.  We had a real rigorous curriculum.  It was just a wonderful learning environment.
Story_ID: 163956
Speaker 1: What were you inclined to--or what did you gravitate towards in those days?  Was it mathematics?  'Cause I know you subject--subsequently majored in math in college [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], but did--were you a mathematics person in, in middle school?
Speaker 2: I, I was.  I was always a math person from, from kinder--from the first day I, I picked up something.  I, I, I just, I took to math.  In fact in the third grade, and this is gonna really sound funny, my first teaching experience was in the third grade because when we got to arithmetic, the teacher would let me take over the class.  When, when we got to arithmetic.  So I--math was, was it for me.  My first disappointment came in the fourth grade.  And, and it had to do with, with, with math.  We, we were going through--we were doing complex fractions.  And one of the things that used to anger me more in, in elementary school than, than, than in others, was that I didn't think the teachers paid as much attention to math as I, as I thought they should have.  But my fourth grade teacher--one student started complaining about complex fractions.  So my fourth grade teacher goes to the board and she say, "I don't know why you complaining about, you know, wait until you get to high school and you have to do algebra."  So she went and put some simple algebraic equation on the board and solved it.  So Darryl [ph.], my best friend and I, I mean we're blown away 'cause this the first time we ever heard of algebra.  And the only thing we could discern was it had something to do with alphabets and numbers.  And so we made up our algebra.  We assigned a value to each alphabet, A was one, B was two, C was three.  So we spent about two weeks writing our equations and solving them.  And so after a couple of weeks we say we're doing something wrong 'cause you know, Ms. Walker [ph.] said this is difficult and what we're doing is not difficult.  So one evening after school we went by to see her and we showed her what we'd been doing.  And said, "You know, we, we understand this is--this has to be wrong.  But tell us what this algebra is.  We wanna know more about it."  And she said, "You all are too young.  Your mind can't comprehend it."  And she blew us off.  And, and that was--it took--I was a freshman in college before I really understood why our teacher would do something like that.
Speaker 1: That doesn't sound--yeah.  So this is a, this a black teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all my teachers black 'cause we all in segregated schools.  But when I got to college, one of the things I did was I tutored elementary education majors and then I understood why Ms. Walker blew us off.
Speaker 1: Well what, what's the reason?
Speaker 2: They don't know math.  Elementary teachers don't know math.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't--
Speaker 2: She didn't know, she didn't know algebra.
Speaker 1: I wasn't sure what you were getting at.  Yeah that makes sense.  So she didn't know either.
Speaker 2: She didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She didn't.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: See I tell people they wonder why American kids don't like science.  If you go to--elementary teachers don't like math and science.  That's, that's where this, this whole--it's hard comes from.  It's you, you get it from the time you start school.  This is hard, this is hard.  So the, the elementary teachers don't like it.  Until we start training elementary teachers who really understand and appreciate math and science, we're gonna continue to have a cadre of students who hate math and science.
Story_ID: 163957
Speaker 1: Now where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.  I went to Kashmere Gardens Junior/Senior High School [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Now this is in--this is a white high school, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's not.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Kashmere Gardens [Houston, Texas], it, it had changed, did it change by then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right now interesting dynamic.  That's why it's a junior/senior high school.  The, the high school which was probably at the time the best physical facility in the city when it opened, because they--it was conceived and constructed to be a white school.  But they kind of know and can tell that by the time the school opens, the demographics have started to change.  And they don't wanna put a white high school in an area that's gonna become more and more African American.  But they don't have enough kids for African American high school.  So they make it a junior/senior high school.  So it goes now from the seventh through the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you were there, it was going from the--
Speaker 2: Seventh through the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so you would have gone if you were going to school in the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], you would have gone to a what?
Speaker 2: Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Phillis Wheatley, okay.
Speaker 2: Wheatley.  So what they did is they got the African Americans from Kashmere Gardens High School [Houston, Texas], Kashmere Gardens community and Trinity Garden [Houston, Texas].  Trinity Garden, which is adjacent to Kashmere Gardens, is an African American community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and so that those two communities feed--all right Kashmere Gardens High School no longer exists.
Speaker 1: But the white people form Kashmere Gardens went to--where, where did they go to high school?
Speaker 2: At the time they were going to a high school called Jeff Davis, Jefferson Davis High School [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have to chuckle 'cause I, you know when you're not from the South, you don't hear those names, you know, as honorific titles, Jefferson Davis.  But this is a--yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well we have a Jefferson Davis and a Robert E. Lee [High School Houston, Texas] in Houston, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so now did you have black teachers at Kashmere Gardens High School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all, all the black te--all the teachers at the segregated schools are all black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So all, all, all of my, all of my teachers were black.
Story_ID: 163958
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about--before we get into high school deep, I didn't ask you about church.  Was, was church a big--was that important growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Extremely, extremely important.  My father [Desso Douglas] was--you had to go to church.  I mean it wasn't--that, that, that wasn't even, even debatable.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the family church and did--was it--
Speaker 2: It, it's called New Canaan Baptist Church [Houston, Texas].  My father still goes there every Sunday.  He--in fact I tease him.  Only a year ago did he turn over the key.  He had--in fact we always tease my father 'cause he hired all the ministers for, for the church.  But he--a friend of his started the church and my father was, he was a, a very, very religious and in fact growing up I was extremely religious.  My, my grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden] and my minister wanted me to be a minister.  But as I explained to them, because I, I would teach Sunday school and they would say well you have a calling.  And I said, "No.  I can, I can read, I can understand and I can explain.  That doesn't mean that God has called me to, to the min--to the ministry."  But my, my father made sure that, that we all grew up in the church.
Story_ID: 163959
Speaker 1: Now did you have to work when you were--did you deliver papers or anything like that when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  I did work, I, I, I guess I did a couple of things.  I think the, the first job I remember I was a Boy Scout.  And Darryl [ph.] and I would--we'd walk home from Boy Scout meeting and we passed this old I guess second hand store.
Speaker 1: Well was the meeting in the church?
Speaker 2: The meeting was at, at a church.
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't your home church.
Speaker 2: It wasn't my home church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a troop that my father [Desso Douglas] liked and so it was at another church and so he put us in this troop, which turned out to be a really good troop.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You're walking home from Boy Scouts.
Speaker 2: We're walking home from a Boy Scout meeting.  So my first real job, and we walked past this second hand store.  And I noticed that there were a lot of toys and other items that never moved.  So I, I went in and talked to the owner and he explained that they couldn't move some items because you know he might have four wagons, one might have a wheel missing and all of this.  And I say well if, if you give me a dollar for each item I repair, so I started cannibalizing items and, and getting them to work.  So that was my first job was, was fixing these toys so that this guy could sell 'em.
Speaker 1: You took the init--the initiative and made your own job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's my ob-observation.
Speaker 2: The second was, was a real learning experience.  I, I was an adult before I realized I got taken advantage of.  I was a stock boy in the store and I would hang around the butcher shop.  I was about thirteen or fourteen years old.  I would hang around the butcher shop.  So the butcher said, "You wanna learn how to cut meat? " So I said, "Yeah."  So he taught me how to cut meat.  And so I spent most of my time in the store cutting meat.  When I became an adult--I mean I enjoyed it 'cause I, I really loved learning how to--'cause back then you got a, a half a cow.  And so you, you really learned how to cut a cow up.  But then I--when I became an adult, I, I realized the owner was paying me stock boy wages to be a butcher (laughter).  But, so those, those--
Speaker 1: That's a skilled job, that's a skilled job.
Speaker 2: Right.  Those, those are two jobs I, I had growing up.
Story_ID: 163960
Speaker 1: There's a couple of stories you told when we came in that we didn't record.  And one was about--and they're both about race relations in Texas, basically.  And you told one about going to the, the doctors with your grandmother [Annie Wyatt Dirden].
Speaker 2: Yes, I was about twelve, twelve years old.  I was in Onalaska [Texas] visiting with my grandparents.  And so one day my grandmother asked if I wanted to go to the doctor with her.  And I said yes.  Livingston [Texas], which is a small town about thirteen, fourteen miles away, we drive to the doctor.  We get there, and there's a sign on the front of the doctor's office with a finger pointing to the back that say colored.  And so I said to my grandmother, "I don't sit in the back room."  So my grandmother went to the colored waiting room.  I went to the white waiting room.  And no one said anything.  But on the way home, she said, "I can't bring you back to town anymore."  And I said, "what?"  And she said, "Look, they hang little boys here.  And your parents [Mary Dirden Douglas and Desso Douglas] would never forgive me if I let these white people kill you."  She said, "This is not Houston [Texas] and you can't act the same way you do in Houston in this part of Texas."  So my grandmother never took me to Livingston again.
Story_ID: 163961
Speaker 1: There's another story you told.  I'm trying to remember the context of this one.
Speaker 2: This one is about--
Speaker 1: Something about the bus.
Speaker 2: About being on the bus.  I was about eight years old.  I'd been to a scouting event in downtown Houston [Texas].  I got on the bus downtown and sat right behind the driver.  I wrote an essay about this.  Actually, I wrote the essay--I wanna say it was in '78 [1978].  It was the day that the Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] decision, that's the reverse discrimination, one of the Syracuse [New York] newspapers asked me to write something about my feeling about Bakke.  And immediately I was drawn back to my first experience, known experience with racism.  And I sat behind the bus--now no one said anything to me, but everybody stared at me.  I mean all these white people were staring at me like I had done something.  I didn't know why they were staring at me.  It was sometime later that I discovered that I was not supposed to be sitting in the seat behind the driver.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when, when you were growing up, did you know about the Sweatt versus Painter [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] case?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't know about Sweatt versus Painter until I went to law school (laughter).
Story_ID: 163962
Speaker 1: Now at Kashmere High School [Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas], you said this is a black high school.
Speaker 2: This is a black high school.
Speaker 1: In a white neighborhood, right?  And so did that create any tension?  You know black people going to school in a--where it's designated as a white--
Speaker 2: No, because remember now the neighborhood has started to change.  And so more black people are moving into, into Kashmere Gardens [Houston, Texas].  But you--Kashmere Gardens is surrounded by black neighborhoods.  You got Trinity Gardens, then you have another to the east called Liberty Garden.  So it's kind of--Kashmere's kind of surrounded by black neighbors.  But no it didn't create-Houston [Texas] was kind of a strange segregated city.  There were not a lot of racial conflict.  I won't say that there was not racial tension, but there were not a lot of physical conflict growing up in Houston as far as race relations were concerned.  Didn't go to school.  I guess by the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s], had started integrating white neighborhoods.  Houston is, has--god, it's, it's hard to describe Houston now.  Because sometimes when, when people are here and, and they'll say that's a black neighborhood, and I'll say, "Well twenty years ago that was all white."  So I mean Houston has been one of those, those kind of strange kind of cities where there hasn't been a lot of racial conflict.  There's been racial tension, but there hasn't been a lot of racial conflict.
Story_ID: 163963
Speaker 1: What was your experience like at Kashmere Gardens [sic, Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas]?  Now you're, you're involved--your, your focused on mathematics, I guess, right.  Through, throughout high school?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I'm--I don't know if I would say focus on mathematics.  I'm excellent in mathematics.  That, that's what I'm good at, that's what everybody thinks I am.  That's what all my teachers think I ought to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I focused on becoming a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you focused on becoming a lawyer then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you, you know, get the, the, the idea that you wanted to be a lawyer?
Speaker 2: When people really ask me, I tell 'em it was out of ignorance.  I, I arrived at law as a profession out of ignorance.  And when I was in the seventh grade, up until then I, I wanted to be a philosopher.
Speaker 1: Now what, what prompted that?
Speaker 2: Because I like to think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did you know--I mean who--I mean did you have any you know, models?
Speaker 2: Socrates.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Aristotle, Plato.
Speaker 1: So you had 'em in school and you--
Speaker 2: That's what I wanted to be.  In fact it was really funny.  I, I said that one day in class and one of my student's hand went up and he said, "We have a lot in common."  He said, "I majored in philosophy."  And I said, "No.  I didn't say I wanted to study other people's philosophy."  I said, "I wanted to be a philosopher."  I loved [Henry David] Thoreau.  I mean I was--I, I, I loved people who thought.  And so that was--I wanted to be in.  But in the seventh grade I did a paper on the great philosophers of the world.  And discovered that most of 'em didn't live pleasant lives 'cause people thought they were crazy.  Decided I didn't want people to think I was crazy.  And so I started looking around for another profession that I thought had a lot of thought and analytical process to it, and arrived at law.  And so that's when I decided I wanted to be a lawyer, I was twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you know any of the black lawyers in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Didn't know a black lawyer, didn't meet a black lawyer until I was in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who, who was that?  Who was the first one?
Speaker 2: The first one was Henry [E.] Doyle.  And it's really funny because Henry Doyle turns out he was the first graduate of Texas Southern University School of Law [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].  But Henry Doyle was the first lawyer I met in the ninth grade.  We had a career day and he came and talked to the students.  The students--it was like three of us who said we wanted to be lawyers.  All my teachers thought I was crazy.  At first they thought I was kidding, and then they thought I was crazy because they could not understand why someone with the scientific mind that I had, would want to be a lawyer.  Especially in the segregated South.  And everybody told me that I would not make a living as a lawyer in the South.  So everybody tried to talk me out of being a lawyer, but I was really excellent in math, and I love math.  I mean I loved it as an academic discipline.
Speaker 1: Now what did Henry Doyle say about the law when he spoke to you--your, your group of three students?
Speaker 2: Henry Doyle loved the law.  He was the first graduate of the law school.  In fact, the story is that they were almost ready to give up on creating the law school until Henry Doyle walked in at the last minute about two or three days before they said they was gonna give up the whole--and say I wanna go to law school.  Now I later found out Henry Doyle was forty years old [sic, thirty-seven years old], he was a math teacher who decided he wanted to go to law school.  But he later went on not only to become the graduate, first graduate of law school, but he later went on to become a leading jurist.  He was a member of one of the appellate courts, the court of appeals here in Texas and, and really made a reputation for himself as a lawyer.
Speaker 1: So he became a judge.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Appellate court judge.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 163964
Speaker 1: So you know I was, I was--I, I was probably not the kind of student that most teachers wanted to have.  But I did well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In, in, in, in school.  And it, it's really funny.  I started to say something to my son last night because on the way home, he wanted to pick up a poster board.  He said, "I gotta make this poster board and I don't know--I can't, I can't see any merit in doing it, but this is what the teacher said."  So when he finished it and I looked at it and I said, "Is this what you're supposed to do?"  And he said, "Yeah."  Now I almost told him if--when I was in high school [Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas] and the teacher had asked me to do it, I wouldn't have done it.
Speaker 2: Why not?
Speaker 1: Because when I looked at it, I'm looking at it and I'm going that was a waste of time.  And I, and, and so I was the kind of student who would say to the teachers there's no--there's, there's no learning experience in this.  I mean I'm not gone learn anything by doing this, so I'm not gonna do it.  So you know you give me whatever grade you wanna give me, but I'm not wasting my time on some busy work.
Speaker 2: How do you, how do you account for that attitude as a youth?
Speaker 1: How do you want?
Speaker 2: Account for that kind of attitude as a youth, you know.  Did--I mean did you--I mean did you get in trouble for that?
Speaker 1: In trouble with whom?
Speaker 2: For--the teachers if they assign you something and you say well I--what's the learning experience in that?  Or you know, I'm not gon' do it.  I mean did you ever get in trouble for saying that?
Speaker 1: I got my grades reduced.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean that's what, what else, what else could they do?  I mean I had a lot of teachers--I was, I was the student that teachers loved to hate because they knew at the end of the day, I was gonna make the high score on all the exams.
Story_ID: 163965
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in like student government?
Speaker 2: I was involved in the student government.  I was a, I was a student athlete.  I was, I was involved in everything [at Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: Football and basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you a star or were you--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a star.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a pretty decent basketball player.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so when--I guess when, when--well you're in school, you're in high school from what, 19--so you, you come out in 1962, right?
Speaker 2: Two, 1962.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're there from '58 [1958] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Well I said back then high school was ninth, I mean tenth through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay, tenth through twelfth, okay.  So this is '59 [1959] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 163966
Speaker 1: So when you're in high school [Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas], John Kennedy is elected president, you know the "New Frontier" and all that is going on.
Speaker 2: Right, we're going to the moon.  Well, we're not going to the moon, but I mean it's the beginning of Sputnik and, and all of that.
Speaker 1: Cuban Missile Crisis was there when you were--
Speaker 2: And that's why everybody is, is, is shocked that I'm not really into the math thing 'cause science is really big when I got out of high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean science is, is really big and, and I'm good at it.  But it's not what I wanna do with my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and it really starts to escalate around here [Houston, Texas] when [Lyndon B.] Johnson becomes the president in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: It really starts escalate when Johnson becomes President in, in '63 [1963] and we opened the [Lyndon B.] Johnson Space Center.  We opened NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] out here and we really you know, Kennedy makes, Kennedy makes his--he makes his famous speech here in Houston about us getting to the moon before the end of the decade.  So now everything is, is blowing up in, in science and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have any exposure to computers in high school?
Speaker 2: No.  And in fact it was really funny.  I got my first exposure to computers in my junior year.  The summer before my junior year I was looking for a job and everybody was saying we don't have anything for, for pure mathematicians, but if you had anything, any knowledge or any experience in computers, we could place you tomorrow.  Well the amazing thing is and most people don't realize, the computer started as a, as a business tool.  International Business Machine, IBM.  And so all the computer courses were in the School of Business [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  But when I came back in the fall, I started taking classes in the school of business in computers.  So I took a lot of computer classes, even though my major was in, in math.
Story_ID: 163967
Speaker 1: You've already kind of explained how you chose Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas], right?  And you were saying that you chose Texas Southern because you could get a car and go to school (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I was already, I was already in love with TSU.  I fell in love with TSU when I was twelve years old.  And in, in high school I came to a lot of programs here at, at TSU.  I spent a couple of summers here at TSU in programs.
Speaker 1: Upward Bound or something or that kind of a thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it wasn't Upward Bound, but it was a federally funded program where we came over and took math and writing and logic and other courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well this is, yeah, so you--so, so it's not hard to make this decision.  It's a school you're familiar with, you like the school and you--
Speaker 2: It, it--I like the school.  The only hard thing was you know, all my advisors and teachers tried to talk me out of coming over here.
Speaker 1: Now why?  Now this is, this is Houston's [Texas] black college.
Speaker 2: This is Houston's black college because they told me I was too good of a student to come over here.  They, they wanted me to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or some, some other place.  I always tell students now when I recruit that I was smarter than my advisors.
Story_ID: 163968
Speaker 1: Now before we leave high school, were there any special teachers or mentors in high school, at Kashmere [Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My math teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my favorite teacher was, was, was my math teacher.  She and I had a, had a special relationship.  I was, I was very active as a student.  I was a non-conformist as a student.  I always had people--I, I, I organized and led the first strike in my high school.  I organized and led the first strike here at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  So I was always trying to make people do things right.
Speaker 1: What you strike about in high school?
Speaker 2: I--it's, it's embarrassing to tell people what, what we struck about.  And it, it's, it's a funny story.  We had--I probably had the--one of the best principals in the world.  Name was Ira B. Bryant, Dr. Ira B. Bryant.  And in fact in a book they said if, if he had--they tried to get him to come to Texas Southern [University] when, when the state took it over.  And the author of the said if he had come over here, TSU would have been, would have had a much better start.  But he was, he was really a good administrator.  But he was very dictatorial.  He was extremely.  And so he and I would, we would always have these conflicts.  But what the strike was and the reason I, I hate to say it, the, the strike was--it came about because one morning myself and three of my friends were talking and another friend came in.  And there's another high school in, in Houston [Texas] called [Booker T.] Washington [High School].  And they had attempted a strike, a cafeteria strike and it had failed.  So Gladys [ph.] came in and she said, "You all hear about the attempted strike at Washington?"  And so we said yes.  And she said, "You know what happened?"  I said, "Well they don't, they don't know how to plan a strike."  And she said, "And I guess you do."  And I said, "Yeah, we, we could plan a strike."  And she said, "Oh, you think you could plan a strike?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well why don't you?"  I said, "All right, we'll plan a strike."  And so that's--we, we, we had a strike just to prove that we could have a strike.
Speaker 1: Okay so there was no issue really that you had.
Speaker 2: It was no, it was no issue.
Story_ID: 163969
Speaker 1: The thing that made it bad was it came two weeks--I'm a senior [at Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas].  So two weeks prior to that, we had a senior meeting.  And the senior class wanted to have a picnic.  They wanted to have a picnic down in Galveston [Texas].  And so they put together all--we put together all the plans and at the last minute, somebody said, "Well we have to get approval from Dr. [Ira B.] Bryant."  And I'm like, "We going on a Saturday.  I don't need approval from Dr. Bryant to do anything on Saturday."  So we put it to a vote.  And it's everything to one.  I'm the only one that voted not to go and seek permission from the principal.  So now the class decide we gotta get permission from the principal.  All my life, even in elementary school, I always had good relationships with teachers and administrators.  So I'm the one who's never afraid to talk to anybody.  So then the class decide even though I don't think we ought to get permission, I'm the person who ought to go talk to the principal and request permission.  So I do and he responds like I know he's gonna respond, he says no.  All right well two weeks later we had this successful cafeteria strike, but we have no demands.  So he decides that the reason for the strike is he had denied us permission to have a senior picnic at the beach.  So as consequence of that, he decides during the commencement, we can't walk across the stage and shake his hands.  He sends our diplomas to our homeroom teachers.  He told us we were the worst class to ever graduate from the high school.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay, so that made for a strange graduation I guess, right.  No diploma--
Speaker 1: No we had, we had fun.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, we, we, we--I should say we had fun, everybody had fun.  I was probably the only sad one at commencement, and it was really kind of a strange story.  Because everybody asked me why are you so sad?
Speaker 2: So did, did, did you feel kind of guilty for having a, a strike with no reason?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I, I explained to them I, I was sad because I realized that most of them I would never see again in my life.  And these were people that I had grown up with.
Story_ID: 163970
Speaker 1: All right so did you, did you--well were you to achieve--receive any special honors at graduation [from Kashmere Junior/Senior High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Just I, I laugh because that's a, that's a funny story.  On the day that they announced honors and we're walking home from school, one of the guys on the football team says to me, he said, "You know there's another guy in the class named James Douglas."  And I said, "No."  And he said, "Yes there is."  I said, "No, it's not."  He said, "It is."  I said, "Fool, don't you think if there was somebody else in the class with my name, I wouldn't know about it?"  He said, "Nut there is."  I said, "Why do you think there's somebody else in the class named James Douglas?"  He said, "Well this morning when they were announcing honors and all that, they kept calling some guy named James Douglas."  So I said, "That was me."  And he said, "You.  You mean you smart?"  And I said--but if it was me, no I mean I, I, you know I was all right.
Speaker 1: All right it just wasn't apparent to everybody.
Speaker 2: No 'cause I'm, I'm, I'm, you know I, I believe life ought to be fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well we'll just pause here.
Speaker 2: So no, we, we--you know high school is--I had an, I had an interesting debate with a, with a, with a teacher who was, who was very good, but I did not like her teaching methodology in, in high school.  And, and we probably fought my, my whole senior year because I didn't like, I didn't like her, her approach to teaching.  She was good for me, and, and probably the students who were in the top of the class.  But she was not good for the whole class.
Story_ID: 159853
Speaker 1: All right so at, at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas].  So who was your advisor in the math department?  Or, or who was the major you know, pro--professor there in the math department?  Did, did you have a good rela--relationship with, with him?
Speaker 2: I had a, I had a good relationship with, with everyone.  I, I, I went through undergrad without an advisor.  Not to say that I didn't have an assigned advisor.  I never, I never went to see my assigned advisor.  I advised myself when I was in, in undergrad school.  My favorite undergrad teacher was a guy named Dr. Llaryon Clarkson.  A mathematician, a unbelievable teacher, I mean unbelievable teacher.  Brilliant guy.
Story_ID: 159854
Speaker 1: When you were like a sophomore [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] I guess, 1963 was like a big year in, in the country with the March on Washington that summer [August, 1963] and then the assassination of [President] John F. Kennedy, bombing of the church in Birmingham [Alabama].  There's just so much going on in '63 [1963].  Were you involved in any Civil Rights [Movement] activities?
Speaker 2: Only as it related to I think picketing the movie theater.  'Cause at that time we'd already integrated the lunch counters, this was the movie theater.  But most of our involvement at that time under the direction of a guy named [HM Reverend] Bill Lawson, Reverend Lawson, was really trying to get Houston Independent School District to integrate.  So it was more about picketing the schools and trying to force Houston Independent School to integrate than, than anything else because everything else in Houston [Texas] basically was, was no, no problem.  Houston integrated.  Houston was one of those cities be--Houston wanted to be major league.  When I say major league, Houston wanted a professional baseball team and wanted a professional football team.  Houston wanted to be a major player.  One of the things they understood and it was made clear to them, was that if they did not have integrated accommodations, we would not have a major league team.  And so Houston--there would, there would--we didn't have all the, the, the riots and, and all of the physical conflict that they had in other parts of the country, segregated South.  So Houston just integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Everything but the schools.
Story_ID: 159855
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to do any foreign travel in school or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was at, at--my, my, my involvement was, was really trying to make TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] right.  I was real active as a student and in student government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you an officer in student government?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was president of the sophomore class.  And then in the spring of my sophomore year I got elected student government president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're student government president, and so now was there any kind of a--this is kind of early for that, though.  For black students organization and organizing, you know--
Speaker 2: No, that was, that was, that was--that didn't come until late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.  So what were some of the issues of student government when you were president?
Speaker 2: I think the, the major--there were a couple of issues.  One was--the biggest one I believe was that the students thought the university was too paternalistic.  And had too many rules and regulations and treated us like we were in high school.  And we wanted, we wanted, we wanted ore, more freedom.  I remember meeting with Dr. Navy [ph.] and he was trying to explain to me why freshman women had to be in the dormitory by six o'clock.
Speaker 1: Now this seems to someone today to even hear that, it just sounds bizarre.  But, but--
Speaker 2: And me explain to him that, you know, I, I'm in, I'm in Austin [Texas] frequently.  And in Austin, freshman women don't have curfew.
Speaker 1: Yeah these, these are the women at University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: White university.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In a state university.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is a time, I, I guess it would be fair to say when you look back at that time, the white state universities and other universities were liberalizing their policies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were liberalizing their policy and be--believe it or not because the South had been segregated and most of the faculty here and administrators here had gotten their degrees from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Iowa and all that.  And, and I talked to them about what it was like in their experience.  And their experience was nothing like here.  And, and I'm saying to them, "Why if you explain to me when you were at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], when you were at Yale and when you were at Harvard, this is the way student life was there.  Then why you wanna be so paternalistic with us?"
Story_ID: 159856
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a--so the black colleges [HBCUs, historically black colleges and universities] I guess a historian might say that they were following the model of training schools and that sort of thing, of the old--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, going back to the Booker T. Washington days.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Thomas Jesse Jones and how he set up Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and some of the other colonial universities in Africa and other places where the strict, you know, acculturation to white society meant that the, the rules had to be so tight--
Speaker 2: I remember in the, in the late '70s [1970s], I, I delivered commencement address [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  And so I opened my speech by saying when I got off the telephone with my secretary--I mean with Dr. [Granville M.] Sawyer, I went into my secretary's office and she asked me, "What's wrong?"  And I said, "That was the president of Texas Southern University and he asked me if I would be the commencement speaker."  And she said, "Why are they--why is that so perplexing to you?"  And I said, "I can't believe that anybody's still there that was there when I was a student, that would actually give me a microphone."  So, so after, after commencement, the provost came up to me.  His name was Robert Terry, and he said, "Jim, you, you probably don't remember me."  And I said, "Yeah, Dr. Terry, you were head of the biology department when I was a student.  But I didn't like biology.  So when I finished freshman biology, I never went back any further."  So he said, "I remember you."  And then he start recounting some of the things that I did when I was a student.  And in fact, the, the one speech that I made that really probably angered people more than anything else, it turned out he was sitting on the stage when I made the speech.  So he, he remembered the speech.  And he said, he said, "You probably don't know why we did the things to you that we did."  And I said, "You're right, I don't know."  And he said, "You will probably find this hard to believe, but you were the first student that really questioned us as an administration, and we didn't know how to deal with you."
Story_ID: 159857
Speaker 1: Now the, the speech he was talking about is--I chastised the administration [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  And so a couple of days later, one of my favorite faculty members called me in and, and he, he said that the administration had asked him to talk to me because they were disturbed by my comments and they wanted me to retract them.  And I responded, "They're disturbed because they believe what I said is wrong or they don't like it?"  And he said, "What difference does it make?"  And I said, "Well if they think I'm wrong, I'm willing to discuss it.  But if they don't--if it's just that they don't like it, then no."  And so he said, "Well Jim you know these people can do things for you."  And I said, "If they are that small-minded, I don't want them to do anything for me."  And so I refused to, to retract it.  One of the things they did, I--at, at one point when [Lyndon B.] Johnson was president, Johnson invited thirty student leaders to meet with him.  And I happened to be one of them.  The university refused to let me go.  And told the--asked the vice president to go, who was my roommate.  And told him that they didn't want me to go because they were too afraid that I would question Johnson about the United States' involvement in Vietnam.  So they--
Speaker 2: Would you have?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I mean I--I may have.  I don't--I mean I wouldn't have, I wouldn't have felt uncomfortable doing it.
Speaker 2: How, how this experience as a student affected your own presidency of Texas Southern.  I mean I know it had to on some level, but you know--
Speaker 1: It, it--my experience as, as a student affected everything I did as an administrator.  Because one of the things that, that--and we, we can get into this later.  I've always had excellent relationship with students.  'Cause I've, I've, I understand stu--I understand from my point of view why students are concerned about certain things.  So I've always had excellent relationship with students.
Story_ID: 159858
Speaker 1: Now were you in the program to get your--the law degree in six years?  Were you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, because what happened was I came [to Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] as a freshman. I was a pre-law political science major.  That's what the program was.  And discovered two things.  One, I hated political science.  But one of the reasons I hated political science was we had to write a lot of papers.  And as a, a writer, all my life my teachers always commented about what a, a succinct writer I was.  Well I'm in this department and length is everything.  So at the end of the year I went to the department head and I said Dr. Robinson [ph.], "You know this doesn't make sense.  Everybody keeps talking about length.  I write a paper.  They say it's not long enough.  I say I'll write--what did I miss?  I mean what's missing, how did--what could I have done?  They can't give me anything other than it's not long enough."  I said, "I, I'm more concerned about content than I am about length.  That nobody can, can give me any problems with the content, they're just not"--so he picks the paper up on his desk and he says, "Douglas, it's got to weigh something."  So I said, "Thank you."  He said, "What are you gonna do?"  I said, "I'm gonna change my major."  He said, "To what?"  I said, "To math."  He said, "I thought you wanted to go to law school."  I said, "Yeah, but I wanna get out first."
Story_ID: 159859
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about how a university could, could, could get so far away from, you know, what you would think the natural mission of it would be?  I mean to judge a paper by the weight of it and to put all the curfews and arbitrary rules.  Now how did that, you know--well
Speaker 2: Now in 1960 this is not unusual.  I mean you could go to almost any HBCU [historically black college or university] in the country and you, you, you're dealing with the, with, with the same, same thing.  My problem was, you know, I was outspoken in an era--at a time when, when most students were not outspoken.  And I look at students now, I don't, I don't know why.  I mean one, I never--I remember one day sitting in the, the office of the dean of students and we were talking.  And he turned to me and he said, "Douglas I'm gonna be honest with you."  And I said, "What, Dean?"  And he said, "I'm just trying to find an opportunity to kick you out of school [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]."  And I said, "That's an opportunity you'll never find."  I, I never--it never dawned on me that I would ever get kicked out of school.  It never dawned on me that I had to worry about a grade.  When students come to me now and say well I'm afraid to do this 'cause it, it might harm my--it, I don't know.  I don't know why it, it, it--I never thought about those things happening.  I mean when, when we, when I led the first strike, everybody told me they gon' kick you out of school [Kashmere High School, Houston, Texas].  And I'm going they can't.  When I explained to them that Willa [ph.] Avenue was a public street and that the sidewalks were public and we could do anything on the sidewalk we wanted to do.  Nobody believed me.  So the first two days of the strike, I was the only person out walking picket until the other students saw that I wasn't getting kicked out of school (laughter).
Story_ID: 159860
Speaker 1: One important fact that we have not mentioned, although you mentioned his name.  The president of, of T--of Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] in those days was James Nabrit [sic, Samuel M. Nabrit].
Speaker 2: No Sam, Sam was James' [Nabrit] brother.
Speaker 1: Sam Nabrit.
Speaker 2: Sam was, Sam was James' brother, right.
Speaker 1: Okay so my point is moot now.  You know where I'm going.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I didn't realize.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I saw him (unclear) and I said what is he doing at Texas Southern?  I said but James Nabrit of course is the brother of Sam--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: One of the architects of the Civil--
Speaker 2: Civil Rights Movement.  And he actually came through Texas before he went to [Washington] D.C. But yeah--
Speaker 1: It's interesting as a, as president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], a lot of people say he was very conservative, you know, even though he was civil rights--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but remember now being, being, being a civil rights activist in terms of race relations and running a university are two totally different things.  So there were lots--his brother was the same way.  Dr. Nabrit was very, very, very, very supportive of the students in the Civil Rights Movement.  And very, very supportive of the students getting involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  Now he might have had his view about the paternalistic life on campus, but he had no problem with, with students going down and, and picketing and sitting in on lunch counters and, and things like that.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting contradiction, you know.
Speaker 2: I, I'm, I'm telling you I--but, but that's the way life was back then.  That's the way they thought.  In fact there's a famous speech that he made to the students back in 1960 when they actually started the, the sit-ins on--in the lunch counters.  He, he told the students he support 'em and told the, the dean of women if she couldn't support the students, then she needed to look for another job.  I mean so he was very pro-civil rights.
Story_ID: 159861
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you more about [HM Reverend] Bill Lawson.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah he's, he's a, a retired minister here in Houston [Texas] and, and basically had done some work with, with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] early in the Civil Rights Movement.  But he was really the leader of the Civil Rights Movement here in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, he was, he, he was the one who, who led most of the protests and, and the person who, who really was the architect of, of most of what happened here in Houston.
Speaker 1: Do you remember [HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I remember Pluria very well.  Yeah he was, he was media person.  He had--Pluria was very involved with that Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity].
Speaker 1: Right, he was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I, he, you know left here for [Washington] D.C. I guess in the early '70s [1970s] I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Late '60s [1960s], but yeah he was involved in a lot of ac- civil rights activities.
Story_ID: 159862
Speaker 1: As you finished your math degree [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], now once you were telling me you started law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] with a sort of a attitude that it was a lot easier than it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, two things kind of happened.  One, the, the dean of students probably the person that I fought with more than anybody else, I guess the spring of my junior year, my senior year, asked me to, to come by his office.  So I went by and he, he say, "You're taking--you're in math."  I say, "Yes sir."  He say, "You've taken some computer courses."  And I say, "Yes."  He say, "I got a call from IBM and they're looking to integrate.  And they called and asked me for a recommendation.  And I wonder if you would object to me recommending you."  And so he recommended me.  I went, interviewed for the job, took the test and got the job.  And so my first job out of college was with, with IBM.  I started to law school.  Didn't know a lot about law school.  Knew that I could learn anything that I put my mind to it, and, and in fact I always tell people I, you know I'm a believer in developing independent learners.  That's the only way I got through undergrad[uate] school because I was always out doing something and not going to class.  So everything I, I had to learn on my own.  But I, I went to law school, and the first week of class I realized that unlike undergrad school, law professors expect you to go home every night and study.  I also knew that at that point in my life I was not ready to go home every night and, and study.  And so against the advice of the dean of the law school and my parents, I decided to withdraw from law school and come back when I was ready to study.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now meanwhile though, what were you doing for IBM?
Speaker 2: I was an analyst.  And but I soon--like I worked for IBM real short period of time because at the same time, a friend of mine that I had grown up with was working for a small simulation company, which later grew into Singer Simulation.  They had a contract with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  And he told me that, that they wanted to talk to me, that they were interested in, in hiring analysts.  And so I went out and interviewed with them and started working with--out at NASA in the fall of '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 159863
Speaker 1: Now, now by this time did you know FORTRAN [Formula Translation] or COBOL [Common Business Oriented Language] or any of the computer languages?
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew the computer languages.  But that was an interesting experience because we worked in machine language.
Speaker 1: Okay explain.
Speaker 2: Machine language is binary.  So it's, it's, it's not--I guess you have what's called the compiler language and we call that kind of essay writing.  And then you have what's called the assembly language.  And it's, it's COBOL and, and FORTRAN are compiler languages.  And that's what we call the higher level.  The closer you get to the computer, the more complex the language becomes.  And then the next is the assembly.  And it's like, it's like one instruction.  Load the accumulator, add this.  It's, it's, it's single instructions till you get to machine language, and machine language is binary.  It's all zero and ones.  So all the, all the codes are zero and ones.  So that was all machine language 'cause you're working directly with the machine.
Story_ID: 159864
Speaker 1: You start back at law school [Thurgood Marshall Law School, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: I start back in law school.  I, I worked in--it was really crazy because when I interviewed with, with Singer and everybody told me I was crazy for, for being too honest.  I told 'em you know I'm probably gonna go back to law school in the fall, but they hired me anyway.  I said next fall I'm probably gonna go back to law school.  So they hired me anyway.  And what happened was I was working on a project.  And when I resigned to go back to law school, they asked me if, if I would stay and complete that project and I said I, I really don't know.  I, I mean I'll, I'll work as long as I can.  And so I completed that project probably late October, early November.  And then when I got ready to resign, they say well we want you to stay on.  And I said you understand that my schedule change every semester.  So anyway they agreed to work around my, my law school schedule.  And so I was able to work my way through law school working for Singer.
Story_ID: 159865
Speaker 1: Now in, in the case of IBM and Singer, were you the first A--African American in the shop or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, neither one.  IBM was huge, so I can't tell you what happened anywhere else in Houston [Texas].  They brought in about two or three African Americans when they brought me in here in Houston.  With Singer, there were, there was one other guy--the friend who told me about it, he was, he was an engineer who told them about me.  He was, he was an engineer.  I was the first analyst that the company hired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is, which is a funny story because there were about six hundred engineers and, and analysts.  And so it was funny.  I was real active 'cause we had a real active employees organization.  We had athletic teams, we went to plays, we went to movies.  So--and I was an officer, I was president of the organization one year.  So I would tell my wife at the time, I said, "Look when we go to an event, if I don't introduce you in fifteen seconds, it means I really don't know the person.  So introduce yourself."  So after a while, she said, "Look, this doesn't make any sense".  And I said--she say, "All these people know you, but you don't know all these people."  I mean I--I say, "Look, there are about six hundred professional people in the company, all right.  Then there are 598 white people and two blacks, me and Earl [ph.].  So they only have to know two names, I have to know 598 names."
Story_ID: 163971
Speaker 1: Law school at Texas Southern [Thurgood Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Who, who was you know did you have any special tea--teachers or mentors there in law school in those days?
Speaker 2: I had some special teachers.  You know I always tell people I never had a mentor.  I always had, I had a couple of bridges, but I never had a mentor.  But I had some special teachers and, and probably the guy that, that was my favorite teacher is a guy named Eugene Harrington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what did he teach?
Speaker 2: He taught contracts and commercial law.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was he around there for a long time, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  He--actually he, he started in '66 [1966].  He was, he was young, started in '66 [1966].  I guess he died maybe six years ago, six or eight years ago [sic, Harrington died in 2002], something like that.  But he taught until, until he died.
Story_ID: 163972
Speaker 1: I know subsequent you write about the legal aspects of comp--the new computer age and, and computers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What, what happened was I guess in the fall of my third year in law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], I went to one of my professors and I said, "You know we have this new piece of technology called the computer.  And it's gonna create two problems that--well not necessarily problems, but two areas where I think it intersects with law.  One is just like any major piece of technology, it's gonna create a lot of new legal issues.  And nobody's really looking at those new legal issues and how they ought to be resolved.  And two, you can probably take the computer, program it and assist lawyers in law practice, and nobody's really looking at that.  Do you have any idea of where I can get some money once I graduate to do some research in that area?"  And he said, "Yeah, probably get some money and get another law degree at the same time."  So he gave me a list of ten schools.  He said, "Write these ten law schools, just kind of outline what your thoughts are, and see what kind of response you get."  So I wrote 'em.  Six of 'em wrote back and said you know add some detail; we're really interested in it.  So I ended up going to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] doing a degree that I call computer law.  And that was an interesting experience.  When I walked in the first day to talk to my advisor, he said, "Jim," he said, "I'm gonna be honest with you."  He said, "This computer law stuff you're talking about," he said, "I don't know anything about it."  He said, "In fact no one on the faculty knows anything about it."  He said, "So while you're here, I'm gonna ask you to do one thing for me."  And I said, "What's that?"  He said, "Whatever you do, do it well."  I said, "All right."  I said, "But I have to take some credit hours.  I mean what am I supposed to take?"  He says, "It's your program, you take what you wanna take."  And so I did.  I put together this program, did my research, did my work and while I was doing it, I started getting letters and phone calls from law schools saying we don't really know what this computer law is, but will you come teach it?  And my initial response was no because I went to law school to be a litigator.  I always tell people my intent was to be Johnnie Cochran before Johnnie Cochran.  I went to law school to be a litigator.  And in fact there was a funny story.  The summer after my first year in law school, when I went by to see my torts professor, he said to me, "Jim, Big Jim," he called me Big Jim.  He said, "Big Jim," he said, "you know you ought to think about a career in law teaching."  And I said Professor Carl [ph.], "That's the last thing in the world I would do.  If I wanted to teach, I would have done a Ph.D. in mathematics" I said, "because grading math exams are a lot easier than reading blue books.  So why would I go to law school to spend my life reading blue books?  You have to be crazy to be a law professor."  So anyway I kept saying no.  And finally one, one day John [ph.] who was my advisor, said, "Jim," he said, "you know law teaching is not as bad as you think it is."  He said, "Why don't you try it for a year or two and if you don't like it, you can always litigate."  And I said, "You know, you're right."  So at about the same time, maybe two weeks after that, I got a call from Otis King who was dean at Texas Southern [University] law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law].  And he said, "Jim," he said, "you know if you would come here and teach this computer stuff you're doing, we'll be the first law school in the country to offer a curriculum in computers."  So it made a lot of sense, so I came back to Texas Southern.
Speaker 1: So this is in what, what year did you come--
Speaker 2: That's in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: Fall of '71 [1971].  I came to Texas Southern in fall of '71 [1971].
Story_ID: 163973
Speaker 1: It took me maybe four to six weeks to discover I didn't like teaching.  But I loved it.  And I decided that I would stay in law teaching until I didn't love it anymore.  A few months after that, I got a--I was contacted by Cleveland State University [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and they wanted to know if, if I was interested in leaving Houston [Texas].  I said no.  They asked me to think about it.  They called me back a couple of weeks later.  I said no.  So then the guy said, "Well would you do us a favor?"  And I said, "What?"  He said, "Before you make your final decision, will you come visit us."  So yeah, I went, I visit.  Was impressed with the dean [Craig W. Christensen].  My first conversation with him, he said, "I really need your help."  I said, "You don't need my help."  He said, "Yeah, I need your help."  I said, "All right, why do you need my help?"  He said, "I need you to help for two reasons.  He said "First," he said, "I'm the dean of the law school (unclear)--and we've graduated more black lawyers than any law school in this state, but we've never had a black law professor.  I need you to help me change that."  He said, "And second, I'm a dean of a law school in a city that's majority black.  I have over 1,400 law students.  I only have sixteen black students.  I need you to help me change that."  That was a big influence.
Story_ID: 163974
Speaker 1: The, the last one is there were, there were sixteen black students [at Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], but the president of the Student Bar Association, which is the student government of law school, was an African American guy.  So his wife and the girlfriend of the BLSA [Black Law Students Association] president, asked me if I would have breakfast with 'em.  So I had breakfast with 'em.  And they told me, they say, "You know David [ph.] and Larry [ph.] on one hand they're very happy.  On the other hand they're very sad."  I said, "Well why are they happy?"  They said, "They're happy because they've been trying to get the faculty to hire a black law professor, but the faculty turns everybody down.  They gone make you an offer."  I said, "Well good."  They said, "But they're sad 'cause everybody know you're gone turn it down."  So I was caught, 'cause I really didn't intend to move to Cleveland [Ohio].  That was one of the last places in the world that I--but I, I ended up accepting the job.
Story_ID: 163975
Speaker 1: One of the things that happened when I got--when I resigned from here [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], Dr. [Granville M.] Sawyer and I had, had a very close relationship that we had established when I was a student.  He came during my second year in, in law school and he and I established a very close relationship.  So he called me in and he said, "I, I can't believe this resignation.  And I said--he said I thought you loved TSU [Texas State University]," and I said, "I do, that's why I'm leaving."  And he said, "what do you mean you're leaving because you love it?"  And I said, "Dr. Sawyer," I said, "I've, I've only had two up close experiences in higher education.  One is here, the other is at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], and they don't run like each other."  I, I had a, I had an unusual experience at Stanford.  I was befriended--Stanford's law school was run by two associate deans.  The dean was just the figurehead.  Bill Leininger [sic, Joseph Leininger] who was the Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, and [William] Bill Keogh who was the Associate Dean for Administration, really ran the law school.  For some reason, they befriended me and till this day I have no idea, but nearly every afternoon the three of us would sit around talking about managing law schools and managing universities.  I--so I said to Dr. Sawyer, "I don't know why TSU doesn't run like Stanford, it could be money.  If I'm really gonna be of any real benefit to the university, I need to go away and really learn how to run a university.  And then I think I can really have something to contribute."  So he said, "You intend to come back?"  And I said, "Yes."  So he took my letter of resignation and tore it up and he said, "I, I give you a leave of absence."  So he gave me a leave of absence and I headed to Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law in Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So this is 19--
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], fall of 1972.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well summer of '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 163976
Speaker 1: Were you teaching computer law (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was, I was teaching computer law.  One of the things that, that intrigued me about Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], we got all these computer systems now.  At the time, there was no legal research system.  The legal research system was just being developed.  And it was a system called OBAR [Ohio Bar Automated Research].  It was a combination, it was a, a joint relationship between the Ohio Bar [Association] and Mead Paper.  Mead was in Dayton [Ohio], entered into a relationship with the Ohio Bar to create a legal research system, which is, which has grown into what's called Lexis [LexisNexis], which is one of the largest legal research systems in the world.  So the only place that was, that was doing any real computerized kinds of research, was in Ohio.  And so that was one reason I was interested in, in accepting the job in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know NCR in Dayton was doing some things too in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not in, not in '72 (1972).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now what are--I didn't ask, I didn't ask you, and maybe I should have asked this before, but this is a good time.  What are some of the special legal issues that, that advent of the computer age brings to the--
Speaker 2: Probably the biggest one that, that I guess the initial one was how do you protect the software?  Because the way the law was written at that time had not conceived of the concept of, of something that seems so intangible being able to have some ownership.  So it was how do you protect the software, whether you could patent it or whether you could copyright it.  And copyright really didn't offer the kind of protection that you really needed.  And people didn't understand that since it, it appeared to be so intangible, how you could actually patent it.  That was the issue.  The other one, which has really grown to be the biggest one, is the whole privacy issue.  Once you start putting--and I think one of the things that, that I said in that article you talk about in, in 1971 was my position as that once we started going to these national--and remember at the time we were not talking about Internet.  Internet wasn't even on anybody's mind.  But we were--there was this idea that you could collect all of this stuff and have a national data bank.  That once we started collecting this information on a national level, that you could forget about the whole concept of privacy.  And I mean that's proved to be true, is that privacy is, is, is lost.
Story_ID: 163977
Speaker 1: How did things go in Cleveland [Ohio at Cleveland-Marshall College of Law]?  You were there for how, how, how long?
Speaker 2: I was there for, for three years.  Things went exceedingly well in Cleveland.  The dean [Craig W. Christensen] after--I guess I'd been there about six months and I, I, I learn now--I know now why it happened.  At the time I didn't know why.  But after about six months the dean started asking me to move into administration.  And I guess my, my--the beginning of my third year, I finally agreed to, to move into, move into administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah and I just wanted to mention the paper you published.  'Some Ideas on the Computer and the Law' [1972] in the Texas Southern University Law Review.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you, you wrote other articles about the subject too, subsequently published them.  Okay.  So, sorry in Cleveland, all right so now let's see.
Speaker 2: It went well.  I was, I was able to greatly increase the number of African American students.  By the time I left, we were well over a hundred.  We were bringing in like maybe about forty a year.  I did--I mean people thought I was a very good teacher.  People thought I was a very good ad--administrator.
Story_ID: 163978
Speaker 1: I worked for a guy that I can say that I'm the only person who ever got along with him as an--whoever worked well with him.  Nobody else could--he couldn't work with anybody else.  He couldn't work with anybody before me, and he couldn't work with anybody after me.  Extremely, extremely demanding person.  In fact it was, it was a funny story.  When, when we first started, I'll never forget my first day on the job I went in and, and I said, "Craig [W. Christensen] you and I have to have a different relationship than you had with everybody else."  And he said, "What do you mean?"  And I said, "Well you never let anybody else run that shop."  I said, "Every meeting that I've been in with you and some of your staff, you made decisions for everybody."  I said, "If I'm gonna work with you, I have to run my own shop."  So he points at his nameplate and he said, "Jim, you see that?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "That says 'Dean.'"  He said, "The buck stops here, so I make all the decisions."  And I said, "No, not if I'm gon' work."  I said, "If, if I'm gonna work for you, I'm gone have to make my own decisions."  So we discussed it for about a month and then one day he said, "Look, why do you insist that you have to run your own shop?"  And I said, "Because you want me to."  And he said, "I guess you gon' tell me why I want you to."  I said, "Yeah."  I say, "You want me to because I know that you know that decisions ought to be made by the most informed person."  He said, "Yeah."  I say, "Well if I spend all week working on my shop and you only touch it every now and then, if I don't know more than you, then you need to fire me and hire somebody else.  If I do, you need to let me run it."  He said, "You know what?"  He said, "I'm gonna do something I've never done in my life.  I'm gonna let you run your shop."  So this is in November.  Almost every month after that, he would come to me and he would say, "Jim, I know this isn't in your job description, but could I move this unit to you?"  So by March I've got almost the whole law school.  And he said, "You know you should be the associate dean."  I said, "You can't make me the associate dean."  He said, "I, I know I can't," he said, "but you, you should be the associate dean."
Story_ID: 163979
Speaker 1: Then in late April a strange thing happened.  We're at a cocktail party.  He [Craig W. Christensen] came to me and he said, "Jim, I have two other deanship opportunities.  I would like for you to consider going with me."  I said, "What are they?"  He said, "The University of Houston [Houston, Texas] and Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York]."  I said, "I, I can't go to the University of Houston.  If I go back to Houston, I'm going to Texas Southern [University]."  I said, "but I would consider Syracuse."  So this is, this is something that's unbelievable.  So about ten days later, his secretary called me.  She said, "Jim, Craig really wants to know what you decide about Syracuse."  I said, "Mary, I haven't even thought about it.  He said he had an opportunity.  Tell him to make up his mind and I can guarantee you it won't take me long to decide what I'm gonna do."  So about three days after that I was in her office, and she said, "Craig asked me to call you, say he really needs to know what you decided about Syracuse."  I said, "Mary I haven't even thought about it.  I don't waste thought.  Why should I decide on Syracuse?  Suppose I decide to go and then he decides he's not gonna go.  Then I just wasted my thought."  She said, "Well I guess he didn't tell you everything."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  She said, "Well he's already decided he wants to go, but he's not gonna accept the job if you don't go."  So I said let me go in here and talk to this man.  So I go in his office and I said, "Craig, Mary says you've decided you wanna go to Syracuse, but you're not gonna accept the job if I don't go."  And he said, Tthat's right."  I said, "Then we need to talk."  He said, "Sit down."  I said, "Well first of all, I'm not going to Syracuse as an assistant dean.  I'll have to go as an associate dean."  He said, "Jim, it's a private school.  I'm gonna be out raising money."  He said, "You will be the associate dean."  He said, "I want you to run the law school for me."  I said, "All right."  Now all my life, I've never known that I was young.  Even when I was eight, nine, ten years old, I talked to adults just like I talk to adults now.  I never knew I was young.  I never knew, when I listened to professors now say I'm a junior professor, I never, I never considered myself a junior professor, even the first day I started teaching.  So I said to him, "I'm an assistant professor.  Next year if I stay here, I'm up for promotion to associate.  I will only go to Syracuse if I get an appointment as associate professor."  So he said, "You got it."  I said, "Craig, now as dean, you can decide whether I'm an associate or assistant dean."  I said, "but whether I get a faculty position and at the associate level, the faculty has to make that decision."  So he said, "They have."  I said, "Craig, I don't know anybody at Syracuse.  I haven't even talked to anybody at Syracuse."  He said, "Jim, believe me, the faculty had voted and the university administration has given me the authority to offer you a position as associate professor and associate dean."  I said, "All right, one last thing."  And he say, "What's that?"  I said, "If a faculty is crazy enough to offer me a position without seeing me or talking to me, I need to see them."  So he said, "Well go to Syracuse [New York]."  I flew to Syracuse, sit down, met with the faculty, liked 'em.  And so I accepted the job.  Now I can't think of that happening anywhere in the world.
Speaker 2: That kind of selection process.
Speaker 1: That selection process, especially since Syracuse never had a black faculty before either.  So that they would hire a black man sight unseen.
Speaker 2: I guess they, I guess your friend paved the way for 'em to--
Speaker 1: Hey, I don't know what he told 'em.  But he, he, he must have made them believe I walked on water.
Speaker 2: This is 1970--this would be--
Speaker 1: That was 1975.
Speaker 2: Five [1975]--
Story_ID: 163980
Speaker 1: But an interesting thing happened in '78 [1978].  Seventy-eight [1978] he asked me, he say, "You know Jonathan [ph.]?"  I said, "Jonathan," I can't remember Jonathan's last name, but he was head of legal services in Chicago [Illinois], I mean in New York [New York].  And Craig [W. Christensen], the dean [of Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] at one time been head of legal services in, in Chicago.  And he said, "Yeah," he said, "Jonathan is in town.  He want to have dinner."  So we go to dinner with Jonathan.  I had known Jonathan for a while because my first year teaching here [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], Jonathan had visited on the faculty.  So we're having dinner.  And so Craig said, You have no idea of why I was so interested in getting you to Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]."  I said, "I don't even--I never even had any idea how you all got my name."  So he said, "I happened to be talking to Jonathan one day and I told Jonathan, 'Man, I'm having all kind of trouble trying to find a black law professor that these people will approve.  Do you have any idea?'"  And Jonathan say, "Yeah, there's a young guy down in Houston [Texas] at Texas Southern [University] that you need to contact.  I guarantee you that they will love him."  So that's how all of that connection came about.
Story_ID: 163981
Speaker 1: There are some things that we need to clear up I think before we, we jump to 1975 where we left off.  So now you wanted to talk about Dr. [Granville M.] Sawyer, your relationship with Dr. Sawyer.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think earlier I'd said that when I left Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] the first time, Dr. Sawyer called me and he gave me a, a leave of absence because I said that I wanted to go away, learn some things and that I'd come back.  And so he tore up my resignation and gave me a leave of, leave of absence.  Dr. Sawyer and I met the first week he was president of the [Texas Southern] University.  Dr. Sawyer became president of the university during my second year in law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: So that was like 19--
Speaker 2: That was in 1968.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay.
Speaker 2: He became president of, of the university and I called his office and spoke to his secretary.  And she said--and I told her I wanted to meet with, with the new president.  So she said, "Douglas, why you wanna meet with the new president?"  And I said, "I wanna talk to him."  She say, "What makes you think he wants to talk to you?"  And I said, "He may not wanna talk to me, but why don't you ask him?  I wanna talk to him about his vision for the university."  So she came back.  She put me on hold, went and talked to him and came back and she said, "He said he'll, he, he'll give you a fifteen minute appointment."  And so that fifteen minute appointment turned into an hour.  And from that moment on, Dr. Sawyer and I had a really, really good relationship for the remainder of my time in law school.  And then when I came back that year to teach, for some reason, he included me on every kind of as a part of his inner cabinet.  And, and every decision making process that he had at the university.  So one of the things that he developed that was very big, he turned us into what he called a urban academic center.  And I was a part of all of those deliberations.  So for some unknown reason, Dr. Sawyer really liked me.  In fact a, a funny story.  We had a reception when I was graduating from law school, the senior reception.  So all the seniors were there and we're going through the line at the beginning of the reception, shaking the president's hand and his wife is there and, and he said, "Douglas," he said, "I don't know where you're going and what you're after, but I can tell you're gonna get there real fast."  So his wife jokingly said, "Honey, maybe he's after your job."
Speaker 1: And well the, the irony is that, is that you eventually did become president.
Speaker 2: Right.  But that was not, that was not my intent at that time.
Story_ID: 163982
Speaker 1: Now there's a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] story, too right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One of the things I, I, I said earlier, I worked while I was in law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] at the company [Singer Company, contracted by NASA] worked around my schedule.  And, and one of the reasons they, they agreed to do so, as we go, one of the things that's always happened in my life is I've always improved every environment that I've been in.  It's just hard for me to go into an environment and see a problem and, and not wanna, not wanna correct it.  So on the first day of the, the job I walk into the department at NASA, and there are about ten guys.  Remember I, I first started with IBM, so this is about November.  And there are about ten guys because women were not numbered in the, in, in the scientific profession at that time.  In fact out of probably about three hundred technical people, we only had one woman.  So I walk in, there are ten guys that they'd hired in June.  And they were all sitting around reading program manuals.  And so I talked to them.  I said, "Why you all reading this manual?"  And they said, "Well this is what they've assigned us to do."  And I said, "How long you been reading manuals?"  And they said, "June."  I said, "You all have been reading manuals since June?"  So they said, "Yeah."  So I went into the manager's office and I said, "Ken [ph.], is this true?  These guys have been reading since June."  And he said, "Yes."  And I said, "That's not the way you learn how--a language and to learn how to program."  I said, "It has to be hands-on."  So he said, "Well Jim, we're not big like IBM.  So we don't have an educational program, and the only way these guys are gonna learn, is they have to read."  And so I said, "Will you do something for me?"  And he said, "What?"  I say, "Will you let me spend some time with your best analyst?"  And he said, "For what?"  And I say, "'Cause I'm gonna develop a training program."  So he said, "All right."  So he gave me some time with his best analyst.  It took us about three or four days.  We developed a training program.  The next week we put, we implemented that training program and within a week, everybody was working.
Story_ID: 163983
Speaker 1: Then I'd been on the job [at Singer Company] probably nine months or so, and one day one of the guys in my division asked me what I was doing that weekend.  And I told him nothing really.  So he asked me to come--they had--they told me that the guys in my division was having a meeting and they wanted me to come.  And I went.  And the meeting was about the manager because they all disliked the manager and they said he's overbearing, he won't let you do your job.  He--you got to check in with him all the time and all of that.  And so I sat there and listened.  And so near the end I said, "Look, if you all feel this way, you need to sit down and talk to him."  So they agreed that's what they would do.  They put together a list of their concerns.  And then they decided that I had the best relationship with the manager, so I should talk to him.  So I went in the next Monday to talk to him and I, I really expected when I say Ken, these are the complaints that the people in the group have, he would say god, I didn't know that.  What can I do to correct that?  That was my expectation.  And so when I told him about the complaints, he said, "They're right."  I said, "They're right."  And he said, "Yes."  I said, "Well you don't treat me like that."  He said, "Jim, I don't treat you like that because you do your work."  He said, "All your assignments, you take 'em, they come back on time, they're, they're, they're accurate.  He said, "I don't have to worry about you," he said, "you're a self-starter."  And that was it.  So I, I had, you know when, when I worked in a white environment, I guess I never had a--I never had a problem with a, with a glass ceiling.  In fact, when I--because the company let me work and go to law school, the white guys were upset because they couldn't understand why I got more privileges than they did.  But I got more privilege than they did because as I told one of my assistants when I was dean, I always worked harder than everybody else everywhere I've ever been.  And that's been my, my motto, to work harder than everybody else and, and, and make things better everywhere I've been.
Story_ID: 163984
Speaker 1: Where does that come from?  I mean we probably discussed it in the first interview, but just for the sake of it like who taught you that or how did you pick it up?
Speaker 2: I think I picked it up just watching my father [Desso Douglas].  You know when, when you have eight brothers and sisters and, and I, I watched my father work most often sixteen hours every day to, to make sure that he provided for us and you know I always tell people, I, I'm amazed at my father.  He put nine kids through school, five of us were in college at the same time.  And so just watching my father is where a lot of it came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah you talked about it.  Desso, Desso Douglas, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 163985
Speaker 1: So NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] lets you work at night in order to--
Speaker 2: They work at night.  Basically in, in the afternoon.  I would go to work about four o'clock.  You know on days when I didn't have a class, I would go to work at eight.  But I basically decided when I worked.  As long as I put in about eight hours a day, they were satisfied. But remember this was at the height of the lunar project.  So we worked sixty, seventy hours a week.  Worked--normally I worked twelve hours on Saturdays and Sundays.
Speaker 1: Okay you're talking about the, the moon landing, right?
Speaker 2: The moon landing.
Speaker 1: Nine, 1969, July the 20th.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So as you're approaching that, things are getting more intense.
Speaker 2: Things, things are getting, getting very, very in--intense.  In fact, in 1970 just before I graduated from law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], I probably had one of the big--biggest miracles in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it's, it's, it's funny.  About maybe eight or nine prior to that, we [Singer Company] had written a huge proposal to NASA to modify one of the routines in, in the software.  And the guy who managed that department, had written a, written a proposal.  But then about a week before he was to start working on the proposal, he quit to take a job at Martin Marietta.  And so the director of the company came to me and, and asked me if, if I would, if I would do the job.  My first response was because it was in an area of software that I'd never worked before, and I said, "Look, there, there are ten guys over there who've been--I mean this is all they do.  Why do you want me to do it?  I've never worked in this area."  And he said, "Jim," he said, "we want you to do it."  And so I worked for about seven or eight months on revising the software in that area and it was a software that controlled the whole simulation.  It was what we called executive routine.  We had systems, but this was the one that controlled all the systems, the, the software that controlled all the systems.  I worked for about eight or nine months modifying the code on that system.  And this is the miracle.  At eight p.m. on my last day we got on the simulator to run it for the first time, and it ran perfect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for people in software, and that was thousands of instructions.  Not only was it thousands of instructions, but this was modifying an even larger system that was real complex.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is post the moon landing, right, or--
Speaker 2: No, remember the moon landing was '69 [1969].  This is 1970.
Speaker 1: It's in the spring of 1970.  This is, this is, this is--well it's during, it's, it's after the initial lunar landing, which was, God that was a prideful moment for everybody that worked at NASA.  That was--I think that was one of the best projects this country has, has ever undertaken.
Speaker 2: Were, were you on the job that day when they landed?
Speaker 1: I was at home watching it on television.  Because remember, here I think it was like three or four o'clock in the morning when they landed.
Story_ID: 163986
Speaker 1: There's one though, that, that probably defines me.  It's a story that, that probably defines me.  In the scientific area, engineers, computer and people, physicists, chemists, scientific people tend to be very conservative.  So in the company, I was one of a handful of Democrats 'cause everybody else is Republican.  And so when it was probably, I think it was '67 [1967], '68 [1968], somewhere in that area, when they first started talking about welfare.  And so I go in one, one afternoon and they've had a big conversation about welfare.  And I walk in to the office and they say to me, "Jim, we have finally discovered a subject that you will agree with us on."  And I say, "What's that?"  And they said, "Welfare."  I said, "What about welfare?"  They say well, "We know you're opposed to it."  And I said, "No, I'm not opposed to welfare.  I think it's a good concept."  And so the guy that I worked directly with, because each analyst was paired with an engineer, name was Ed [ph.].  So Ed said to me, "Jim, let me see if you really understand welfare."  He said, "Now the federal government is going to take some of our hard earned money and give it to people who don't work."  And I said, "Yes."  And he said, "You're for that?"  And I said, "Yes."  He said, "Jim, that doesn't make any sense."  He said, "You're the most motivated person I've ever met."  He say, "You go to school full-time, you're in law school full-time and you're working full-time."  He said, "And a person motivated like you is willing to take some of your hard earned money and give it to somebody who doesn't work."  And I said, "Yes."  I said, "What you don't understand is I didn't wake up one morning and say I think I'll be motivated."  I said, "That's something God put in me."  I said, "And because God put it in me and didn't put it in everybody, I think I have an obligation to help those people that he didn't put it in."  And so that's a--that, that defines somewhat who I am.  I think I've been blessed.  And that's one of the things that, that my first meeting with Thurgood [Marshall], that's one of the things he told us.  I was at Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California].  Thurgood Marshall invited, I think there were like six or seven black students at that time.  He was, he was a, a judge on the moot court program.  He invited the six or seven--
Speaker 2: He's in the Supreme Court [of the United States].
Speaker 1: He's on the Supreme Court at that time.  So I mean--
Speaker 2: This, is that 1970 going into '71 [1971]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Actually, it was in the spring of '71 [1971].  So he invited us to have lunch with him.  And so naturally first thing we do is we all get together and we all figure out this--we gone ask him this and we gone ask him that.  So when we sat down to have lunch, one of the--my fellow students started to ask him a question.  He said, "Hold up."  He said, "You all didn't invite me to lunch, I invited you."  He said, "So this is, this is my conversation, it's not yours."  So he said, "What I, what I really wanna talk to you about is your responsibility."  He said, "You're blessed.  You have been given opportunities that a lot of black people don't have.  But I wanna talk to you about the responsibility that comes with those opportunities."
Speaker 2: So what did he say?
Speaker 1: He talked about what we had to do as future black lawyers to give back to the black community.  I mean that was the whole conversation about our--the expectation that we would give back to the black community because you know the opportunity for a law degree from Stanford was something that, that most people, most black people especially, would never have a chance to, to pursue.
Story_ID: 163987
Speaker 1: J.S.M. [Master of the Science of Law] really is a, is a--because it is both a combination law and a scientific area, which is why it is a, it's scientific jurist masters is what it's called.  Because it was a combination of law and computer science.  It was a study of the intersection between those two disciplines.  So because it was a--more of an in--interdisciplinary study even though it was in the law school, I took half of my classes in the, in the computer science course, in the computer science department.
Speaker 2: And I don't know if I asked this before, but I'll ask it again now.  About how many people do you think had a J.S.M. in those days?  And I mean in 1971.
Speaker 1: Only a handful, and no one had one in computer law because I had the first one.  It was my creation.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right now this says a, this says a lot, so, okay.  All right so--
Speaker 1: Now remember I think I told you before that, that my advisor explained to me and that nobody knew anything about the subject matter.  He didn't know anything, no one on the faculty.  In fact no one in the, in the United States really knew anything about it, which is how I got into law teaching because once I started studying it and the word kind of leaked out, law schools wanted me to come and, and, and teach the subject matter.
Story_ID: 163988
Speaker 1: But the other thing we were talking about was the, the, the incident I had with, with the dean [Bayless Manning].  Because one of the things that, that I got, and remember I said earlier, my idea was to always improve everywhere I've been.  Well I was blown away when I got to, to Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California] because remember up until Stanford, all of my education had been in a totally--well not totally segregated.  I guess in public schools and, and in high school it was all segregated by law.  TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], we had some white students here.  Not, not many.  But Stanford was my first experience, educational experience in, in a white environment.  I get there and, and there's six or seven black students, which to me in 1970 didn't make any sense at all.  And so it started a push to increase the, the number of, of African American students at, at, at Stanford.  And so I remember having a, a meeting with the dean, me and a couple other black students and a couple of the associate deans and one of the assistant deans.  And it was an interesting confrontation be--I, I never forget him, his name was, his last name was [Bayless] Manning.  I can't remember his first name.  But it's--the whole conversation was unintelligible because one of the things that the associate dean told me later that, that he really agreed with me on.  In, in the catalog, Stanford's catalog, they, they had a statement that we reserve thirty positions in the entering class for minorities.  And there were--and generally the entering class at Stanford was 150.  So I asked the dean, "Why did they put that in, in, in the catalog because they only offered thirty admissions offers."  And I said, "The, the yield rate on admissions at Stanford was about thirty percent."  So generally for a class of 150, they'd issue about 425, 430 offers to fill that 450.  And so I said, "If, if you, if you really want thirty, then you need to offer about ninety to a hundred offers of admissions to, to yield thirty."  And he said, "They, they might all show up.  And I can't handle them."  And I said, "Well then why do you offer 400, over 400 for white students?  'Cause you know they're not gonna all show up."  So we had that long debate.
Story_ID: 163989
Speaker 1: And I think what, what caught people by surprise was--and I said, "And also you put"--there's a statement in the catalog that says we admit minority students with lesser credentials.  And I said, "You know, you might wanna rephrase that and say we look at other indicators of success other than the LSAT [Law School Admissions Test] in admitting."  And he [Bayless Manning] said, "Naw," he said, "They don't know as much."  And so I said, "Dean," I said, "let's take you and I for example."  I said, "I'm smarter than you."  I said, "And let me tell you why I'm smarter than you."  I said, "I can go over in East Cleveland," which was the black neighborhood, "and I can function."  I said, "And I can function here."  I said, "If I take you out of here and take you over to East Cleveland, you'd be dead tomorrow."  I said, "So it's not a matter of intelligence, all right.  It's not a matter of intelligence."  So we had that debate and it was funny because he had, he had, he had resigned at that point, at the end of the year, to take a job with the [President Richard] Nixon administration.  And I just told him, I said, "Dean," I said, "based on our conversation and reviewing your logic and your ability to analyze, if you use that same ability in your next job, you won't get an opportunity to resign; they will fire you."
Speaker 2: So what happened to him?  I mean did he--
Speaker 1: Well he left the school at the end of the year.  He'd already resigned and he went to the Nixon administration.  Nixon was--that was a, a story in of itself.
Story_ID: 163990
Speaker 1: Because while, while I was there, which reminds me the Nixon admin-[President Ronald] Reagan, I was, I was investigated by Reagan.  Reagan was the governor of California.  That was an interesting situation.  Reagan was the governor of California.  I take this course, it's called Poverty Law.  So I register for this course.  So two weeks into the course, I go to the professor.  I said, "Look, is this all we're gonna do in this course?"  And he said, "What do you mean?"  And I said, "I, I'm expecting to talk about law."  I said, "We, we, we--this is sociology."  So he said, "Well, Jim you know most of your classmates don't know what it is to be poor.  And if by the end of the semester, I get them to have a better appreciation for the plight of poor people, I would have accomplished my goal."  I said, "Well I know what it is to be poor", and so he said, "So you think the class is a waste of your time."  I said, "Yeah, it's a waste of my time."  So he said, "You wanna do a project for me?"  I said, "What is it?"  He said, "I have a graduate who's head of the local legal services.  He's having some problems with some statutes that Ronald Reagan has passed in, in Sacramento [California].  And, and it's really detrimental to, to poor people."  It, it, it was really in the used car area.  They had these used car dealers that were just ripping people off and Ronald Reagan--and the Department of Motor Vehicles had oversight over these used car salesmen.  Well Ronald Reagan had created a, a public committee to oversee this, this Department of Communication, I mean Department of Transportation.  They were turning down all the, all the violations that the Department of Transportation was, was issuing.  So he said, "If you work with him"--so what it turned out was I had to draft some legislation.  I had to go to Sacramento every week to committee hearings.  I drafted legislation.  And he asked me, "Draft these legislations, work with him, and then you don't have to come, you don't have to come to class.  All you have to do is, is write a paper about your experience."  So I did.  I did the experience, I drafted it.  Couldn't get it out of committee, but we drafted it.  So going forward, most of the people knew, at least they'd been told that I was a, a law student at Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California].  But for some reason, Ronald Reagan didn't believe it.  He thought I was on the staff of legal services and he had issued an edict that California (unclear) Legal Services could not undertake anything that was political in nature.  And so they investigated me because they thought--they really thought I wasn't a student, that I was really a staff person masquerading as a student.
Story_ID: 159866
Speaker 1: So, when you finished Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California] with this almost one of a kind degree, you come back to Houston [Texas], right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas].  And we, we ended the last session talking about you, you were at--we, we had talked about Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and is there anything else you wanted to say about Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one, one of the things I, I guess a couple things I wanted to say 'bout, about Cleveland.  But, but one of 'em was how I got into administration.  I really didn't know--I think before I said the, the dean [Craig W. Christensen] had bugged me for a number of years to, to move into administration.  I really didn't understand why until I became a dean, and then I, I realized why the dean wanted me in administration.  Most faculty members, I would say ninety-nine and nine-tenths percent of the faculty members are not really interested in, in administration.  They don't really care how things run as long as it doesn't have a negative effect on them.  And so they never know, they never know anything about administration.  Most faculty members, in fact I often joke with people and say that's one of the reasons there's poor management in, especially on the academic side, in universities because most of the people charged with selecting academic managers, are faculty.  And most faculty don't even have any idea of what the skillset is to be a manager.  But what happened was because, and I told you how the dean had pursued me to come to the faculty at Cleveland State [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio].  And because I was the first African American on the faculty, I think he felt somewhat committed to make sure that I was happy.  And so he would come by my office periodically to talk to me about my committee assignments.  And for some reason I've always been honest.  And I would tell him about administrative problems.  I would say, "I don't, I don't know, your admissions office is so mismanaged, I don't know how you get anything done."  So then he started asking me about what I would do administrative matters.  I didn't know that faculty never paid any attention to administrative matters.  And so because of that, he started and, and, and you know once I became a dean, I realized because I had to hire managers from the faculty, and realized that very, very, very, very, very, very few faculty had the kind of skillset to be a manager.
Story_ID: 159867
Speaker 1: So this is how you got into administration.  So then, then did he [Craig W. Christensen] offer the administrative--
Speaker 2: He offered me an administrative job [at Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], and then an interesting thing happened.  When I finally accepted it, the day when we sat down and talked, I agreed to, to accept the--an administrative job and I think earlier I told you I was the only person who could work for him.  Nobody could work for him before me and nobody could work for him afterwards.  But I started to leave his office, and he said, "Jim," he said "do you really know me?"  And I said, "Yes."  He said, "You do?"  I said, "Yes" because his reputation on, on the campus was that he was crazy.  And I said yes.
Speaker 1: You didn't tell him that that was the reason.
Speaker 2: He knew that was his reputation.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he said,--"And that doesn't frighten you?"  I said, "No it doesn't frighten me."  And he said, "Why?"  And I said, "Well because I, I work with somebody like you."  And he said, "You have?"  And I said, "Yeah."  "Tell me about it."  And so I said, "When I first went to work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], each analyst was paired with an engineer."  And Ed [ph.], the guy I mentioned earlier, was the guy that I was paired with.  So I'd been working about three months.  The analyst that I was replacing wasn't leaving the company, he was moving to another section.  And so he had a couple projects that he was working on with Ed that he was finishing up.  So one night we're on the simulator, and I'm in the, in the outer office working on some code.  And Henry [ph.] came in and he started beating on the desk.  He didn't pay any attention to me, he came in, took a seat, just started beating on the desk, talking to himself:  "I will not work with this man.  I don't know why I agreed to do this, this is crazy, I can't do this anymore."  And I mean he was just going through this tirade.  So the next morning I went in to talk to my manager.  And I said, "Ken," I said, "is Henry all right?"  And he said, "Yeah, but why do you ask?"  So I recounted the incident from the night before and he said, "Jim I, I probably shouldn't have done this to you."  And I said, "Done what?"  And he says, "Ed."  He said, "You're the fifth analyst this year to be paired with Ed, nobody can work with Ed."  And he said, "And, and it's my fault."  He said, "I should give Ed to one of the more experienced people."  And I said, "No, I, I'll try it."
Story_ID: 159868
Speaker 1: Ed and I worked together [at Singer].  So one night we're working on a problem.  We--and often in software, this happens, we, we run over.  We get on at five, we say we got a thirty minute fix.  So about two o'clock in the morning we're still working on this thirty minute fix.  And Ed--the engineer derives these equations to run the simulator and then as an analyst, we modify the software.  So about two o'clock in the morning I said Ed is trying to figure out an equation.  I said, "Ed, take a look at this."  And he said, "Jim go away, I'm busy."  So I said, "All right."  So the next four or five hours, he'd given me stuff to do and I'm doing it.  So about seven o'clock he said, "This is it.  This is, this is where we want to be."  He said, "Let me, let me write the complete equation."  I said, "Why don't you take a look at this?"  He said, "You know that junk you were trying to show me last night?"  And I said, "Yeah."  I mean he didn't say junk, I, I cleaned it up.  So I said, "Yeah."  So he takes a look at the, the notepad and he say this is the equation.  I said, "I know."  So fast forward a few months later we're in the same situation, the middle of the night, and Ed is working on the equation and I said, "Ed, take a look at this."  And he said, "Go away."  Well now I think, you know I work with this guy long enough, you know, I'm gonna be persistent.  So he said, "Jim, go away."  I said, "No Ed, you gon' look at this equation."  So he said, "Look, Jim, let me tell you something."  He said, "you're the analyst, I'm the engineer.  You do your job, I do mine, all right.  Let's keep it that way."  I said, "All right."  So about a hour later he give me a set of equations, I go change the software.  We're flying the simulator around, man, this is perfect.  He said, "Let me write this equation down."  I said, "No, let me write the equation for you."  He said, "What do you mean, write the equitation for me?"  I said, "Ed, let me explain something to you."  I said, "You're gonna give me the equation you asked me to put in.  I'm gon' give you the equation I put in."  I said, "You're gonna have to come to understand that we're gonna work together as a team.  You can write, draft all the equations you want, you can't communicate with this machine.  I'm the one that communicates with this machine.  So if you don't understand that we're working together as a team, we never gon' get anything done."  Ed and I worked together until I left the company and we never had any problems; we became the best of friends.  I told Craig [W. Christensen at Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] that story.  He and I never had, never had any problems.
Story_ID: 159869
Speaker 1: Going in, into administration, did you miss what you were doing before, teaching?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well I've, I've always done some teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've always done some teaching.  I, I love teaching and in fact I did not--remember I said I didn't think I would like teaching.  It took me, you know, two or three months into teaching before I discovered that it was what I really wanted to do.  I love teaching.  In fact when I went into administration, my original intent and what I told the dean was that I would help him because one of the reasons I agreed to do it, we had just started computerizing university administration.  So one of the things we were doing was computerizing, putting together the computer system for law school admissions, a lot of the law school operations and all of that.  So that kind of intrigued me.  And so I told him I would give him two years.  That I would, I would help him for two years and then I was gonna go back to, to full time teaching.  But even during the time that I was in administration, I was also teaching.
Story_ID: 159870
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the transition from Cleveland State University College of Law [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] to Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York].
Speaker 2: You know going to Syracuse was probably the most difficult decision I ever made in my life for two reasons.  One, I loved it at Cleveland.  Two, it meant that I would not get back to Texas Southern [University, Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] for a longer period of time than I thought I, I would.  Three, I knew Syracuse [New York] was a small, mostly white town.  And I knew that even though I, I would have an opportunity to grow professionally, I knew that the, the, the personal side of my life was, was gonna suffer.  And it was, it was agonizing.  I, I had to make a decision whether to go to Syracuse and, and grow professionally, or whether to come back to, to Houston [Texas].  Because most of my commitment to Cleveland was to the dean [Craig W. Christensen].  And so since he was leaving, I was more than--if I had gone to Syracuse, I, I, I'm more than likely I would have come back to, to Texas Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause remember I was, I was on leave.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right.  So did you remain on leave even after you went to Syracuse?
Speaker 2: No.  Once I decided to take the job at Syracuse, I called Dr. [Granville M.] Sawyer and, and told him to--because what happened because I was on leave, it meant that the dean had to reserve that position for me.  And so he couldn't fill it with a full-time person.  He would fill it year-to-year with a person.  So the dean was putting pressure on me to come back to Texas Southern.  And so I just told Dr. Sawyer that--to go ahead and, and, and I would not extend the leave and that I'd come back when the opportunity presented itself.
Speaker 1: So your, your position at Syracuse was--
Speaker 2: Associate dean and associate professor.
Story_ID: 159871
Speaker 1: Do you remember something called Law in London?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we had a, we had a program in, in London [England], international program where students from Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] would, would go to London for the summer.  It was one of our summer abroad programs.  It was, it was an interesting program.  It was more clinical than classroom.  They would go over and, and have a clinical experience with, with some of the barristers in London.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you institute that, or did--
Speaker 2: No, I did not institute that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We--Syracuse had a real big abroad program section away from--separate from the law school.  And it was their idea that maybe we ought to have something in law, 'cause they had a lot of other programs in, in London and around the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what was the Sy--Syracuse experience like?  This is 1975?
Speaker 2: This was in 1975.  It was, it was really a growing experience.  I grew a lot professionally because one of the things that the dean [Craig W. Christensen] did--I think I had said earlier he told me he had wanted me to run the law school.  And then he gave me an opportunity to run the law school.  I mean I, I learned how, how to, how to run a law school.  It was kind of funny because I had a, a, a couple of other faculty members, African American faculty members, who suggested they thought it would be a, a bad idea for me to go to Syracuse because they, they didn't think that white faculty would let me manage them.  I can tell you and we'll get to it when I come back to, to my arrival here as dean.  It was much easier managing the faculty there than it was managing the faculty here.  The, the faculty was not, was not a problem at, at Syracuse because remember the faculty made me an offer sight unseen.  And so I had complete control, I mean complete support from the faculty at, at Syracuse.  It was the students.  The students found it unbelievable that a young African American, and remember I'm the, I'm the first African American in the law school, that a young African American could tell faculty members what to do.
Speaker 1: So you're like thirty-one years old.
Speaker 2: Thirty-one years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that I could tell faculty members what to do.  And it's--Syracuse is, is--it was an interesting place.  I tell people at the time I went there, it's, it's, it's like an old beauty queen who doesn't realize that she's aged and needs to make some changes (laughter).
Story_ID: 159872
Speaker 1: But they [Syracuse University School of Law, Syracuse, New York] were having some, some serious ABA [American Bar Association] problems and, and they asked one reason they were interested in me, they wanted, they wanted to clean 'em up.  And, and I'll never forget--
Speaker 2: You said ABA?
Speaker 1: American Bar Association.
Speaker 2: ABA.
Speaker 1: Right.  The--I had suggested a number of changes to the curriculum.  And we talked about it a couple times in faculty meeting.  And on the day in which the faculty was going to vote on it, I got a call from one of the chairs, the senior chair at the university, or the professor that held the, the senior chair.  And he said, "Jim," he said "I'd like to come talk to you."  I said, "All right."  So he came and he said, "You know this proposal of yours," I said, he said, "I think, I think I know what you wanna accomplish."  He said, "But I have to be honest with you," he said, "I don't think it's gonna work."  He said, "But we brought you here to correct things.  And even though I don't think it'll work, I think we have an obligation to let you do things your way.  And I want you to know that even though I don't agree with it, I'm gonna support it today."  And he did, he supported it in, in faculty meeting, it passed.  And fortunately for me, it worked.  But, but I--so I, I always had--another incident in my second year a student filed a complaint against me.  A female white student who said I cursed her out, yelled and screamed at her.  And so when it got before the committee, the committee just said there's no way.  You cannot make us believe that Jim did this.
Speaker 2: Now, now what happened?  I mean what, what was the incident?
Speaker 1: She said I, I accosted her in the hallway and cursed her out.
Speaker 2: Was there any kind of conflict between you two that, okay.
Speaker 1: No, no, not at all.
Speaker 2: Was she contending for a grade or something?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now there was one incident.  When I came up for tenure, it was really funny, I came up for tenure.  This one student started a petition drive to have my tenure denied.  And I guess maybe a month, six weeks after his petition drive, we had--the dean and I had an open forum with the students.  And so this student rose and, and he was angry with me because I would not allow him to do something he wanted to do.  And so he started this petition drive.  So it was--so we had this open forum with the dean.  And he asked the dean [Craig W. Christensen] a question.  He said, "You know about six weeks ago, I submitted a petition to the rank and tenure committee opposing Dean Douglas' tenure.  And I haven't--and nothing has happened."  And the dean said, "Well you understand your petition addressed an administrative assignment.  Tenure is related to teaching and scholarship and, and community service.  Your petition didn't go to any of those issues, so the tenure committee could not deal with those issues."  He said, "If you had an administrative problem with Dean Douglas, you should have submitted your petition to me."  He said, "Why didn't you do that?"  He said, "I didn't submit it to you because I didn't think you would do anything."  And he said, "You're right, I wouldn't."
Story_ID: 159873
Speaker 1: You were at Syracuse [University School of Law, Syracuse, New York] for five years?
Speaker 2: I was at Syracuse for five years.
Speaker 1: And what are you the most proud of, of your term, your time at Syracuse?
Speaker 2: Probably most proud of the fact that able to clear up all the problems that, that we had at Syracuse.  I was able to, to turn the law school around.  I was able to gain an immense amount of experience.  I really got a real view of the internal operation of the university.  The dean [Craig W. Christensen]--it even started at Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] because he put me on committees that deans normally should have served on.  I had an opportunity to serve on because he didn't, he didn't wanna deal with 'em.  In fact, one of the big issues we had when we arrived, we'd been there about three months and he came into my office one day and he was made, he was fuming.  And the university had at that time, there were a handful of universities where the law school library, the director of the law school library still reported to the university library, and not to the dean of law school.  Syracuse was one of the last ones.  And so prior to our arrival at Syracuse, there had been between permanent deans that would only stay nine months, and interim deans, there'd been five people in the dean's office, five different people, for five succeeding years.  So they got--Syracuse was very, very detailed.  So we write a six page letter after we agree to come.  He writes a six page letter to the provost outlining all the things that the university had agreed to do for the law school.  And one was to turn the, the control of the law school library over to the dean.  So he came in my office, he was fuming.  I said, "What?"  He said, "I just met with the provost," he said, "and he, he, he told me that, that because the university library objects to us turning the, the law school library over to him.  He can't do it right now."  And he said, "I, I'm so angry."  He said, "I'm gonna resign."  So I started laughing.  And he said, "Jim, what are you laughing for?"  And I said, "Craig," I said, "now there have been five people in the dean's office in the last five years.  I hope you don't think that it was the deficiency of all of those people, the reason now.  You had to know there was something wrong with central administration when you took this job."  So he said,--and I said, "And I can't (unclear) right then.  Here, you handle the problem."  So he gave me the assignment of negotiating with, with the university to, to transfer the law school library, to transfer the law school--control of the law school library to the dean of the law school.  And I did.  But what was interesting was when the provost and I finally reached the decision of how the transition was gonna take place and I got up to leave, he said, "Jim," he said, "this has been an amazing experience."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "This is the first time I've had to negotiate with the law school and we didn't yell and scream at each other."
Story_ID: 159874
Speaker 1: So in 1980, you went over to Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].  They recruited you, right?
Speaker 2: They did.  They, they did.  What, what happened was I, I had decided that I was, I was gonna leave Syracuse [University School of Law, Syracuse, New York].  And the main reason that I wanted to leave Syracuse, and Syracuse I, I tell anybody, it was the best job I ever had.  I enjoyed it.  I mean I, I enjoyed it immensely.  But I, I had gotten to a point, I'm one of those people if I can't grow, it's time for me to go.  And so I, I'd gotten to a point where everything had become routine, there were no problems; everything worked.  And so--and plus I'm in this small town that I wanna, I wanna get to a city.  I wanna get to a major city.  So I had decided that I was, I was gonna leave.  And then got a call one day--because I was talking to my girlfriend at the time, this is around November.  And I said, "You know, I really have to start looking for a job.  Is aid if, if, if I am going to leave Syracuse, I have to secure a faculty position before Christmas," because that's normally all the hires in--especially for seasoned law professors, made before Christmas.  And I said, "I really need to start."  I said, "You know the funny thing about it is I don't know how to look for a job."  I never looked for a job.  So I don't know, I don't know what to do.  We were actually in--at the time we were on the West Coast and we were coming to, to Houston [Texas] for Thanksgiving.  And I said, "I, I have, I have got to--after Thanksgiving, I really need to start to look."  And so we came to Houston for Thanksgiving.  And my mother [Mary Dirden Douglas] asked me, she said, "You know anybody named Mike in Boston [Massachusetts]?"  I said, "I don't know anybody in Boston."  And she said, "Some guy named Mike Nelson [ph.] has called here three or four times and said if you came for Thanksgiving, to give him a call."  And so I did and it turned out it was the dean of, of Northeastern who said to me, "We heard you are considering leaving Syracuse.  And so would you like to come to Northeastern?"
Speaker 1: So did, did you know right away that you, you wanted to?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I went up to visit first.  But I kind of knew I wanted to.  I, I, I, I knew a lady that was on the, on the faculty at, at Northeastern.  And so I knew a little about Northeastern because--and it intrigued me.  North, Northeastern intrigued me.  There were two law schools that really, rally in--intrigued me.  One was Northeastern and the other one that I got an opportunity to work at was, was Antioch [School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I ended up turning down the opportunity at, at Antioch.
Speaker 1: In, in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: In D.C. because right after I got to, to Boston, Antioch pursued me as an associate dean.  But, and it really intrigued me because it was a stand-alone law school and I liked what they were doing.  Both Northeastern and Antioch had non-traditional legal education programs.
Story_ID: 165768
Speaker 1: So before we take you to Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], tell us about some of your activities increasing black enrollment at Chicago State, at, at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] rather.
Speaker 2: Right.  You know one of the, one of the things that intrigued me and, and one of the things that influenced me to stay in, in legal education, was that I discovered early on and, and when I was in law school, but also I was told before I came to law school that, you know, that it just wasn't a place for, for African Americans in the legal profession.  So there were very few African American lawyers at that time.  So one of the things that I committed myself to do was to increase the number of African American lawyers in this country.  So even when I, I really didn't have to talk so much about it when I went to Cleveland State 'cause the dean [Craig W. Christensen] had made that commitment to me.  But I think I told you early on that I wanted to go to Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] and meet with the faculty.  And one of the, the, the conversations I had with the faculty was to make sure that I knew the dean that when we were coming from Cleveland was committed to increasing the number of American Americans in their law school.  I wanted to make sure that Syracuse was interested in increasing the number of African Americans in the law school.  And so they, they made that commitment to me.  Oftentimes when people make commitments and those commitments are hard to live by.  And if I say I had one thing that, that I thought shouldn't have happened at Syracuse when I, when I arrived, one of the things I discovered was that Syracuse didn't have any money.  And not only the law school didn't have any money, the university didn't have any money.  But they said to me, "You know we don't have any money.  You admit these black students, but we don't have any money to fund them."  And my response was okay.  So believe it or not, and in fact I, I had friends at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] and all across the east coast, Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.], who could not believe that I could get African Americans to come to a private law school and pay they own way, but I did.  I was able to tremendously increase the, the number of, of African Americans in law school.  And people would say how do you recruit?  And I said, "I don't.  I let the African American students recruit."  One of the things I would do if I had an interesting African American student that, that I wanted, I would often say, "Here, call some of the black students.  Call the black students at Syracuse, and then call the black students at the law school that you're interested in attending.  And they will sell you on attending Syracuse University."  In fact there's a guy on the Fifth Circuit, James Grave [James E. Graves, Jr.] from, from Jackson, Mississippi.  And it's funny when, when he was inducted on the Fifth Circuit, he invited me to his induction ceremony.  And somebody asked him, "Well from Jackson, Mississippi, how did you get to Syracuse?"  And he said, "One Saturday I was lying across the bed and I got a call.  I was on this call for about thirty to forty minutes.  And when I got off, my wife said, 'what was that about?'"  And he said, "You know that's some fool from Syracuse that think I'm gone come up there and go to law school."  But, but I was that fool.  And I, I eventually convinced him that he ought to come to, come to Syracuse.  So I tell people I recruited black students like, like a football coach.  If I, if I got somebody, I latched onto 'em.  And that was all students.  I, I remember when I was in Cleveland once and this was an Asian student.  I went in one morning at, at nine o'clock and I, I started reading his file it was an Asian student.  And I'm god, this guy is tremendous, I have to have him.  And so I called him.  And he was, he was just enthused when I--by the time I got off the phone with him.  And he was just happy and all of that.  And then I hung up the phone and I realized you know I just called Hawaii, it's three o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: There, okay.  In, in Hawaii it was--
Speaker 2: In Hawaii.  And he came to Cleveland, graduated with honors, editor-in-chief of the law review and went to work for one of the larger law firms in, in, in, in Cleveland.  But I, I made, I made an effort everywhere I went to make sure that, that that was an increase in, in the number of African American law students that we had at the law school.
Story_ID: 165769
Speaker 1: What is going on in the world of, of law as it relates to the computer, the rise of the, the computer industry in the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, God!
Speaker 1: During that period of time, you know.
Speaker 2: During this period of time, it had started to grow.  And I mean it had, it had started to take off.  In fact one of the things that happened, I was instrumental in-because I was very--I had, I had become very involved with the American Bar Association [ABA].  I was on a number of the committees and I was instrumental in starting one of their sections, the section on science and technology.  I was one of the founders of, of that section and served on that council for, for years.  But it had started to take off.  And if you look at it today, I was talking to a friend yesterday who has retired from law practice and he say one of the reasons he retired from law practice was that he's too old school.  Technology had driven him out because now a lot of the courts re--require electronic filing.  I was reading an article the other day and this guy was saying his office is paperless and explaining why it makes sense to, to go paperless.  You don't see huge books in the library in, in law firms now.  Law schools have even started cutting back on, on the paper books that they buy and everything has gone, gone electronic in, in the legal profession now.
Speaker 1: Yeah that--we interviewed [HM] David Chaumette when we were in town last time who was a expert on electronic discovery.  He's a, he's a known, know for that.  But in 1975 for instance, I mean what was, what was the big issues?  What were the issues I guess, in terms of law and compu--technology.
Speaker 2: See right now in, in '75 [1975], I, I--you know we still hadn't gotten to the PC [personal computer] and the kind of technology.  So we still basically--the large mainframe in, in 1975.  There were a few people that were doing stuff, but we still--the, the major, large mainframes.  The Lexis [LexisNexis] system is a lot better.  They've expanded beyond Ohio and have started to go national.  They put a lot of federal stuff on there and started contracts with various state bars to, to put even the state materials on.  So it, it's starting to, to grow.  There are some, some basic law and--law management, law office management systems that are being developed.  But still remember we don't have the word processor yet.  We're still with the IBM.  We've come out with the [IBM] Selectric typewriter.  So we're moving in that direction, but we haven't got there in, in, in 19-, 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay both the--I was going to ask.  Were, were there issues a--around software development and hardware stuff?
Speaker 2: But it's, it's not so much about the issues were not--the issues about ownership.  The issues about how do, how do you own a piece of software, that was the issue that was taking place in, in, in the early '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 165770
Speaker 1: When you were teaching law in the mid-'70s [1970s] I guess, '74 [1974], '75 [1975], that's around the time of the Watergate hearings, right, it was '74 [1974] [sic, 1973] when they, they were on television?
Speaker 2: Right, right, the Watergate hearings taking place.
Speaker 1: I was won--won--wondering how that affected students, law students, you know watching a hearing of, of that kind of legal importance take place on TV.
Speaker 2: Well I don't, I don't think that--watching it affected a--I, I think what effect it had on law students was--the effect it had on law profession, because remember most of the parties involved in, in Watergate were lawyers.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And so one of the things that came out of that was a requirement that law school begin to teach legal ethics because at, at that point, legal ethics was really not taught at, at most law schools.  And I was kind of amazed because when we started talking about it and I was at--originally at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] when we first started talking about, to find out that, that a lot of the young lawyers just didn't know the rules.  They, they didn't know the rules and there's a rule, rules of professional responsibility that nobody ever talked about, really talked about in law school.  Also in the Spring of '75 [1975] I had an, had an opportunity to sit down with, with John [Wesley] Dean [III].  And to, to hear him recount for me his experience working with the president [Richard Nixon], and he admitted, he said, "Look, you know I'm a young lawyer that get an opportunity to work with the president."  And he said, "What most people don't understand it had nothing to do with the money, it had to do with the power."  He said, "When you can sit in a restaurant in Washington, D.C., pick up the phone, call for a taxi, get a, a limo," he didn't say a taxi, he said a limo, "get a limo to the airport, catch a plane to California, get a helicopter to where you want to go."  He said, "When you have that kind of power because of your relationship with the president, when the president asks you to do something, even though you know you shouldn't, you can't say no.  You, you, you can't say no."
Speaker 1: Did he feel sort, sort of immune from you know, harm, you know?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't feel immune from harm.  He didn't believe he was, he was gonna get caught.  But he felt he couldn't, he could not say no to Nixon.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he was--John Dean was [White House] Counsel to the president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: During the Watergate mess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 165771
Speaker 1: One of the craziest moments in my life was when I first arrived at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York].  Remember we're about a year out from the '76 [1976] election for president election.  About a year out, and I get a call one day from the Dean of Public Affairs, who's a big mover and shaker in [President] Jimmy Carter's campaign.  And this is early in the campaign, early, early 'cause Jimmy Carter started running real early.  And he said, "Jim," we had, we had a real nice auditorium in the law school.  So he said, "Jim, you know I'm having Jimmy Carter in town tonight.  And he's gonna be in, in your auditorium."  He said, "I, I have a problem."  And I say, "What's that?"  He said, "I have about an hour that I need somebody to just sit down and talk to him."  He said, "You've got a real nice office.  I'd like to bring him by and leave him with you for an hour."  And I said, "Look man, I said there's no way in hell a peanut farmer from Georgia is ever gonna be President of the United States.  I have better things to do; don't waste my time with some fool."
Speaker 2: That was--so you didn't know much about him, then.  I, I don't think a lot of pe--people knew much about Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 1: Well I knew a lot about him.  But I didn't think he, he stood a snowball's chance to ever be president of the United States, I really did not.
Speaker 2: Did you know he was, what was he, a deputy commander of a nuclear sub?
Speaker 1: Yes, I, I, I--the question wasn't about qualification.  I've always knew to be president was--there was never a question about qualification.  I mean Reagan proved that, and then George Bush definitely proved that.  So it wasn't about whether he was qualified.  I think that might have been one of his Achilles heels was that he was too qualified, he thought too much.  That's one of--
Speaker 2: Well I was--the reason why I said something 'cause I think a lot of people had im--im--impression he was a peanut farmer and that was it.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.  That, that, that wasn't--that wasn't my--I just didn't, just the politics of, of the time, I didn't think--I thought it was very, very difficult for a Democrat, but I definitely thought it would be extremely difficult for Jimmy Carter to win the, the Democratic nomination, and definitely didn't think he would be able to beat a Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if I remember those days correctly, I think that the Republicans were in a good position to get whipped because--or, or be beaten because of the Watergate scandal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: But the surprise was Jimmy Carter seemed to come out of nowhere.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And win, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Everybody assumed it would be a Kennedy, you know, Ted Kennedy would be the one.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or someone better known, you know, but wasn't the case.
Story_ID: 165772
Speaker 1: But, but one of the other issues at, at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], I told you that they told me no money, I was able to get students in.  But one of the things I discovered because I told you I, I'd become very involved with the ABA [American Bar Association].  There's another--in legal education, there's a organization called the Law School Admissions Council.  And the Law School Admissions Council oversees the Law School Admissions Services.  Law School Admissions Services is, is the organization that develops and administers the Law School Admissions Test [LSAT].  And most people don't know the law school admissions test is actually owned by a corporation that's owned by all the law schools.  So law schools actually put it together.  I, I'd become very in--involved in, in, in that organization.  But--
Speaker 2: Now are these--is that organization affiliated with the ABA at all?
Speaker 1: Law School Admissions Services?  No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's, it's a separate organization that's owned by the law schools, collectively.
Speaker 2: Okay, so all the law schools are members?
Speaker 1: All the law schools are members.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, all the ABA approved law schools are members.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  That, that's how ABA went to--
Speaker 1: Right.  You have to be a ABA approved law school to be an Admissions, a member of the council.
Speaker 2: Are there any law schools that are not ABA approved these days?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are some that are not ABA approved.
Speaker 2: Which ones would some of them be?  I mean do you know any names offhand?
Speaker 1: I don't know--
Speaker 2: At one time none of the black ones were, were ABA approved.  I'm sure of that, right?
Speaker 1: No.  No that's not true.  For a long time, see Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] has been approved for a long time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Texas Southern's [University, Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] been approved, Southern [University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and North Carolina Central [University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina].  Those were basically the four that were approved for a long period of time.  And most people don't know back in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], there were probably about thirty or forty black law schools.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they all, they all ultimately closed down, especially after integration.  They--and--
Speaker 2: They're associated with the universities?
Speaker 1: Some, some of them were.  Like, probably the one that, that come to mind is Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma], Langston had one at one time.
Story_ID: 165773
Speaker 1: But anyway, there's a formula that a lot of law schools use in admitting law students.  And when I got involved, I got involved first at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and, and the Cleveland State faculty kind of understood my argument because one of the things I discovered in, in looking at that formula, was that it had a negative effect on black students who came from black universities.  So if, if you were an African American and you attended one of the HBCUs [historically black college and universities], this fact had a negative effect on, on your ability to get into law school.
Speaker 2: Well is the difference cultural or what?  What, what is the difference?
Speaker 1: Look, one of, one of the things--and, and it's called a law school means, all right.  What they did in the '60s [1960s], is that there were not a lot of blacks going to law school.  And they--the, the, the formula is based on a predictive value.  They try to predict how well a student is going to do in law school.  And so they didn't have a lot of black students who took the LSAT.  So they went to a lot of the black colleges and they said look, we got this test.  These students might not be interested in going to law school, but we just want you to see if you can get them to take the test.  And so from the HBCUs students don't do that well.  They--the, the average score of a student coming from a HBCU is low.  But if you do well, all right, this test says the, the mean, the LCM [least common multiple], is what it was called, said maybe you did well on the test, but because other people from that school didn't do well on the test, it probably means your grades are inflated.  All right.  So my first task, and at this time I had started working, 'cause I had gotten involved in Law School Admissions Council, I started working with them to eliminate this factor.  But by the time I got to Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], it hadn't been eliminated.  I, I talked to the people at, at and we eliminated it from our decision making process.  Well when I got to Syracuse and discovered they was still using it, I asked the faculty to, to eliminate it.  And so I went to the admissions committee because that's normally--faculties work through committees.  And I asked the, the admissions committee to eliminate it.  And there was a heated discussion, and I basically said, "If you don't eliminate it, my tenure at Syracuse will be one year."  And so the committee passed it.  And then the faculty passed it.  When the faculty passed it, the woman who was chair of the committee, resigned as chair, accused me of holding a gun to the faculty, and told me that I was very arrogant.  My response was I didn't hold a gun to the faculty, faculty could decide what they wanted to do.  My only requirement was I was not gonna work on a faculty that used that as a part of the admissions criteria because it had such a negative effect on, on African Americans.  And that African Americans didn't consider me arrogant, they considered me a person with a lot of confidence.  So--but the faculty did eliminate it and I say--and in fact, I pushed the council to do a study on it and discovered that not only did it not have a positive, it did not have a positive, predictive value, it had a negative predictive value.  And so the council eliminated a part of admissions for all law schools.
Story_ID: 165774
Speaker 1: That's--also while I was at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] because of my involvement in ABA [American Bar Association] and we'll get to this later when I become dean at Thurgood [Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  We, we conducted a study.  And the study was to look at four phases of law school.  First was recruitment, admissions, graduation and bar performance.  And look at the racial discrepancy in those four aspects.  And everything--the numbers kind of lined up, you know, minorities got recruited, minorities enter law school, you know if they had the same factors, law, I mean grades, LSAT [law school admissions test], they, they graduated.  That is if they were predicted to do well, they did well.  If they wasn't, they didn't do well.  So everything worked out until it got the bar.  When it got the bar, African Americans and Mexican Americans who had the same experience as a while student, did much worse on the bar.  I mean it was no--it was so notable that--and so the ultimate decision was the ABA didn't have enough money to do a real thorough study because the study we did would--the data was voluntarily given by the law schools, and some law schools didn't give data, some state bar didn't give the data.  So we didn't have the data for all the law schools and all the state bar.  And the, and it, it was estimated cost about three or four million dollars to do it.  The ABA didn't have three or four million dollars.  So when we published the study, the study only included three portions and did not do the bar.  And so one of the decisions I made then was that I was going to find some organization that was gonna do the bar study.  But we'll, we'll talk about the bar study later 'cause it's, it's about six or seven years before we ultimately, ultimately get it done.
Story_ID: 165775
Speaker 1: So all right so now we're at, we're, we're at Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: We're at Northeastern.
Speaker 1: And Boston [Massachusetts], it's in '70 [1970], 1980--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].  The fall of 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So since you're there at Northeastern is the nation's leader in experiential legal education.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It is, it is the only law school in the country that requires student to do co-ops while in law school.  And, and what happens and the way the, the program is structured at Northeastern, it's on the quarter system.  Students spend their first nine months in the traditional program, look like any other law school program.  But beginning with the Summer quarter after the first year, half of the class, the first year class, goes out to work and the other half go to school.  And then for the next two years, they rotate.  You spend one quarter in school, one quarter working.  And, and so it, it's a, it's a real effective program.  Probably the, the biggest benefit of it is placement because Northeastern is also a pass/fail.  So students don't get grades, which is kind of unheard of in the law school world 'cause it's--law school world is really competitive.  And most of--especially at the major law firms, the major corporations, most decisions to hire is based on how well did you do in law school.  And all you, all they know is you passed.  So--but, but what happens though is I would say about seventy-five or eighty percent of the students form Northeastern get jobs based on their performance in one of their cooperative experiences.  So it's been a tremendous placement experience for each one of the students.
Story_ID: 165776
Speaker 1: You were only there [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] a year.
Speaker 2: I was only there a year.  My intent was, and it was really strange.  I'd been there about a month and I got a call from a faculty member here at Texas Southern [University, Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].  And I had known her because I was the one who convinced her to go into legal education.  I met her--one of the things I did as my involvement in the Law School Admissions Council, was I convinced the council to allow us to do a conference in Atlanta [Georgia].  We did it at Atlanta Complex [Atlanta University Center], in which we invited the pre-law advisor and, and the provost from every HBCU [historically black college and university] to talk about how to increase the likelihood of their graduates to getting into law school.  Met this woman, name was Tanya Banks [ph.], at that conference.  At the time she was pre-law advisor at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi].  And just in talking to her, discovered she had graduated from Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with honors.  Had been a member of the law review.  And I said to her, "I know you're not making any money in, in criminal justice and political science.  If you're really gonna stay in teaching, you need to be at a law school."  And so she ended up accepting a job here at, at Texas Southern.  So she called me, I'd been there about a, a week or so.  And this gets into some of the politics of higher education.  So she said--we talked about me coming to, to Northeastern, asked me how I liked it.  I said, "You know, I love it.  I, you know Boston is a, is a big city.  I think I'm, I'm comfortable enough that I can spend the rest of my career.  I think I'll retire from here."  And she said, "You love it that much?"  I said, "Yeah, I mean I love it.  I mean it, it, it wouldn't be like being back at Thurgood [Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  I mean I--that would be my first choice."  And she said, "Stop lying."  I said, "What do you mean?"  She say, "You, you know never intended to come back here."  And I said, "But I do, I would love to be there."  And she said, "Well why you keep turning down all our offers?"  And I said, "Well I have never gotten an offer from Thurgood."  I said, "In fact, when I first thought about leaving Syracuse [University School of Law, Syracuse, New York], the first thing I did was call Otis [King]," and Otis was the dean of--"I mean when I first thought about leaving Syracuse, the first thing I did was call Otis.  And, and Otis told me you--Thurgood didn't have any opening."  She said, "James, you're lying."  I said, "Why do you think I'm lying?"  She said, "Because the last two years when we started in the fall to talk about law school hiring, the faculty has asked the dean to contact you and see if you were ready to come back.  And both times he's come back and said you said you had no interest."
Story_ID: 165777
Speaker 1: So now the dean [Otis King] is caught in a lie it sounds like, or you know.
Speaker 2: Well he's not caught yet.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: So she said, "James, I, I, I don't believe that."  I said, "Well I'm telling you the truth."  She said, "Let me tell you what."  She said, "Now one of you're lying.  I don't know whether it's you or Otis [King], but one of you are lying."  I said, "Well it's not me."  She said, "I tell you what I'm gonna do."  She said, "When are you gonna be in Houston [Texas]?  When is the next time you're gonna be in Houston?"  I said, "I'll be in Houston Thanksgiving."  Said, "All right," she said, "I tell you what I'm gone do."  She said, "I'm gonna give a small cocktail party.  And among the people that I'm gonna invite is gonna be some of the faculty from the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas], including the dean, and you."  She said, "and somewhere during the evening and we're just sitting around talking, I'm gonna ask what would it take to get you to come back to Thurgood."  So she did.  During the middle of the cocktail party, she said, "What would it take you?"--and I said, "An offer."  She said, "What do you mean an offer?"  I said, "An offer."  She said, "You've never had an offer?"  And I said, "I have never had an offer."  She said, "Otis never offered you a job?"  I said, "No, Otis has never offered me a job."  So one of the faculty members said, "Otis, is that true?"  And he didn't say anything.  One of the other faculty members said, "Otis, you heard James.  Is what he said true?"  He got up, got his coat and left, never responded to it.  Now the next day (unclear) talking to one of his friends, he said look, on the faculty.  He said I, I--he won't talk to me about it.  I don't know what it is; he won't talk about it.  So I guess about three months after that, the same woman called me and said, "You need to send us a resume."  I said, "For what?"  She said, "We looking for a dean."  Now his exit as a dean had nothing to do with, with this situation.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Related.  No, no, no, no, no, no, no.  I'm serious.  It was, it was, it was some other factors that had absolutely nothing to do with--I, I know for sure it had--he was in some other problems with--at the university that had absolutely nothing to do with, do with me.  Because--
Speaker 1: Did it have anything else to do with lying?
Speaker 2: No, no, I had, I had an interesting conversation in I think it was '78 [1978] or so.  Because by this time, Dr. [Granville M.] Sawyer's no longer president.  Dr. Spearman, Leonard H.O. Spearman, is president.  Now in '78 [1978] I did, I did get an inquiry about being the dean.  I was in Houston for Christmas and Dr. Sawyer asked if I would have breakfast with him.  I had breakfast with him and he asked me, "What would it take to get you to come to Thurgood as dean?"  And I said, "Won't discuss it with you, and I think it would be a bad idea for you."  And he said, "What do you mean?"  I said, Ffirst of all, I don't seek a position where somebody's already there.  And sScond"--and the dean was on a leave.  I said, "And second, you don't want that reputation."  He said, "What reputation?"  I said, "the last dean was on leave when you fired him.  You don't wanna fire another dean that's on leave."
Speaker 1: They'd be scared to take a leave I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.  But, but no Otis is--and that's another story that had absolutely nothing to do with whatever happened between the two of us.  I don't know what, what was between the two of us.  But, but I never, I never got an offer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then so you come back as dean when you come back?
Speaker 2: I come back as dean.
Story_ID: 165778
Speaker 1: But getting back to Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], Northeastern was interesting and, and remember I told you every place I go, I try to improve it.  I'd been at Northeastern a few months and now this is an interesting experience because other than the young lady that I knew, African American woman who was on the faculty and she had taught for a few years at Wayne State [University Law School, Detroit, Michigan] before she got to Northeastern.  Nearly everybody on the faculty at Northeastern had never taught before they came to Northeastern.  Northeastern was a, a redevelopment of an old law school that had closed down.  And a group of guys from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], all of whom hated their law school experience, 'cause I remember talking to the dean the first time and he--when I went up to look at Northeastern, and he asked me what did I think.  And I said, "If I accept the job, I'm probably--I'll probably be the only person on the faculty who really enjoyed my law school experience."  So everybody hated their law school experience at Harvard and Yale and decided they wanted to do something different, which is one of the reasons they came up with, with the whole cooperative concept.  But the whole university of Northeastern is cooperative.  But because they had this concept, Northeastern University was interested in it.
Story_ID: 165779
Speaker 1: While we're on that, I mean what were some of the--I mean people are always extolling, you know, Harvard Law [School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale Law [School, New Haven, Connecticut] and all that sort of thing.  And the people that graduate, you know, are seen as having come out of the top schools in the country and are able to--you know, you see them in corporate America and government and that sort of thing.  But what were their criticisms?  What were their criticisms of those programs?
Speaker 2: It's, it's a criticism of most law programs.  A lot of 'em are heavy in the Socratic method of teaching.  And I will admit that most of law faculty members are horrible Socratic teachers because they don't understand it, they don't understand the benefit of it, and they don't explain it to the students.  Faculty members ask me all the time why do I get along so well with students?  I'm, I'm a strict Socratic method teacher, but I explain to the students what's happening to them, why it's happening to them, what the benefit is, and how it works.
Speaker 1: Explain it to us.
Speaker 2: Well it comes from, from, from some Socrates.  It was Socrates' method of teaching.  And what Socrates would do, was that he would give his students a series of readings.  And then they would meet and he would quiz on their level of understanding of the readings.  And, and that's what the case method is all about.  See I tell students, and, and this is what students don't understand.  I tell them there are two, two benefits to going to law school.  The first one is the benefit of an education, all right, and, and, and I ask them what is the purpose of an education?  And it's, it's kind of a question--I have a, a daughter who, who started teaching a few years ago.  And she was complaining about her class one day and I asked her, I said, "What is your goal?  What is, what is, what is the end game?  What do you hope to accomplish in the classroom?"  And she said, "Well I wanna get my students to a point where they understand everything that we're covering."  And I said, "No."  And she said, "Well what ought to be my end?"  I said, "You ought to wanna get your students to a point where they don't need you.  You ought to wanna produce independent learners.  I mean what people go to school for is to learn how to learn."  And so I tell my law students, I said the problem that most students make when they come to law school is they think they come to law school to learn the law.  But that's not true.  The benefit of a legal education is not to learn the rules.  The benefit of the legal education is to improve the development of your analytical skills.  Now we use law as a vehicle for developing those skills.  But the rules are only a residue of that experience.  The true--
Speaker 1: So you, okay, okay go--
Speaker 2: The true purpose of that experience is to prove your analytical skills.  I don't want you to know the rules, I want you to understand the rules.
Story_ID: 165780
Speaker 1: --And knowing how to, knowing how to use it.  Knowing how to use it.  I don't ever tell a student like at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], they say that the secret is a faculty member never answers a question.  That's true.  I remember I took a course from my advisor at Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California].  And John never answered a question.  I mean he, he drove the students crazy.  And sometimes we, we'd be--we'd meet if it was an afternoon after we'd had a class, and he would say, "Jim, how'd the class go?"  And I would say, "John, if the court considered all the things you discussed in class, they'd never get an opinion made."  So in, in those environments, faculty generally don't answer questions.  Everything has a possibility, all right.  I don't do that.  I, I, I tell--it is true, and I tell my students this is what they, they need to know, all right.  And I, I joke with 'em.  I say look, I can tell most of you here have majored in some liberal arts area.  Political science, public affairs, history, most of you have majored in a liberal arts area.  And the reason you did was you hated math-based courses.  Math-based courses had a definite answer.  Now you come to law school and you want a definite answer.  But the amazing thing is there are generally no definite answers in law school, all right.  If it's black and white, people don't litigate.  People litigate when it's gray.  So we gone learn how to deal with the gray area because that's where lawyers make their money.  All right and then we talk about even though there's no--there might not be any right answers and faculty members generally tell students there, there are some wrong answers.  And we talk about how to arrive of--what are the possible answers that could be right, and why the wrong answers--I'm also a person who believes if I ask a student a question and the student's answer is incorrect, it's not just enough for me to tell the student what the correct answer is.  I have to logically lead that, lead that student from his incorrect answer to the correct answer.  Now going back to Harvard and Yale.  Why do they do so great?  It's the same thing.  I, I, I had one professor when I was at Stanford admit it.  He said, "Look, first day, all of you all gon' be great."  He said, "The reason we know all you gon' be great because in our admissions process, we only admit people who are gonna be great.  So our job as a faculty is to make sure we don't mess you up while you're here."  So you know it, it's, it's like taking one chef and giving 'em all the best ingredients, and taking another chef and giving the worst ingredients, and then try to understand why the person with the best ingredients succeeds.  So they get all, they get the best students in the world, that's why they are great, 'cause they get the students.  And those students are gonna be successful no matter what.
Story_ID: 165781
Speaker 1: But anyway, so we had all these guys from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who didn't like their Harvard experience.  Remember I said I--one of the things, I loved law school.  Mainly because I, I kind of understood what it was when, when I went.  And it's an amazing thing.  About thirty-five years ago, we were sitting around in the Law School Admissions Council in one of our meetings and somebody said you know, we always tell students that you can major in anything and go to law school.  But what we've never tried to find out is whether one subject or one major prepares students better for law school than others.  And since we had a lot of money, we'd figure we'd do a study and find out.  And what that study revealed was that people who majored in math and math based subject matters, physics, engineering, did better in law school than people coming out of liberal arts.  And a part of that, and I tell my students, I ask them, I say what do lawyers do?  Lawyers solve problems.  They are, they are problem solvers.  And so people who come from a problem solving, analytical background are generally better prepared for law school.  And so having coming from that problem solving analytical background, I mean it was just, I mean where we're not solving natural problems, we solve problems dealing with the inner relationship between members of society.  But the process is still the same.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, so I enjoyed, I enjoyed law school.  In fact, law school was the first academic experience I truly enjoyed because it gave me an opportunity to talk in class, rather than to have some person standing in front of me, giving me a fifty minute lecture on some material that I read before I got to class, and completely understood.  So I was, I was bored till I got to law school, 'cause then I got an opportunity to talk to faculty and discuss stuff with my students and stuff.  It was just fun.
Story_ID: 165782
Speaker 1: But I get to North- I get to Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].  So I'd been there about three months, three or four months, and one day in a faculty meeting, one of the faculty asked, he said, "Jim, you're the more experienced faculty member here.  Based on the number of law schools you've, you've worked."  He said, "How would you evaluate what we do?"  And I said, "I'll give you an analogy."  I said, "One day, there, there was this guy who was walking down the street.  And at the doorway of this beautiful house appeared a friend.  And the friend said, 'Jim, why don't you move in with us?'  I looked at the house, it was extremely attractive.  So I went home and I packed my bags and I moved in.  But soon as I stepped through the front door, I realized the house was just a shell, there was no drywall, there was no cabinetry, there was nothing, it was empty inside."  So after the faculty meeting, about half the faculty came to my office and said what did you mean by that analogy?  And I said, "You all have no idea of how this place is mismanaged."  I said, "You don't, you don't know what you're doing to these students."  And they said, "Like what, they come, they graduate.  What do you mean?  What else do we need to do?"  I said, "Well let me explain one.  This is what you all have never thought about.  The way the program works when students are in co-op [cooperative], they're in Boston [Massachusetts] for ten weeks.  All right, and then they're ten weeks on a co-op.  All right.  So what happens in Boston, in Boston you cannot lease in Boston other than September 1st to August 31st.  You can't get a lease for any other period of time.  Simply impossible.  I discovered that when I, when I arrived in, in Boston in June.  And so I had to sublet until--and that's the way it is.  But the students are locked into a one year lease.  So when they leave town, two things have to happen.  One, they've got to find some person to sublet for ten weeks while they're gone.  Also, they have to acquire a lease for ten weeks where they're going.  So it's just a lot of transition with the students.  Then the other one was the subject matter, and nobody--we didn't have an operat--operation to help the students with that.  The other one was the subject matter.  One of the courses I teach is commercial law, all right, which is divided into three sections.  All right, sales, commercial papers, and secured transaction, all right."  I say, "When I walk into a class, and there are a number of courses that were divided into sections.  When I walk into a class, I have three different kinds of students in that class.  I have one set of students who've never taken a course before.  Then I've got another set of students who've either taken commercial law or sales.  And then I have a third set who's taken sales and commercial law.  Now all of this is from the same code.  And so the ability to deal with the students are different because of their experience in the three different areas of the law."  So we talked about it.  "Plus" I said, and this is gonna sound strange.  I said, "You all have no written set of academic policy.  There are no rules, there are no academic rules."  So I was kind of a quasi-administrator from that point on (laughter).
Story_ID: 165783
Speaker 1: Okay, so they [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] did adopt--did, did they adopt rules?
Speaker 2: They had not one--I drafted one and we were in the middle of it 'cause things take a long time in law school, well in university administration.  So I adopted one and we were mid--in the middle of adopting it be--before--
Speaker 1: Before you had--
Speaker 2: I, I left.  One of the things that happened, which kind of a short story.  I interviewed with Northeastern even though they told me, this was back probably about '77 [1977].  They were looking for a dean.  I interviewed for a dean.  Had talked to the people at Northeastern and they basically told me that I was too young, they didn't have anybody on their faculty as young as I was and they just wanted to meet me to see the person who'd accomplished all that I had by the age that I was.  But an interesting happened when, when, when I announced that I was coming to Thurgood [Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] as the dean, a group of faculty visited my office and informed me that they wished that I wouldn't leave.  That the reason they were interested in me coming to Northeastern as a faculty member, was that they expected the dean wasn't gonna be there more than another year or two, and they really wanted me to be the next dean.  And so they wanted me to stay at, at Northeastern.
Speaker 1: During this period of time, you--did you know that when you were there, or did you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't, I didn't know that until after I had announced that I was coming to Thurgood as a dean.
Story_ID: 165784
Speaker 1: Well 1981 as dean of Thurgood Marshall Law School [Thurgood Marshall School of Law] here at Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas].  What were some of the challenges here?
Speaker 2: Well the first, the, the--it was, it was a, it was a interview and I won't call any names, but when I came down to, to interview for the dean and, and, and I was getting ready to leave, the woman who had said something to me about--that started the whole deal with, with Dean [Otis] King, asked me how did I think the whole process was going.  And I said, "I'm gonna get the job."  And she said, "James, that's a real arrogant position to take," and I said, "No, I said I'm gonna get the job" and she said--I said, "I'm gon' tell you why I'm gonna get the job."  And there were, there were four finalists.  I told her one of the finalists wasn't even the ballpark and, and I don't even know why they invited him for an interview.  I said there were two other finalists.  There was one that was from an East Coast law school.  And I said your--the faculty impression of him is that he's too New York slick.  So I know he won't get the job.  And the third one was a guy who was in his fifties.  And he was associate dean at a Midwestern law school.  And I said, "he's gonna get the offer, but he's gonna turn it down.  And then you all are gonna come to me."  I said, "je's gonna get the offer because you all think he's more mature than me."  And she said, "well suppose I told you that he has promised me that if he got the offer, he would definitely accept?"  Because I knew they had grown up together.  And I said, "if he told you that, I guarantee you he told you that before he visited."  I said, "I know once he visit here, he knows he can't function as the dean here."  Fast forward.  One Friday evening I'm sitting in my office, and he calls.  Said, "Jim, this is so-and-so and so-and-so, how's it going?"  He and I knew each other.  He said, "I just got off the phone with Dr. [Robert J.] Terry [sic, Dr. Leonard H.O. Spearman] down at TSU."  I said, "Yes."  He said, "I got the offer."  He said, "I'm calling you for two reasons."  He said, "The first one is I don't want you to be upset because I got the offer first.  I don't want you to turn it down because you didn't get the first offer."  He said, "And the second reason is I wanna know what's important to you.  I wanna know what your major demand is gonna be?"  He said, "Because I will use that as the reason for turning it down, and it'll make it easier for you to get what you need."  And so that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Exactly as you thought it would be.
Speaker 2: Yes. So I, I knew because even a few years later, Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman wanted some information about the search process.  So I had to pull the files to look at the search.  And everybody's comment was, which I knew, that I was by far the most experienced person in the search, but I was too young.  I, I, I knew that was, that was gonna be issue, that age was gonna be the issue.  And so I knew that, that John appeared to be, to outsiders, people who had not worked with me.  But I remember when I was an assistant dean at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], the assistant to the dean was complaining about one of the other assistant deans.  And she said, "I, I, I keep telling the dean he shouldn't hire all these young--these people just too young to know how to manage, they can't do this."  She just complained about young people.  And so I said, his name was Dan.  I said, "Marlene [ph.], Dan and I are the same age."  She said, "Yeah Jim, but you just different."  And so people who didn't work with me who just looked at my age, I knew it was a, it was a problem for them.
Story_ID: 165785
Speaker 1: So 1981 you, you start as dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] here at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas].  So, so what were some of the--what did you wanna do first you know I guess.  What was the first, first thing you did as dean?
Speaker 2: The first thing I wanted to do, and I told everybody during the interview, Texas Southern was--Thurgood Marshall was having tremendous problems with bar performance.  And my position was that the Bar has been a problem for African Americans forever.  That if there was one place where we ought to be able to discover solution for the problems African Americans were performing on the Bar, this ought to be the place.  So the first thing I wanted to accomplish was--which became one of the most difficult things to do, was to change things so that we improve our performance.  One of the things that I know about human nature, is people might want a different outcome, but they don't wanna change the way they do things.  So that was, that was one of the, the, the big roadblocks.  The first--that was the second biggest.  The first big issue I step into the first year was when I arrived, there was--I didn't know anything and I have been a very, very big student advocate.  I mean I was very involved in students, so I've always involved students in everything.  'Cause I always want, I always want their input.  Be, be, because--and I've always had a very, very good relationship with students.  It was hard when I left Thur--when I left Thurgood while it was Texas Southern Law School the first time when I went to Cleveland [Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] 'cause the students got a petition to keep me from leaving.  Same thing true when I left Syracuse [University School of Law, Syracuse, New York].  So I've, I've been--I've always had a very, very good relationship with students.  So one of the things at Thurgood, they had students on every committee.  And the recommendation for students on committees came from the student bar.  So naturally I come as dean, I don't know anybody.  So I get the recommendation from the student bar, and I present them to--it wasn't the faculty, this was a law school council.  There were two law schools in the world that had law school councils.  One was Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], the other one was Thurgood.  Which involved a lot of students on the decision making process.  So I present my recommendations for committees to the council, and there's a uproar because the complaint is there are not enough Mexican American students on the committees because--and there's definitely not, there's not a Mexican American recommended for the admissions committee, and no Mexican American recommended for the academic committee.
Story_ID: 164000
Speaker 1: So we're talking about the beginnings over here as dean at TSU [Thurgood Marshall Law School at Texas Southern University, TSU, Houston, Texas].  Now you were there for fourteen years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were here for fourteen years as dean of the law school (unclear).
Speaker 2: I was here for fourteen years.  I, I, I came with the intent of staying five or six.  But the job took about twice as long as I thought it would take.  I think you asked me earlier the longest I'd been on a job.  And normally I stay on a job as long as I can grow.  And generally four or five years I've learned everything that I think I need to know about job and then I'm ready to, to, to move on.  But I also go into a job to accomplish something.  And generally it takes me four or five years to accomplish what I need to accomplish.  Here it took me longer than four or five years to accomplish what I needed to accomplish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah I, you know I would have thought probably in 1981, that you probably were never coming back here too.  If I didn't know the story you just told, I probably would have thought he's never coming back to Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 2: Well re--remember I said earlier I left for one reason only.  I never wanted to teach any place else.  And I really did leave to go away and learn.  And once I thought I'd learned how to run a law school and learned how a university operated, it was time for me to come back.  When I left Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], I knew I was, I was ready to, to come back at that point.
Speaker 1: So you're coming back to a place that you love, a place that you wanna see prosper.
Speaker 2: I do.  And I came back to a place that was in serious trouble.  At the time in, in 1981, in the Spring of '81 [1981] and the law school has gone through what's called a show cause hearing before the American Bar Association.  That's the step before the American Bar Association withdraws it's, it's accreditation.  And then a strange thing happened when I flew down to meet with Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman to negotiate my contract.  He, he opened the meeting by saying, "Jim, I'm gonna be honest with you."  He said, "We can't afford a law school.  Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] does not have the finances to have a law school."
Story_ID: 164001
Speaker 1: This is maybe a, a good time to just reflect on the origins of--we talked about it in the first part of the interview, but the, the reason why Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] has a law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law], basically is because of the State of Texas trying to comply with what the federal mandates that they admit black students to the University of Texas Law [University of Texas School of Law, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But, but interesting thing happened in, in that history.  Most people don't know it, and when I tell people they find it almost unbelievable.  The intent of the state for creating Thurgood Marshall Law School [Houston, Texas], was to create a law school that would give them the opportunity to make a reasonable argument to the Supreme Court [of the United States] that African Americans had a separate law school in Texas that was equal to the University of Texas [Austin, Texas].  That decision was rendered in 1950.  And which the Supreme Court basically said the law school at, at Texas Southern is not equal.  But if you look at the opinion, the, the criteria that they established would have been impossible for the state to meet.  They said they didn't have any long well established alumni.  The, the library connection was not as great.  So they put up a lot of stuff that was no way a law school that was three years old [Thurgood Marshall Law School established in 1947] could have the kind of reputation in the profession that a law school that, that was almost one hundred years old would have.  So anyway it wasn't equal.  They, they, they said U.T. [University of Texas] is gonna have to admit Sweatt [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950].  That was in 1950.  The legislature in Texas meets every other year.  So in 1951 when the legislature met, they cut Texas Southern, while at that time it was called Texas State University for Negroes [later, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  They cut Texas State University Negroes budget by thirty-nine percent.
Speaker 1: That's a big cut.
Speaker 2: That's a big cut.  But see now it doesn't have to be equal to U.T.  Anyway so they were having all these serious problems with bar and everything else, salaries.
Speaker 1: Well just 'cause, just to dwell on that a second.  So you got a law school in a, a, a very, a small state supported school with a law school that has basically been abandoned by the state in terms of funding and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's not, it's never gonna come anywhere near your University of Texas Law, Law School, and may not can barely make it because of the--
Speaker 2: At that point, yes.  But we're getting to some of the things that I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To make it better.
Story_ID: 164002
Speaker 1: So, so we're in this ABA [American Bar Association] problem and Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman says to me, "We, we don't--we can't afford a law school."  And I said to him, "Dr. Spearman, I'll take this job if you'll make me two promises."  And he said, "What are they?"  And I said, "First when I increase the revenue, you promise me you won't take it all."  And he said, "All right, I promise you I won't take it all."  I said, "And second, I have the authority to manage the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].  I have to be in a position where I make all the decisions related to the management of the law school."  See I had been at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and so I knew that central administration had a habit of, of over-reaching.  And I said, "I have to have complete authority to manage the law school."  He said, "You have it," and so I accepted the position.  So that was the beginning.  One was to improve the bar, the other one was to increase the revenue.
Story_ID: 164003
Speaker 1: I told you I, I walked into this Mexican American issue.  And so there would--the complaint was there are no Mexican Americans on the admissions committee and on the academic standing committee and I didn't know.  So I said all right.  Then what I'll do is I'll withdraw my recommendation.  I'll see what, what the situation is.  So I sit down with the student leaders and the president happened to be an African American.  And he said, "Look, the Mexican American students ran and they supported in total, my opponent.  They need to understand what politics is all about.  So I'm not about to appoint any of them to the committee."  So my position is I couldn't persuade him to do it.  So I said to the council, it's, it's his decision.  It's the students' decision who they want to serve on a committee.  I am not gonna force them to do something.  I said but I, I agree there ought to be some Mexican American representation on the committee.  So I will make sure that I appoint Mexican American faculty members to the committee, and which I did.  But that was not acceptable to a number of the faculty members and not acceptable to the Mexican American students.  And in fact it went on.  I mean I had Mexican American legislatures calling me.  In fact, I got a frantic call one day from Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman who said, "You know I got a call from '60 Minutes' and they wanna come down," and I said, "Dr. Spearman let '60 Minutes' come do a story.  I'm not concerned about '60 Minutes.'"  So there was this--all; this pressure and it went on until March.  And what happened in March was Dr. Spearman called me in his office and he said, "Jim, I'm gone make a plea to you to change your decision."  And I said, "Dr. Spearman, I, you know I, I made it clear that I'm not--that's a student function.  I'm not gonna tell the students what to do."  And he said, "Then I'm gonna demand that you do it."  I said, "And when you do," I said, "you'll have my resignation."  I said, "I'm not gonna raise a stink.  I just work till the end of the year and I'll be gone."  And he said, "Don't be so hasty."  I said, "I'm not hasty."  I said, "Back in October when I decided that I was not gonna force the students to do it, I knew that at some point you and I would have this conversation."  I said, "I made the decision then that when you and I had this conversation, I was gonna resign.  So it's not a hasty decision, I lived with this decision since October."  And so he backed down.
Story_ID: 164004
Speaker 1: But going back to improving the bar, and increasing revenue.  It turned out increasing revenue turned out to be the easiest of the two.  One of the things that my experience had led me, especially from being at Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] and--but more specifically from managing the law school at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], was that I understood revenue generation and in higher education, especially in public education, revenue generation is, is based a lot on attendance.  What is your enrollment numbers?  And so Texas has a formula system for creating the budget.  I mean that's not to say that you can't get extra money.  But the basic money is creating--is created using a formula.  And I, I, I ran the formula, realized that the formula we had just didn't generate enough revenue.  I had gotten some promises when I first arrived from people in Austin [Texas], that they would help me on the extra money.  And I was able to get some extra money, but it wasn't enough.  And I realized that it was never going to be enough; that I had to somehow generate enough base budget in order to operate the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  So the first thing I did was I ran the formula and realized that there was a strange way the formulas in Texas were constructed.  They--the formulas addressed--they--there's a graduated formula for small universities in every area other than academics.  They realize if you have a small school, your rate and facilities is gonna be up.  If you have a small school, security's gonna be up.  If you have (unclear) rate.  But when it come to academics, there's no variance.  And so I, I, I worked with in Texas what's called a [Texas Higher Education] Coordinating Board, because they're the ones who recommend to the legislature things that pertain higher education.  And I said, "You know it's, it's really crazy.  In small law schools, everybody's treated the same on the academic side."  I say, "Why don't you have a graduated formula for small law schools?"  So the commissioner told me, he say, "All right Jim," he said, "I tell you what.  If, if you develop one, I'll recommend it to the legislature."  Now my feeling at the end of the process was he said, hell there's no way he's gone be able to develop a formula for--but I did.  I developed one for, presented it to the commissioner and he's no, I can't do this, I want all law schools to be treated the same.  So then I went to Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman probably the only time I ever did anything that he told me not to do.  I explained to him the situation.  And I said, "The only way I'm gonna be able to generate money for the law school, is I'm gonna have to double the enrollment."  We had about three hundred students, I wanted to double it to six hundred.  He said, "Jim, we're already having too many problems with the bar.  Now you gone double the number of people who fail the bar."  And I said, "If I don't have the revenue, I can't put together the program that's necessary to improve the bar performance."  So he said, "Well I'm not gonna approve it."  So he didn't approve it, but I did it anyway.  So I, I increased the revenue.
Story_ID: 164005
Speaker 1: The problem was the faculty [at Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  There were a couple of things that happened.  The first thing I did was I presented a small change, curricula change, to the faculty.  And the chairman of the committee met with me after the admi--I mean the curriculum viewed my recommended, recommendation for a change, and he came back to me and he said, "Jim," he said, "the committee--it's not that we're opposed to this change.  But everybody on the committee think that this is just the tip of the iceberg.  That in the back of your mind, there's a massive change that you have conceptually, and we'd like for you to just present the whole thing to us."  And so I did.  I presented the whole plan to the committee.  Managed to get it out of committee and the faculty immediately turned it down.  Didn't know what to do, so at the same time, I'm working with a committee that's created the, the state--the governor who I'd come to know, asked if I objected to him creating a task force to work with me, of lawyers from around the state.  And so I agreed and he did created a task force working with the state bar.  And one day we were meeting and they said, "Jim, you don't have any idea of, of the problems that we need to do to correct it."  And I said, "Yeah."  And they said, "Well will you share it with us?"  So I shared it with 'em.  And they said, "This'll work.  Why haven't you implemented it?"  And I said, "I, I can't get it past the faculty."  So they didn't know what to do.  I didn't know what to do, so I went to the president [Dr. Leonard H.O. Spearman] and I said, "Look, things have to change.  I mean if you want me to stay here, things are gonna have to change."  And he said, "Well what do you mean?"  And I said, "Well first we have to do away with the council."  All right.  And so we did away with the council.  And that meant that now responsibility for running the law school rest with the faculty only.  So then I presented my proposal.  It was turned down again.  So, so I said to, to--what happened before I presented the second time, in December the board asked if I would develop, no I was, I was given a call from the president, he said look, "The, the board wants to meet with you in December."  So I met with the board at the board meeting, and they were concerned about the bar performance and, and what needed to be done.  And they say we, we'd like a proposal by March and to what plans the law school has to correct its problem.  All right so after the December meeting I called a faculty meeting and said, "Look this is, this is the outcome of the board meeting.  They want us to develop a plan and present it by March."  And the faculty took a vote for me to tell the, the board that there was not enough time for them to develop a plan and the board could do what it wanted to do.  So I said to the president, "I am not going to the board meeting in March with no plan.  I will develop a plan."  And the provost objected to it, said, "No, they want--" I said, "No, I don't care--I know what they asked for, they asked for a plan from the law school.  I am not walking into a board meeting with no plan.  I don't have any problem with explaining to the board what happened, and the fact that it is my plan.  But I will suggest to them that I take my plan back to the faculty and ask the faculty to respond to my plan and modify it, develop it, do whatever they want to, but come back with another plan--"
Story_ID: 164006
Speaker 1: And so we meet in May, the board likes that idea, they like my plan.  They say take it back to the faculty and, and we want you to report on what comes out of the faculty in May, for the May meeting.  I called three faculty meetings, can't get a quorum for any of 'em.  So the president says what to do.  I said obviously there's only one thing left to do.  And he said, "What's that?"  I said, "You have to change the approval authority in the law school.  You have to take some of the power from the faculty and give it to the dean."  He said, "Well what about the American Bar Association [ABA]?"  'Cause the rules of the American Bar Association say all of this has to be decided by the faculty.  And I said, "I know, but see most people don't read the first part of that statement.  It says other than in exceptional circumstances.  And I can guarantee you the American Bar Association will say this is one of those special circumstances."  "I don't really know about that."  And I say, "Well, why don't I invite them down to meet with you?"  So I invited the consultant from the American Bar Association down to meet with the president.  At the beginning of the meeting, I got up to walk out and he said, "No Jim, I want you to stay."  And I said, "No, I don't wanna stay.  I want you to speak alone with the president of the American Bar Association."  So I walked out of the meeting.  I don't know what transpired in that meeting.  All I know is after the meeting, the president told me that the representative from the ABA told him if they did not make the change that I was recommending, that we were gonna lose the law school.  So the president decided to recommend to the board, and he asked me, he say, "Well you think you can get that task force from the state bar to support this?"  And I said, "Yeah, I don't have any doubt that I can get them to support this."  And so they did.  Made the recommendation to the board.  Two days before the board meeting, the faculty discovered that the president was getting ready to make a recommendation that they change the governing structure of the law school and give me a lot more power, and so they took a vote of no confidence against the dean.  The board passed it.  Then the faculty filed a complaint with the ABA, said the, the, the board had made me a king.  Filed a complaint with the ABA, with the ABA later found in the university's favor.  But the board gave me more authority to do what needed to do.  I told the board though, that I would only act in an instance where the faculty refused to act.  Remember we got to the board because the faculty refused to deal with the issue.  I said I would only act if the faculty refused to act.  So it was a struggle for the next six years.  And a funny thing happened.  One day about six years later I'm leaving a faculty meeting.  And one of the faculty said, "Jim," he said, "everything is confusing."  He said, "We keep periodically making changes,"  he said, "but it just doesn't seem to make any sense.  I, I mean there's no focus."  So I said, "Look. Let me tell you something."  I said, "Go back to your office, pull that plan that I recommended six years ago, and you will discover that today we passed the last piece of that plan."  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 164007
Speaker 1: But one of the big issues that I had during this process was three years into my tenure [at Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  I went home one evening knowing that the next day I had two members of the faculty that the faculty had recommended for tenure.  And they were horrible.  I mean they were, they were horrible.  And my thought process is if I support this, these two people are gonna be with these students for the next thirty years.  But if I don't support it, I'm already in the battle with the faculty, and it's gonna really blow up.  And that's probably the only time in my life I've, I've ever had difficulty sleeping.  And so the next morning I went into the office and drafting, drafted two letters recommending that those two people not be given tenure.  I was later sued on it.  But it was--
Speaker 2: So that means with that kind of suit means you--the, the university's sued, basically.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: With you, you named as the--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But managed to get rid of both of 'em and because neither one of 'em were, were--should have been on anybody's law school faculty.  Now that, that doesn't mean that we didn't have some who already tenured that didn't need to be on the faculty.  In fact one, he was, he was a slickster, but you know I, I grew up in the hood.  So I managed to, to get him off the faculty 'cause he, he tried to out-slick me and I out-slicked him and in the end, it--I guess you could say on the record, he re--he resigned from the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 165786
Speaker 1: What, what qualities were you looking for I guess in, in faculty members, and what, what were some of the qualities that were disqualifying some of these people that wanted tenure at that point, at that juncture?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I guess the, the, the biggest quality I was looking for, you know because universities talk about research, community service and all those things.  Our problem [at Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was teaching.  I wanted people who could teach because that's one of the things our students needed.  And these two people were horrible teachers.  I mean horrible teachers.
Speaker 1: But they were active in the community or something, or, or what?
Speaker 2: No, they were active on the faculty.  That's all.  They wasn't, it wasn't necessarily they were active in the community.  In fact, if you, if you read the recommendation for tenure because see be--before I came, there were no real standards for tenure.  If you stayed seven years, you got tenure, all right.  And in fact that was one of the things--the board said when it saw the recommendation that came from the faculty, is all the recommendations said was they been here seven years.  But, but they, they couldn't teach.  And the guy that--the tenured faculty member that I, I, I managed to get rid of, the, the--I'll give you an example.  I'd been here about--I came in, in the, in the summer.  I came in, in July of '81 [1981].  So I'd been here about two or three weeks and one day I went into my office and he had about eight or ten recommendations for grade changes.  So I called him in and I said, "Look, I'm concerned."  He said, "About what?"  And I said, "Well I've already gotten about twelve recommendation for trade--grade changes from you.  Now I get about eight or ten this morning."  I said, "I know you know faculty will make mistakes when they're reading blue books, you can make a mistake now and then."  I said, "But at some point, mistakes become so great that I have to question whether you have the ability to evaluate your blue books."  He said, "No, I don't, I don't make mistakes."  I said, "You don't make mistakes?"  "No."  I said, "Then all these recommendations are not mistakes?"  He said, Nno, no."  I said, "Hold up.  Let me take this student," I pulled this student and I said, "All right.  You initially gave him a D.  Now you wanna change it to a B."  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "And you didn't make a mistake when you were grading the paper?"  He said, "No."  I said, "Then explain that to me."  He was sitting across from me.  He got up, walked around the desk, put his hand on, on my shoulder and he said "Dean," he say, "you're new here."  He say, "Our motto is that we help our students."  I said, "Yeah you're supposed to help 'em before the final exam, not, not, not after." (Laughter).
Story_ID: 165787
Speaker 1: I'm serious.  You would--we--you wouldn't believe it.  It looked like everything but a law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  They, they were having receptions at noon.  I'm going receptions are for the evening.  Well the students won't come after two.  Nobody was in the law school after two.  And I said is it the students won't come after two, or the faculty does not wanna be here after two?  And you know naturally it turned out the faculty won't be here after two.  I remember the secretary that I had.  I'm, I'm just--remember I told you I, I went to law school.  I have a strange experience 'cause everybody accuses me of--when I was growing up, of not ever wanting to have a job.  All right.  In fact I remember I got engaged when I was in my senior year, and my wife at that--my wife when were dating, she, she could not stand one of my younger brothers, we lived together.  And he used to tease her all the time.  "I don't know why you wanna marry James, he ain't never gone work.  He gon' starve you to death."  So much so that she asked me one day, "Are, are you gonna really get a job when we graduate?"  So that was the reputation.  But I, I--the day I graduated, the day I started work, I became a workaholic.  And I've been a workaholic all my life and people ask me well how did you make that transition?  And my theory was when I was growing up, was that I was my parents' responsibility.  Once I became my own responsibility, I--you know I started taking (unclear).  So I worked long hours.  So one night about 9:30, ten o'clock, I said to my secretary, I said, "Look," I said, "I know we have a lot to do; we've been working late a lot.  I understand you have a baby at home."  I said, "I don't want you to feel that you can't say to me dean, I can't work late tonight.  I mean I, I understand that."  And she said, "No, I don't, I don't have any problem 'cause you here every night."  She said, "Dean King was gone every day by two."  And so that was kind of--it was not a rigorous program.  The, the faculty didn't, didn't have any rigor, the students didn't have any rigor.
Story_ID: 165788
Speaker 1: The first year I was here [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], I had a student to come to my office and he said, "Dean."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "I, I want you to know that one of your dumb students passed the professional responsibility section of the bar."  I said, "Well when you see that student, congratulate him for me.  But why do you think he's dumb?"  He said, "I don't think he's dumb."  He said, "I'm that student and you think I'm dumb."  I said, "I don't even know you.  How can you conclude that I think you're dumb?"  He said, "You think all the students here are dumb."  I said, "I think all the students here are dumb?  What makes you think I think all the students are dumb?"  He said, "You told us."  I said, "I told the students that I think you all dumb."  He said, "Yes."  I said, "When?"  He said, "Three weeks ago in the forum."  I had a student forum.  I said, "All right.  Now I know I didn't say in that forum I think you all dumb."  I said, "What did I say that made you all believe that I think the students are dumb?"  He said, "Well a student asked you what can we as students do to improve the bar performance?"  And you said, "Study, study night and day."  I said, "That's what happens at all law schools."  He said, "Then why are you the only person who tells us that?"
Story_ID: 165789
Speaker 1: All right now you asked me what I look for.  One of the things that helped me was my second year here [Thurgood Marshall Law School, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], the university required written evaluation of faculty members.  One of the things I discovered 'cause up until that point, I'd been accustomed to have oral evaluations of faculty 'cause it was what happened to me everywhere else.  The dean, eh call you in.  You have a one-on-one.  They tell you, you know basically this is how I think you performed, this is what your merit increase is gonna be for the coming year.  Like that, and you could tell a faculty member almost anything in that private meeting.  I found out once you start putting it in writing though, the faculty--you put something negative in writing, you got a automatic fight with a law faculty.  And so the first year I put it in writing.  Well on the teaching aspect of it, I used the student evaluation to measure the teaching.  So they said to me, "Well you know you can't trust student evaluations."  I said, "You all are right.  All right so in order for me to do my job as dean, I'm gon' have to sit in on your classes.  I wanna give you all warning, I will be coming around.  I tell you before I come, but I'm gon' come and I'm gon' sit in on your class."  So I started going around and sitting in on classes.  And that's how I could evaluate the teaching of faculty.  The first thing I said to the faculty after my first round of sittings is that I have some real concerns.  Because there, there are two things that I, I really look for when I sit in on your class that really concern me.  The first one is I wanna know whether as a law student, I can come to your class totally unprepared and have no fear.  And too many of your classes, students can come to class with no fear at all of being unprepared.  See in, in legal education, and I tell my students this every day, it is not difficult, but it is extremely time consuming.  You cannot learn it.  There are no shortcuts; you have to put in the time.  All right so you have to--and I know this sounds funny when you're talking about professionals, but you're talking about people, a lot of whom are not self-motivated.  A lot of very bright, but they were told when they were in elementary school, you know you're real bright.  But if you don't improve your study habits, you gon' fail when you get to junior high school.  All right, they don't improve their studies in, in elementary school, they get to junior high school and they gon' fail.  But the same thing happens in junior high school.  The teachers tell 'em you got a good mind, but if you don't apply yourself, you gone fail when you get to high school; they don't.  They don't apply themselves.  Same thing happens in high school, same thing happens in college, same thing happens in law school.  So you can tell 'em the first time it really hits them is when they take the bar.  But then they've never been prepared to really sit down for the rigor of the study that's necessary to be adequately prepared for it.  And so you, you have to--you shouldn't have to tell them that they have to do it.  But the truth of the matter is, you have to, you have to force 'em to do it.  So I wanted to make sure that the classroom was such that if a student was unprepared, that student would be scared to come to your class.
Story_ID: 165790
Speaker 1: Second, I said because this is an analytical process, too many of you come to class and you get the facts of the case, and you begin the discussion, all right.  You should have a student recite the facts of the case.  Their response to me was they can't.  Why can't they?  They can't read.  All right.  So I said to them the first step in analysis is being able to read.  So we get this big debate about analysis, how to improve the analytical skills of the students.  So what I did was I went over to College of Education [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], sat down with some of the faculty there, had them to put together a program and deliver a program for the faculty [at Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  I put them through a seminar on how to teach.  Because what happens is believe it or not in universities, outside of the College of Education, most people have never been taught in universities how to teach.  So what most faculty do is they try to emulate what they thought was a good faculty member that they had.  I tried that.  I walked into my first class, I said to my class look, I am going to be the kind of faculty I always wanted.  So I said you all adults, nobody held a gun to your head to force you to come here, all right.  You made this choice independent and with free will.  So I'm not gon' hold your hand, I'm not gonna force you to do anything.  But I'm gonna tell you, you can't cram, there are no shortcuts.  If you don't go home every day and study, you can't pass.  I give all of the, the, the, the requirements of the course.  The first exam, everybody fails, everybody fails.  At that point in my life, I was young enough to, to still be playing basketball.  So I played.  I go over to the gym and there'd be a lot of the law students that I played ball with.  So I, I, I asked some of the guys in the class, I said, "What happened on the exam?"  They said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Everybody failed."  I said, "Did I ask questions that we didn't cover over material we didn't cover?"  "No."  "Were the questions that complex?"  "No."  So I'm like, "Well then how did everybody fail?"  "Well nobody studied."  "Why nobody--why didn't anybody--" "Well we only studied for those people who demand for us to study.  You don't make any demands on us.  So my teaching really turned 180 degrees and I was (unclear).  But it's not just at Thurgood.  I discovered moving around that's true at, at, at most law schools in the country.  Now it's probably, it's not true at, at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Law School, New Haven Connecticut] and in fact I, I was joking with some of my friends once I came back from Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California] and, and I told them.  I said, "You know, how you all used to tease me for studying all the time?"  They said, "Yeah."  I said, "Well everybody there studies that way."  So it's--you know so it's, it's just--it was an attitude.  And I knew I had to, to change that attitude.  I knew and so we had a, a series of seminars with the faculty on how to teach.  I mean how do you get students to develop the analytic--we talked about the Socratic method.  We talked about it.  And--
Speaker 2: Was, was the seminars well-received by faculty?  Did they--
Speaker 1: Initially no.  But, but and, and, and look it, it took yelling and screaming on the part of the faculty, and then you know slowly faculty came around to understanding where I was.  The people, even the people who supported me, were afraid when I first got here because the former dean [Otis King] and his cohorts had told them anybody that supported my program, they were gonna make sure that they were gone.  They told 'em that they were gonna get rid of me and then when they got rid of me, they were gonna be back in control.  So initially every, everybody was scared, everybody was scared--
Story_ID: 165791
Speaker 1: I, I made a--I was telling the chairman of the board [Board of Regents at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] because he didn't even realize back in the early '80s [1980s], the guy who was, who was chairman of the board, if but for him, I probably would have lasted two years.  Because I got a call from him one day and he said, "Jim, let's go to lunch."  I went to lunch.  And he said, "Look I have a question."  He said, "All these changes you're recommending for the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law], are you sure they'll work?"  He said, "Before you answer, I want you to know I've done some research."  He said, "I talked to Dr. [Leonard H.O.] Spearman and his administration, and they all think it won't work."  He said, "I've talked to some of the faculty members, they all think it won't work.  I've talked to some of the students, and they all think it won't work.  I've talked to graduates of the law school, they all think it won't work.  I've even talked to some lawyers who are non-graduates and I get mixed opinion."  He says, "Is it any way the program that you're trying to put in place will fail?"  And I said, "No."  He said, "How can you be so sure?"  And I said, "Milton [ph.], if anybody at Texas Southern had any idea of how to correct the problem, it never would have gotten this bad."  I said, "If people had agreed with me and my suggestions, I would have been scared.  So I'm not surprised that, that no one there thinks what I'm doing is gonna work."  I said, "But I guarantee you it'll work."  And he said, "Do what you need to do and I have your back."
Story_ID: 165792
Speaker 1: I mean it's, it's frightening to think that people would not study law, you know, in particular 'cause they have to rep--
Speaker 2: But see you have to, you have to know when you're--I, I have learned that it's human nature to adjust to the environment that they're in.  And if you have an environment where the thought process is study and rigorous study is not a necessity, then you won't develop it on your own unless you come to law school with that thought process.  And remember, a lot of, a lot of our students didn't come to law school with that thought process.  A lot of 'em came with the process that I'm gonna do what I need to do to get out.  I don't know if you--
Speaker 1: What they were doing was finishing law school with the help of getting their grades boosted, and then when they hit the bar, then they start studying?  Because they haven't--I mean passed the bar.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  That's--
Speaker 1: Never passed the bar, you know.
Speaker 2: Eventually some of 'em passed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they'd have to then like--
Speaker 2: Right, because once you fail the bar two or three times, you realize these people not playing.  And I tell students that every day.  I say one of the things that happens is when a student passes the bar the second or third or fourth time, it isn't because they came back to law school and learned anything.  They don't go back to law school.  It's just that at some point it hits them, these people are serious.  If I don't sit my butt down and study, they're not gonna let me through.  And so they sit down and study.  It's, it's a, it's a whole attitudinal thing.
Story_ID: 165793
Speaker 1: Did they have any study groups when you got here [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]?  I, I guess they didn't if they're not really studying.  They probably didn't have study groups.
Speaker 2: They, they--it wasn't so much that they didn't have study groups, it's, it's just that they didn't meet that often and in fact, often they didn't know the real purpose of a study group and what ought to happen in the study group.  And remember if, if, if you had a wrong concept, if your concept is to know the rules, see I tell my students in the old days you walk into a law office.  And now everybody's got technology.  All right, but in the old days you used to walk into a law office and what did you see?  You see books.  You see rows and rows of reporters.  And what's in those reporters are the rules.  You don't have to know the, the, the--they don't pay a lawyer to know the rule.  I tell 'em the rules of law and the cases are like a toolbox that a carpenter or mechanic use, all right.  And if you've got a problem, you got to reach into that toolbox and pick the correct tool.  That's what they pay the lawyers for, to analyze the problem and then know which one of these rules out of all these rules, solve the problem.  So you don't have to memorize the rules.  You have to understand the rules well enough to know which one to go to, to solve your problem.  So, and so nobody ever told 'em that.  So they sit down, memo--I tell my students now.  I can tell you if you make a C on my exam, I can tell you what's gonna happen when you come to, to, to talk to me about it.  I'm gonna say I was looking for one, and you say I'm gonna--I've got one.  And I was looking for two and I got two, and I was looking for three and I got three.  But rather than write one, two, three, four, five, you wrote five, three, four, two, you know.  And, and often if you make less than a C, it's because you didn't even recognize the issue in the problem.  The issue related to whether or not there was acceptance of the contract and you're talking about another element which is consideration because you couldn't analyze the problem.  So it's that--I said I know if I ask you what is an offer, you can tell me.  If I ask you what is consideration, you can tell me.  But if I give you a hypothetical involving one of those issues, you won't be able to pick out whether it's an offer problem, or whether it's a consideration problem.  So it's, it's that part of the analytical process that you teach and not just do I know how to state the rule.
Story_ID: 165794
Speaker 1: One of the most frightening things you, you, you said was that there's some students that couldn't read the material who were in law school.  You know.
Speaker 2: Well it, it--you know I don't--see this is, this is one of the, the problems I have with reading.  And even some, to some extent, writing.  I think they con--they convey the wrong idea.  They really mean reading comprehension.  They, they--see I remember, remember I told you the problem we--I had in the fourth grade when I was talking about algebra.  And I said there was a student that everybody thought was a good reader, but I always said that those students are, are--were good at recognizing words.  They can properly pronounce words.  And so a lot of people forget that just because you can properly pronounce words, if you can't comprehend, then you're really not a, a good reader.  [President] George [W.] Bush when he was governor of [Texas] this--probably the only civilized conversation he and I ever had, and it was over what was more important, reading or, or math.  And I've always taken the position that math is more important than, than reading because math developed analytical skills and that I don't know a mathematician who cannot read.  I've never met one.  I met a lot of quote readers who can't think.  And definitely I've met a lot of readers who can't do math.
Story_ID: 165795
Speaker 1: In the law school world, about 70 percent of all the law school faculty have graduated from about twelve or fifteen law schools.  They either have their ma--their J.D. [juris doctorate] or master's from about twelve or fifteen law schools, all right.  Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], Stanford [Law School, Palo Alto, California], Columbia [Law School, New York, New York], all right schools of that nature.  That's what you do.  So I'm dealing with faculty who say to me--and people are prejudice toward their own experience.  So if something work well for me, I think it ought to work well for everybody else.  So I'm working with a faculty who say they don't do it like this at Yale, they don't do it this way at Harvard, they don't do it this way at Columbia, all right.  And I'm trying to convince them we don't have the students that they have at Harvard, Yale and Columbia.  We need to develop a curriculum for our students and not a curriculum for the students at Harvard, Yale and Columbia.  Not only do you fight with the faculty to some extent, you have to fight with all the accrediting agencies the same way because most of the people on their commissions are from Harvard, Yale and Stanford, and they can't understand, or didn't understand the curriculum that I put together.  So not only do I have to fight the faculty, I had to fight with all the accrediting agencies because I took a lot of the freedom of choice from the, from the students.  We have a lot more required curriculum that a lot of law schools.  Not all schools, but then a lot of law schools.  And, and, and I think it's not just necessary at, at, at Thurgood [Marshall Law School, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  I think it would be better at a lot of other law schools.  'Cause being an administrator at a lot of other law schools, you'd be amazed at how many students would come to me and not understand the nature of courses in the curriculum.  I had people who would come to me and say, "you know I, I, I really want to take secured transactions, but I don't wanna deal with securities.  I don't wanna, I don't even like stock."  African Americans come to me and say, "you know commercial paper and sales and all of that, I wanna practice in, in, in the low income neighborhood.  I don't wanna have anything to do with commercial law."  And me explain to them what do you think the problem poor people have?  They can't borrow any money, they write bad--you know so it's, it's--and it's not just blacks students, it's white students who don't even know the content of the courses.  So they need advice.  I advise, I, I had a, a, a list of courses at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], at, at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and at, at Northeastern [University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] that the students lived in my office 'cause I'm the only one to say these are the courses you need to take.  Now they had freedom to take every--anything they wanted to take, but they didn't know what they was supposed to take.  And so I just figure here, especially since we're having problems on the bar, there are certain courses every student--they ought to take just to be a, a good lawyer.  But the other reason they ought to take 'em, is they appear on the bar exam.
Story_ID: 159911
Speaker 1: What, what kind of support did you get from William Harris who was the first, I guess he, he was--he came in after you had started.  You started--
Speaker 2: He, he started--he, he, he's an interesting kind of person.  [Dr. Leonard H.O.] Spearman was kind of scared because Spearman was a Republican and, and the, the people who were trying to get rid of me in law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] were also trying to get rid of Spearman as, as the president [of Texas Southern University, TSU, Houston, Texas].  And I remember an interesting situation.  I had been told to come to a board meeting.  And a person, Pike Powers who was, who was on the governor's staff was coming to town and he and I were making a presentation at, at the board meeting 'cause he was a member of that special committee with the Bar [American Bar Association, ABA].  It was funny because late the night before he called me and said, "Jim, I'm all right, I, I can get, I can get a ride in from the airport."  I don't, I don't think much of it.  And that afternoon I go to the board meeting.  Well the board comes in for the meeting, and then maybe after thirty seconds after the, the chairman opens the meeting, all reporters started rushing in and cameras started rushing in.  I'm wondering what the hell's going on?  And so right after that, the governor walks in.  And--
Speaker 1: Now this is, at this point is who, who, who was the governor?
Speaker 2: Mark White.
Speaker 1: Mark White, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  The governor walks in and because the rumor was that the president was gonna be fired at this board meeting.  And he walks in and basically says I'm here for two reasons.  One, I, I, I wanna let everybody know that I, I completely support Jim Douglas in the law school.  But the major reason I'm here is I know there's a rumor out that I've issued an edict to the board to, to get rid of Dr. Spearman.  And I'm here to let everybody know that that's not true.  That I'm here to request the board to keep Dr. Spearman.  But up until that point, Spearman was afraid to support me on almost anything because the, the faculty in the law school had a, had a great deal of political power in the state under Democratic party.  The, the one thing they did not know, and it was funny because a couple of people called and asked me.  They said, "Do they, do they really know your background?"  And I said, "No."  Because believe it or not, even though I grew up in Houston, had been at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] and all of that, most people thought I was from New York.
Speaker 1: Why, now why, why is that?
Speaker 2: Because that was what was played up when I came to TSU. That I was this East Coast--
Speaker 1: Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] a--a--aspect.
Speaker 2: East Coast guy and all of that.  And they didn't realize I had as much political connection in Texas as they did.
Story_ID: 159912
Speaker 1: Texas is a very politically charged, higher education system.  I mean all you have to do is look at what's going on in Texas now [March, 2014] with the present governor [James Richard "Rick" Perry] and the present president [William T. Powers] of U.T. [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] and A & M [Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas] and, and all the other universities around the state.  So Texas higher education is--you know there's a lot of internal politics at every university in the country.  But with Texas, it's not just internal, it's external also.  So you--it's, it's a lot of external politics going on in, in, in the government in, in Texas.  So [Dr. Leonard H.O.] Spearman and I had kind of a on and off relationship.  I remember once I had written him a letter.  It was a "for your eyes only" letter.  And I put on there "for your eyes only."  And when he received it, he immediately called me.  He said, "Jim, Jim, Jim, come over and meet with me."  So I went over and he said, "Why would you put this in writing?"  And I said, "I put it in writing because I can't get a meeting with you.  I've been trying to get a meeting with you for two months."  He said, "Jim, you know you can meet with me at any time."  I said, "Maybe you know that, but your people don't know that.  So I can't get a meeting with you."  And so he said, "Well Jim I'm gone be honest with you."  He said, "I thought you and I would have had a better relationship than Otis [King] and [Granville M.] Sawyer."  And see the former dean and the former president, they didn't even speak.  I mean their relationship was that bad.  And I said, "I thought we did."  And he said, "We did until I heard you were after my job."  I said, "Dr. Spearman, I've never been after your job, I've never sought a job that there was already an incumbent."  I said, "But I won't lie to you.  I, I said a lot of people in Austin [Texas] have asked me if I wanted your job."  I said, "But I don't, I'm not after your job.  I got a job to do, to do in the law school."  So he and I had kind of an off and on relationship.  So much so that--but when he left, he said one thing to me.  He said, "You know, I wish I'd listened to you more."
Story_ID: 159913
Speaker 1: Because one of the things that happened was we had a--for the first time in the history of the state [Texas], we had an economic downturn.  And so they cut everybody's budget.  [Dr. Leonard H.O.] Spearman had a big retreat where he called all the university top administrators [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] together to talk about this economic downturn and the fact that we were gonna have to cut everybody's budget.  The guy who was then CFO [Chief Financial Officer] [Dr. John M. Rudley], who is now the president, he and I kind of knew each other, but not really that well.  And so during that, during that time, I could tell just from the tint of the conference, that Spearman's solution to the problem was gonna be across the board cuts.  And so I said to John, I said, "John, you know Dr. Spearman is getting ready to make one of the biggest mistakes that most universities make, is he, he's getting ready to, to make across the board cuts."  I said, "That would be, that would be devastating to a lot of smaller areas; they, they can't survive with across the board cuts."  So he say, "What do you--what are gonna do?"  I said, "I tell you what we're gon' do."  I said, "You and I going out and have drinks with Spearman.  And I'm gonna convince him to establish a university-wide committee in which the two of us are gonna co-chair.  And it's gonna include a representative from every major segment of the university and we're gonna sit down, we're gonna tear--we're gonna look at every segment of the university; tear the budget apart.  And then we gone make some recommendations for restructuring the university and making the kind of changes that make sense."  So we did.  We took Spearman out for drinks, convinced him to do it, he did it.  So we had this university-wide committee.  We spent about six months looking at these, studying.  And made recommendations to Spearman.  Well the first thing I did was I shared the draft before it became final.  I, I shared the draft with, with Dr. Spearman.  And the first thing he did, was he started making changes.  I said change this, change that.  I said, "Dr. Spearman, let me explain to you.  This is a committee report.  You can't change the committee report.  Now I tell you what I do.  If you recommend your changes to me, I'll go back to the committee and I think I can convince the committee to make those changes."  So I went back to the committee and we made most of the changes he wanted and I presented it to him.  He sat on it.  Then about a year later I get a call from him.  He say, "Jim," he say, "You know that, that set of recommendations you made?"  And I say--he say, "I, I really need those because my job is at stake."  He said, "I'm gonna, I'm gonna have to make those recommendations, so you think you can get your committee back together?"  And I said, "Well Dr. Spearman, you know things have changed in the last year.  Is aid so it's not gonna just be let's issue the same report.  We gone have to look at the issue and maybe modify it and something like that."  He said, "Yeah that'll, that'll be all right."  So I called the committee together and they said, "Man, that was a lot of work.  We're not going through it again for Spearman to sit on it."  So I went back to him and I said, "Dr. Spearman, you know the committee said they don't wanna go through that again 'cause all you gone do is sit on it."  He said, "I, I really need it.  Promise them I won't."  So I went back, I convinced the committee, we issued a report, gave it to Spearman and three months later he was gone.  I don't--he never did anything in those three months, but three months later he was gone.  So--
Speaker 2: It wasn't enough and he didn't utilize it anyway.
Story_ID: 159914
Speaker 1: Yeah, so yeah, Har--[Dr. William H.] Harris comes in '87 [1987] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well something happens before Harris, 'cause there's Dr. [Robert J.] Terry, 'cause that was an important turn in the history of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, TSU, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Doctor, Dr. Terry came in.
Speaker 1: He's like an interim?
Speaker 2: He was an interim.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He spent almost two years as, as the interim.  Dr. Terry came in.  And I guess the important point in the university at that point, was in 1985 the governor created a special task force select--he called it Select Committee on Higher Education.  It was to look at higher education in the State of Texas.  And so it was co-chaired, I can't remember who the other co-chair, but one of the co-chairs was [HM] Wilhelmina Delco, who's an African American woman.  She was chair of the Higher Education Committee in the State House.  She was probably one of the more powerful African Americans in, in, in the state legislature.  She co-chaired.  So I went to Dr. Terry and explained to him what the governor had done and he had been one of my mentors.  I shouldn't say mentors, he had been one of my bridges.  And so I said, "Dr. Terry, I, I think you--this is an important committee 'cause they're gonna look at all the higher education in Texas."  And Ms. Delco had already told me because all this time I guess up until this, I probably spent ten times as much time in Austin [Texas] as anybody else on this campus 'cause I'm after money for the law school.  So I got to know all the state legislatures.  So she, she told me, she said, "Douglas when we start meeting," she said, "I, I think if Dr. Terry's not there, there need to be a representative from TSUat all the meetings because I don't want TSU to make the mistake that they always make."  And I say, "What's that?"  And she said, "They'll wait until we make a recommendation, and then they'll start jumping up and down."  She said, "They need to be involved in the whole process so that they can, they can have some input before we get to a final recommendation."  So that's why I went to, to see Dr. Terry.  And he said, "Do you think I really need to go?"  And I said, "Yeah, I think it'd be good for you to go.  I think you really need to go."  So he say, "Are you going?"  I say, "Yeah I'm going, I'm going whether you go or don't go, but I'm going."  So we both went.  The next month I called him before the meeting, I said, "Dr. Terry there's, you know the Select Committee [on Higher Education] is having a meeting," and they met around the state.  I can't remember where the second meeting was.  And he said, "What's that?"  So I tried to explain it to him.  He said, "I don't remember that one."  I says--he said, "I don't think I can go".  I said, "That's all right Dr. Terry, I'm going."  So I go.  I go to all the meetings.  So somewhere when they're starting to deliberate, 'cause they just taking testimony the first six or seven months.  They starting to deliberate.  She says to me, "James, I, I, I'm trying to be clear.  Make sure that TSU doesn't"--I said, "Ms. Delco, you know Dr. Terry."  Mrs. Delco's husband [Dr. Exalton A. Delco] had taught here back in the early '50s [1950s].  He was a biology professor.  He and Dr. Terry were both in the biology department, so they knew.  I said, "you need to talk to him."  So about three or four weeks after that, she happened to be in town and she called me with that same story.  I said, "I tell you what.  I'm gon' bring Dr. Terry over to you so you can tell him."  So I took Dr. Terry over.  And she had a long talk with him.
Story_ID: 159915
Speaker 1: So they're moving around to the decision phase.  And they're--when they--they're about a month away from TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] I call 'cause nothing is happening.  I call one of the board members.  And I said, "Naomi [Cox Andrews]," I said--she and I were fairly good friends.  I said, "They getting ready to make this decision."  I said, Aall the other universities that thought they were gonna be negatively impact, they packed the hearing room with supporters.  I mean when they were dealing with the University of Midland Odessa [sic, University of Texas of the Permian Basin, Odessa, Texas] they chartered four airplanes to come down, the mayor, everybody came down.  I said, "We gotta have some people from TSU I can't get any movement from Dr. [Robert J.] Terry."  She said, "Well what can we do?"  I said, "Well at least we ought to take some students."  So she said, "Well you put the students together and I'll get the buses and we'll take some students to Austin [Texas]."  Well she called Dr. Terry and Dr. Terry told her not to take the students, but we took the students anyway.  So we packed the, the hearing room so much so that they, they decided that they would not deal with TSU at that meeting since T.S.U. really didn't have any representation.  Remember I'm just the dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].  I don't represent the university.  TSU really didn't have any real representation there.  They would put it off until the next meeting.  So Naomi and I left.  She's the board member.  And she said, "What are we gonna do?  We can't get any movement out of TSU"  I said, "I, I tell you what we're gonna do."  And that--we had one, we had a lot of extremely supportive elected legislatures.  And one that was working with us a lot was a guy by the name of Ron Wilson.  I said, "Why don't we go to Ron's office?  I said we are going to call every member of the board and every black elected official in Houston [Texas].  And we're gonna have them meet Saturday at Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church."  So we did, we went to Ron Wilson's office, called every black elected official, every member of the board, and asked them to attend the meeting at Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church.  There was--the, the--I guess the, the important thing was that all they knew was the, the phone call was coming from Ron Wilson's office.  They didn't know who was on the phone.  So on Saturday morning they all show up, everybody show up to the, the church is packed with all these elected officials and all these powerful people, black powerful people in Houston.  Well what happened the night before was I got a call from, from [HM] Reverend [Bill] Lawson who was the pastor.  And he said, "Jim, he said how you gonna run the meeting tomorrow?"  I said, "Reverend Lawson I can't run the meeting."  He said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I'm just the dean of the law school.  They don't even know who called the meeting."  I said--he said, "Well what we gon' do tomorrow?"  I said, "Let me tell you what to do.  It's your church.  So I want you to open it up in the way you does, you do."  And he always open every meeting with a prayer.  He opened up, "Say your prayer."  And then said, "Since the issue is an important issue related to Texas Southern University, you think the president ought to conduct the meeting."  So the next day we call the meeting, we go in, Reverend Lawson does it.  We conduct the meeting.  They decide that there's gonna be a big show of force in Austin at the next committee meeting and we're gonna have some adequate representation from the university from all segments.
Speaker 2: So this--let me just stop you for a second and just ask you what, what year is this we're talking about, we're talking about--
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985], okay, this is when, okay in the interim, yeah, all right.  So we don't lose track, track of it.
Speaker 1: That's right.  This is '85 [1985].
Story_ID: 159916
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I get a call one night from Mrs. Andrews.  I don't mean Mrs. Andrews, Mrs. [HM Wilhelmina] Delco.  And she said, "Jim, I, I've got a plan."  She said, "TSU's [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] biggest problem is the University of Houston-Downtown [Houston, Texas].  You all sit back"--and I said, "Mrs. Delco, you all, I wasn't even here."  She said, "Well they sit back and let them establish the University of Houston--Downtown, which has your same mission.  That's killing you."  I said, "You're right."  Said, "I have a, a plan.  And I'm gon' make this proposal.  I'm gonna propose that they give you the University of Houston-Downtown."  She said, "The sticking point is they're gonna want your campus.  And they're gonna want you to move downtown."  She said, "There's no way the State of Texas can build a university large enough downtown to support the students on TSU's campus and the students downtown.  So you gone end up with both campuses."  I said, "That sounds good to me, I said but Ms. Delco you know I'm just the dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]."  So I said, "What I'll do is I'll, I'll, I'll go talk to some people."  So I went over to Naomi [Cox] Andrews, who's the board member's office, I mean house.  She didn't live far from me.  I gave her the plan of Ms. Delco, and she said that sounds good.  I said, "But you can't do anything.  You need to convince Dr. Terry of that."  So she calls Dr. Terry, Dr. Terry comes over, we--and that's, that's the agreed plan.  Somehow the plan gets changed, though.  'Cause when we go to Austin [Texas], everybody's opposed to it.  Everybody who speaks is opposed to it.  People asked me why would TSU be opposed?  I think it was two reasons.  One, I think it was the fear of managing a large number of white people.  I mean I'm gon' be honest with you, that's my insight.  And the other one was [George Thomas] Mickey Leland, who a Congressman, had a very good relationship with the Mexican American community.  Mexican Americans had start to consider that their campus, and they did not wanna be merged with Texas Southern University.  So in the end, the end game was the legislature ended up not doing anything to us, but leaving us as we were.  I, I think that would have been our saving grace.  If we had taken over the University of Houston Down [sic, Downtown] campus and, and managed both of, both of the campuses.
Story_ID: 159917
Speaker 1: It's kind of similar to what Tennessee [State University, Nashville, Tennessee] did in Nashville [Tennessee] when they gave the white downtown campus to the University of Tennessee [at Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] [the schools merged in 1979].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: To Tennessee State, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that had taken place, but--
Speaker 1: What, the Tennessee State?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that--
Speaker 1: That was, that was back in the, in the early--no, it was a little after that.  No, it was a little before that because [HM Frederick] Fred Humphries was the president at the time that--
Speaker 2: Humphries that went to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 1: That went to FAMU, he was at Tennessee State before he went to FAMU  That was also the only decent settlement in, in, in those [U.S.] Department of Education claims in the South.  It was the only decent consent decree that came out of all of those.  Tennessee was the only one.  All the others are, are so bad that they don't even make any sense.  The one they settled here was so bad it doesn't make any sense.  The one they settled in Louisiana is so bad it doesn't make any sense.  And even the lawsuit out of Mississippi is so bad it doesn't make any sense.
Story_ID: 159918
Speaker 1: Joann Horton, was she the first female president of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: But you skipped over [William H.] Harris.
Speaker 1: Harris, okay Harris, I'm sorry, you're right.  I did skip over, yeah.  Let's talk about Harris then.
Speaker 2: So Harris came.  I can tell you that--and I always joke with people 'cause it's true.  At one point in my fourteen years as dean, I served under six different persons in the president's office, and nine different people in the provost's office.  All of 'em wanted to fire me initially.  All right, Harris is probably the only that tried.  But the issue he wanted to fire me over and was one that I knew he couldn't.  And so I spent a--
Speaker 1: What was the, what was the issue?
Speaker 2: And I don't wanna call any names.  The issue would have required us to violate one of our academic policies and I refused to violate the academic policy of the law school.  It went on for about a, a week.  With his executive assistant calling me every day saying, "James, you know, you need to back down on this.  You don't need to be fired."  And me saying, "I don't care about being fired.  But I'm not gon' do it."
Speaker 1: Was it about grades here or something?
Speaker 2: No, it was a, it was a, it was admissions policy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Admissions, it was, it was admissions.  But he later, he later backed down on it.  So Harris and I had a, had a warm and, and cold relationship.  I remember once it was an interesting story.  I was, I was walking down the hall one day and, and bumped into Dr. Harris and he said, he said, "Jim, you don't know everybody who know me."  And I said, "You're right, I don't know everybody that know you."  He said, "Well you need to watch what you say because you might be talking to somebody who knows me that you don't know I know."  And I say, "You're right.  What is it you think I said to somebody who knows you that I don't know you know?"  He said, "Well when you were in Oakland last week, you told some people that I was a crab."  And I said, "No Dr. Harris, I didn't tell anybody that you were a crab."  He said, "you didn't tell anybody I was a"--I said, "No."  I said, "What I did tell some people in Oakland, was that you had a crab mentality."  He said, "What do you mean by that?"  I said, "Dr. Harris, every time I wanna do something in the law school, you say to me they not doing that in education, or they're not doing this in the College of Pharmacy [at Texas Southern University]."  I said, "What you don't understand is I don't, I don't"--no, first he asked me what was the crab mentality?  What do you mean by it?  So I told him about crabs pulling each other back into the barrel.  And I said, "Every time I get ready to make a change, you tell me they're not doing this in the College of Education, they're not doing this in--why do you wanna do it?"  I said, "I don't compete with the College of Education [at Texas Southern University].  I don't compete with the School of Pharmacy.  I said I compete with the law school at U.T. [University of Texas School of Law, Austin, Texas] I compete with the law school of U of H [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas].  You keep holding me back.  I can't do what I need to do in the law school because you keep holding me back."  So he apologized 'cause he realized what I was saying was true.  And we moved on from that.  The biggest battle Harris and I had was over funding.
Story_ID: 158442
Speaker 1: All right, so funding clashes with President [William H.] Harris.
Speaker 2: Funding clashes with President Harris.  Let me go back.  When I arrived at TSU [Texas Southern University, TSU, Houston, Texas], there was, there was no discussion or relationship between income generation and funding, all right.  Everything, even though units create pots of money for the university, the state lumps it all together and sends it to the university in a lump sum.  So I think the first thing that everybody was shocked, I, I went out and figured out how much money I generated for the university.
Speaker 1: That, that's quite a--well I can see how this, this can be problematic.  If you're generating money for the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas], and it goes into a, a big pot that just comes to the university in one big pot, then the president has to decide.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How to divvy it up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: After you've fought for it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That can--yeah I can see how that could be an issue.
Speaker 2: Right.  So anyway and remember now I'm getting all the extra money from the state too, all right.  So Harris comes and one of the first things he does is he cuts my budget by half a million dollars.  So I meet with him and I said, "Dr. Harris," I said, "let me explain to you all the special funding I get."  I said, "The state has this formula system, all right.  To get special funding, you go to the state, you have to make an argument that I don't generate enough money for myself as a unit.  In order to operate my program, I need some additional money.  Now when the state give me all of this additional money, they don't expect the university to then take back a part of the money I generate for myself."  He said, "I don't agree with that."  I said, "Dr. Harris," I said, "you know, fortunately for the law school, we have a lot of friends in Austin [Texas],"  I said, "and every budget period they ask me are you getting your money?"  I said Dr. Harris might take five thousand dollars here or three thousand dollars here.  And so I always say "Yeah, you know we're getting the money we ought to get."  I said, "But a half million dollars, when they ask me I'm gon' have to tell them no."  He said, "Well you can tell 'em what you wanna tell 'em."  So when I got asked, I said, "No."  So the first response was we have to expose the president.  I said, "No, don't do that, because that makes the whole university look bad."  I say, "Why don't three or four of the legislators you know, just call him, take him to lunch, sit him down and talk to him."  So they did.  One of the senators, state senator and three of the state legislators took him to lunch; I was not there.  Now this is what their conversation to me was.  They tried to explain to him how we call a special item was supposed to work.  You--we give you this extra money.  You're not supposed to take the money from the law school and all of this.  So he disagreed with 'em.  Told 'em he didn't, he didn't think they had the right interpretation.  And what he said to them was if the legislature really believes that, then let the legislature tell me.  So they told me that.  They told me what we want you to do is draft a rider for Texas, TSU's budget that will guarantee that all the money generated by the law school comes to the law school.  So I drafted the rider.  They passed, and so that's been attached on TSU's budget since that time.  It's--among university administration, it's known as the Douglas Rider.  I tell 'em it's the Harris Rider.  But, but the funding of the law school has been great since that time.  I mean we, we get all the money we generate.  We've been able to operate the way we, we, we need to operate.  But so Harris and I had, had, had, had a--I, I think he, he has a great deal of professional respect for me, but beyond that, I don't think he, he, he would, would like me that much.  But we, we, we made it.
Story_ID: 158443
Speaker 1: We made it through, through his [Dr. William H. Harris] administration [at Texas Southern University, TSU, Houston, Texas] and, and during his administration, I was allowed to do what I needed to do in the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] to improve the law school and, and improve the curriculum.  And, and improve the success of our Bar performance.  We went from I think the, the low score when I first got here was like thirteen, fourteen percent.  The last class was like ninety-five percent, ninety-four, something.  So the reputation of the law school improved.  We had over six hundred students.  The rigor and the program improved.  The law school was tremendously different between the time I got here and, and the time I, I left.  I, I have no idea.  It was kind of strange when, when [Dr. William H.] Harris left, 'cause Harris left about six months after signing a five year contract.  So it didn't make any sense, but they brought in Joann Horton.  Dr. Horton and I, our relationship got off on a rocky road in the beginning.  But it later turned because she was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and she and I were the, the two finalists for the presidency.  And they brought her in and the AKAs had a "Welcome to Houston" reception before she even started working.  So I went to the reception and I'm going through the receiving line and they introduce me to her.  And she said, "I'm so thrilled to meet you, you're the famous James Douglas."  So I said, "I don't know how famous I am, but I am James Douglas."  And she said, "No, you're famous."  She said, "Believe me, you are famous."  She said, "Because when I got this job, everybody that I know who knows something about TSU, told me I needed to get to know you."  I said, "I don't know why they tell you that."  She say, "Yeah.  They told me I needed to get to know you because you had the ability to get presidents fired."  So I said, "Dr. Horton," I said, "I don't have the ability to get presidents fired.  If I had the ability to get presidents fired, I'd be president and you wouldn't."  I said, "But I'm here to help you.  Whenever you need help, just let me know."  So she'd been here about a year and a half and one day she called a meeting.  She and I really didn't have much contact.  But about a year and a half she, she called a meeting and she had all the deans, all the vice presidents and most of the major department heads.  And she raked everybody over the coal.  She had, she had a reputation of being real hard on people.  She raked everybody over the coal.  And people left that meeting say you know if that woman was dying and she needed a teaspoon of water, I wouldn't give it to her.  So I got back to my office and I called her.  And I said, "Dr. Horton," I said, "you know when you came, the initial conversation we had I told you if you ever needed any help, to call me."  I said, "I never heard from you."  I said, "I'm calling you now because you really need my help."  She said, "Why do I need your help?"  So I went on to explain to her what had happened at the meeting.  I said, "I think this is why you were upset." 'Cause she never said in the meeting why she was upset.  I said, "I think this is why you were upset.  You had every reason to be upset," I said, "but it's clear to me you were upset with only one person.  It would have been better if you'd just call that one person in and chewed them out, rather than pissing off your whole upper level administration."  Well it turned out it was true; she was only upset with one person.  But that one person wasn't even in the meeting.  So then after that, she would call me periodically to say what would you do in this instance, what would you do in that instance, what would you do in this instance.  And so we would talk.
Story_ID: 158444
Speaker 1: And then in August, the first week in August, I'll never forget.  I was at the National Bar [Association] meeting and I got a call from her [Dr. Joann Horton].  And she said, "Jim, I, I really do need your help now."  And I said, "all right, what is it?"  And she said, "The provost's resigned."  She said, "I'd like for you to be my interim provost."  So I said, "All right, I'll, I'll help you."  And so I became her interim provost.  I started on August 15th as the interim provost.  One of the things that happened was my second day on the job, we had just started registration, as provost.  And we registered in the gymnasium.  I walked over in the gym and there was a line around the corner.  And I went in and I said, "What's wrong?"  And they said, "Well the computer system isn't working."  I said, "What's wrong with it?"  "We don't know."  So I went and I talked to I.T. [Information Technology], only to discover that we had installed a new system, software system, and it hadn't been tested.  So fortunately this was a Friday.  So I said we are--right now it's about one o'clock in the afternoon.  I said, "We're gonna shut registration down until Monday."  And I asked I.T., I said, "Can you test, test the system over the weekend?"  So they agreed.  They tested the system over the weekend, I got a representative from every unit that was affected by registration to come in on Saturday and Sunday and we worked all the bugs out of the system, and got it up and running on Monday.  That was the first big problem I ran into as, as provost.
Story_ID: 158445
Speaker 1: The next one occurred in the last week in September.  I was--I took the deans on a training retreat on the outskirts of Houston [Texas], we're at a hotel on the outskirts of Houston.  And that Friday evening, everyone was in my suite, you know, drinking talking.  And somebody said why don't we just turn on the TV?  So somebody just went on--I don't even remember the show that was on.  But we--more drinking than anything else.  And then there was this big news flash.  And the flash was the president of Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], Dr. Joann Horton, has just resigned.  I think everybody was blown away.  So I got home that Sunday from the retreat, I got a call from the chairman of the board.  He said, "Jim, I'm sure you know by now that Dr. Horton has resigned," and I said, "Yes."  He said, "The board has decided that we're gonna do a national search, but until we hire somebody, we'd like for you and Howard," and Howard [ph.] was the senior vice president for administration and finance.  "We want you and Howard to work as a team to, to run the university."  He said, "We got a meeting in, in another week and a half.  So you all just go on and do what you need to do, and then at the board meeting, we'll sit down with you all and kind of define what everybody's, each of your responsibilities are gonna be."  So Howard and I got along really well.  So the next week and a half, he and I ran the university.  So we go to the board meeting, and the first thing they do is they call an executive session.  And they invite me in and they say, "Look, I think the board has decided that this two-headed beast is not a good idea."  They had tried that once before and it didn't work.  In the interim between [Dr. Robert J.] Terry and [Dr. William H.] Harris, they tried a three person head and it, and it blew up on 'em.  So they said, "This, this won't work.  So we wanna know if you will agree to be the interim president."  Now before they appointed Dr. Terry the interim, and I don't know how far along they were, they were with this, but I got a call from the chairman who said, "Will you be the interim?  The proviso is you can't seek the presidency," and I said, "No.  I, I won't be the interim if I can't seek the presidency."  I forgot to tell you, Harris and I were also the last two finalists.
Speaker 2: Okay, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Harris and I were the two finalists, [Dr. Joann] Horton and I were the two finalists.  So when they called me in and, and said, "Will you be the interim?"  I said, "Not if it means I can't seek the presidency."  They said, "No, we knew you were gonna say that, so, so the answer is yes, you can, you can apply for the presidency, even if you're the interim."
Story_ID: 158446
Speaker 1: At, at some juncture, and it would have been some years back, you decided you wanted to be the president, right?  Or you decided (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I decided I think just before when, when, when, when [Dr. Granville M.] Sawyer re--resigned and they, they were looking for a president [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Because one of the questions that the chairman asked me when, when they interviewed me when they hired [Dr. William H.] Harris, which and that's a story in and of itself.  But they hired Harris.  But in my interview the chairman asked me, he said, "Why would you wanna be president?"  He said, "you can be the dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] for the rest of your life."  He said, "You probably have more power than any dean in this country.  I don't know of any dean that can pick the phone up at three or four o'clock in the morning and call the majority of his board members and they will talk to him."  He said, "Why do you want to be the president?"  And I told him, I said, "Milton," I said "before I became a dean, I didn't wanna be the president."  I said, "But one of the things I discovered as dean of the law school, is like being an oarsman on a big rowboat.  When the boat is going in the wrong direction, no matter how hard you row, you can't change it.  In order to change the direction of the university, you got to be at the rudder, and the president is at the rudder."
Speaker 1: Okay that's a good answer.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 158447
Speaker 1: But when I say it's a story in itself, because after they selected [Dr. William H.] Harris, I'm out with the, chairman and he tells me, he say, "Jim, he say I'm gon' be honest with you."  He said, "When [Dr. Leonard H.O.] Spearman left, the board decided that we were gonna, we were gonna bring in an outsider, so you didn't stand a chance."  I said, "Then why in the hell didn't you all tell me that?  You know if you all already decided that you wasn't--you were gone bring in an outsider, I wouldn't have gone through the process."
Speaker 2: Well probably wouldn't have been good protocol for them to, to--I don't know if, if--but you know for them to say that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know.  But I mean they could have told me, though.  I mean it wasn't like I was not their friend, have me do all that work and then say well you wasn't gone get it anyway.
Speaker 2: So okay, so--
Speaker 1: With, with Harr--with, with [Dr. Joann] Horton it was funny 'cause a board member came and took me to lunch.  And he said he was taking me to lunch 'cause the board asked him to take me to lunch.  They, they were really concerned that I would leave the university when I didn't get the job when, when Horton got it.  And, and I told him that I wanted them to know that I was not going anywhere.  My commitment was to the university, it wasn't to the board.  And because the board didn't have enough sense to pick the right person, it didn't that I was gonna leave the university.
Speaker 2: So, so, so, so there was a search and another round of interviews in '94 (1994) to pick a new president.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: After Jo, Jo, Joann Horton left.  And this time you were picked.  Do you have any idea why?
Speaker 1: Well what, what happened, and that's what I'm getting to.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that was in, that was in October we have a board meeting, they decide and they ask me if I would be the interim.  I said, "Yes."  They tell me that they're gonna do a national search and that they understand that I'm gonna be a candidate.  And so I said, "Okay."  And so in the December board meeting, two months later, they immediately called an executive session and I go in and they say, "We've decided that we like for you to be the permanent president.  A search is gonna be a waste of our time 'cause we not gon' find anybody any better than you.  And so we can do it."  So they made me the permanent president with, without a search.  The problem was, and it was funny because all my friends called me and they said, "This is shocking.  Because the board is Republican.  Do they know how Democratic you are?"  But the chair was interesting because he called himself an independent, even though he was appointed by a Republican governor.
Speaker 2: So now let me just ask this--what's the composition of the board, the racial composition of Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 1: It's always been majority black.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's always been majority black.
Speaker 2: But they're mostly Republicans you say.
Speaker 1: They are now.  See when I came to Texas, they were mostly Democrat.  And, and that was a strange thing because in 1978 I think it was, Texas elected its first Republican governor after Reconstruction.  And it's been cra--it was crazy for about twelve years and now we've had twelve years of all Republican governorship.  Who knows if they'll ever have another Democratic in Texas.  I, I'm assuming we will.  But the chairman told me, he said, "Look man," he say, "I don't care about your politics."  He said, "I want somebody who can really run the university, and that's all I'm, I'm really concerned about."  And, and so I say that because politics control a lot of what happened during my tenure as president.  But anyway, the board decides that, that they want me to become president, and so in December I accepted the position as president of the university.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is December of '95 [1995], I mean '94 [1994], and then you started in '95 [1995] as president.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158448
Speaker 1: Now in early '95 [1995] you had a--well I don't wanna ask you about this one first I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: No you can, you can ask.  I mean I--
Speaker 1: Three--the lawsuit, or the three white law professors suing the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we had--I had a number of interesting lawsuits.  This was one that was really interesting.  I had three white law professors who sued.  Basically their argument was that it was a salary issue.  That they were underpaid, vis-a-vis, their African American counterparts.  We had one who made about a thousand dollars less than the highest paid member of the faculty; he made about a thousand dollars less than, than Otis King.  And then we had two other senior faculty who were like maybe fourth and fifth.  And they said they were making about twelve hundred less than the African American that was at their level.  At the time the chairman of the board was a partner with Baker Botts.  So he first took the complaint to, to the staff at Baker Botts and they laughed at it.  They said, "This is crazy, this doesn't make any sense in the world.  There is no way there's any merit to this lawsuit."  So--
Speaker 1: So, so one of the top law firms just says it's frivolous.
Speaker 2: It was frivolous.  They said, "It's frivolous, it doesn't make any sense and, and, and, and don't, don't, don't do anything about it.  I mean this is, this was crazy."  But the bottom line is we end up going to trial.  It was probably the most botched lawsuit in the world.  The, the university] is represented by the attorney general's office of the State of Texas.  And when, when they first told me the two members of the attorney general's office that were gonna represent us.  The, the lead attorney I objected vehemently.  I did not want him on the case.  He had botched, no he hadn't botched.  There was an earlier case, a reverse discrimination lawsuit that I had with the faculty.  A white faculty member had sued the law school because he hadn't been hired.  And they had appointed--well what happened was, it was an interesting case.  The lead attorney on that case was an African American woman.  And the first time I met with her, she said, "We need to settle this case."  And I said, "No, we're not gonna"--she said, "We need to."  I said, "Why?"  She said, "We need to settle this case because we can't win it."  I said, "What do you mean we can't?"  She said, "We can't win it just by the, by, by the numbers.  You don't have enough white faculty on the law school, so you can't win this case."  I said, "This case is not about the number of white faculty members on the law school, it's whether or not I discriminated against this guy in the whole hiring process."  And so during the whole discovery period, she and I fought.  'Cause she's trying to get me to, to settle the case and I won't do it.  We fought all the way.
Story_ID: 158449
Speaker 1: And on the day we started trial, the guy who was sitting second seat shows up.  I said, "Where is what's her name?"  And he said, "She called this morning and said she had to rush her, her husband to the hospital, so she can't show for trial."  Now this guy had tried one case in his life.  So, so we, we, we go to trial.  The first day he's horrible.  I mean he is horrible.  But the A.G. [attorney general] sends a more experienced lawyer down two days later.  And this guy is bad, bad, bad.  So on that Friday of the trial, for some reason, we did not have a trial that day because the judge had other business.  But we have a board meeting.  So I get a call to come to the board.  I'm dean of law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] at this time.  I get a call to come to the board meeting.  I go to the board meeting.  And the more experienced lawyer is there.  And he has recommended to the board that we settle.  So the board asked me and I said, "No."  I said, "You know," --so we kind of discussed some of the parts of the case, and I said, the, the, the big problem is one of the first things I, I learned as a law student in, in litigation, is that you shouldn't make a decision until you have all the facts.  I said, "And in this room, even though there are five lawyers, six with the lawyer from the A.G. [attorney general's office], I'm the only person in the room with all the facts.  The lawyer from the A.G.'s office doesn't know anything at all."  So anyway the board agreed not to settle the case.  And in fact one of the things that happened, remember I--this was the same chairman.  He was with Baker Botts.  At this point he wasn't as chairman, but he was on the board.  And he had come the first day of the trial and he said, "Jim, I was there the first day and it was horrible."  I said, "You're right.  But I worked with this guy over the last four or five days and I mean we really improved; we're gonna win this case."  It was an all-white jury too.  So anyway we go back.  The guy, the more experienced lawyer doesn't do anything at all.  I mean he absolutely does nothing.  But the end of the story, we win the case.  We win the case.  So when the, the faculty members assigned filed --they assigned this guy as the lead lawyer.  And so I jump up and down and say, "No way will I have this guy."  And they finally against my objection, they send this guy as the lead lawyer.  It was the most botched case I ever seen in my life.  I complained so that on the third day of the trial, they sent down one of the more experienced lawyers to, to see what was going on.  And I guess the second week, beginning of the second week of the trial, the head of litigation section of the A.G.'s office came down and looked at the trial.  I mean it was so botched, that they fired the lead lawyer at the end of the trial, and they moved the, the other lawyer from litigation to child support, which in the A.G.'s office is like the nether lands in law.
Story_ID: 165796
Speaker 1: Now did you wanna go back and talk about the, the study, the bar exam study (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the, the bar study.  Remember I told you I was on the, on an ABA [American Bar Association] committee and they said we didn't have three or four million dollars to, to do it.  I managed to work my way on the board of the Law School Admissions Services.  Law School Admission Council has a lot of money.  It's, it's, it's probably the most and the best financed organization in legal education.  Students pay a lot of money to take the LSAT [Law School Admissions Test] and so have a, have a extremely large reserve.  So I managed to work my way on that board.
Speaker 1: About, about when did you get on that board?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in the late '80s [1980s].  I can't remember the exact--
Speaker 1: So we're backtracking now just for those wonder--
Speaker 2: Right, it was sometime in the late '80s [1980s].  I got, I got on the board.  Managed to get appointed, chair one of the committees.  And managed to convince my committee that one of the things we ought to do is fund study.  We fund the study, we spent about four million dollars on this study.  And the study was really looked at the, the issue related to the problems minorities, more specifically, Mexican Americans and African Americans would have on the bar.  We worked out an agreement with all the ABA approved law schools and all the state bars where we got data from everybody.  We did a tremendous, in-depth survey of recent admittees to the bar and looked at everything.  Anything that might impact one for performance.  How much did you study, you know, did you work, what were some of your study habits?  We looked at all kind of factors.  I, I shouldn't say we looked at the cycle attrition, looked at all kind of factors to see if, if they could figure out what was going on.  About the only thing that came out of that study was they documented the early study.  That is, there is a gap in the performance, but nobody can explain why that gap exists.  And when I say a gap, you can take a African American and a Mexican American, put them in the same course of study at the same university, have them have the same undergrad GPA [grade point average], score the same on the LSAT, enter the same law school, perform the same in law school.  But when they get ready to take the bar, the African American and the Mexican Americans don't do as well.
Speaker 1: Now is this--has anyone considered that it might be like a culturally biased exam?  I mean they've--I mean this has been demonstrated in police and fire exams around the country.
Speaker 2: They, they haven't.  Nobody's really looked at it since then.  Nobody really looked at it.  And my whole intent of having it done was to try to find out why.  I wasn't trying to document that it actually did exist.  I mean I, I was kind of disappointed with the results, the study as it was issued.  I wasn't questioning whether it, it occurred.  They tried to document it, but they couldn't.  I remember at some point earlier, a group of law professors, African American law professors, we had a psychometrician, and were able to prove that the LSAT has some cultural biasness to it.  And it was really funny because at the conference in which we presented our data, a representative from LSAT got up and said, "Well they might be right, but we want you to know that we've already changed the test."
Story_ID: 165797
Speaker 1: So wow this is interesting 'cause it--I guess just to backtrack a little bit more and what, what you found when you started as dean was that the students were not getting proper education, you know.  Some were getting grades without doing the work, and, and you were saying that that certainly--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  See my study was, was, was not graduates from Thurgood Marshall [School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  This was a national study.
Speaker 1: I, I know.  I, I was referring to when you first started.  What you noticed at, at, at this law school was that people were getting, were being given grades in some instances and weren't, you know, studying as intensely.
Speaker 2: Right, I agree.
Speaker 1: This is, the national study as you just cited, you know, says across the board wherever--so African Americans and Latino students across the board are not, or just have a hard time with the bar exam, regardless of how they performed in school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or where they went to school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is mysterious.  Any, any ideas about what it might be?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of it has to do with--I think a lot of 'em go in with being a lot more tense than they should have, not being relaxed on, on, on the bar.  I remember when I was studying for the bar, some of my study mates asked me, "How, you know how can you be so relaxed?"  And I said, "I'm, I'm gonna pass."  And they said, "Why you say it so sure?"  I said, "I, I've looked at the results.  Seventy-five percent, 70 to 75 percent of the, the people who take the bar, pass.  I said, "That means seven out every ten pass."  I said, "I don't think you can put me in a room with nine other people, I don't care who they are, and I can't be better than three of 'em."  So that was always, always my attitude.
Speaker 1: Now there's a, there's a real issue that occurred in Chicago [Illinois] and some other cities where it was charged at least, thought it may not have been proven for various legal reasons, that certain people taking the police exam and fire exam actually, actually already had the exam.
Speaker 2: That's, that might be true in police and fire.  It's not true in the bar, I can tell you that.  They control that like, like Knox, like Fort Knox.  I don't think there's a question about, about them having the exam.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well that being the case, that is very, that's mysterious.
Speaker 2: It, it's mysterious and it's, it's an issue that still hasn't been resolved.  The problem is, it's not that many people who know about it.  I can even--even if you, if you talk to law professors and people who received the report once the Law School Admissions Council did the report, I doubt if there are very many, many people who actually read it.  I know that other than the people on the ABA [American Bar Association] committee, only a handful of people know about the initial study.
Story_ID: 165798
Speaker 1: Okay, well back to 1995.  So, so you're dealing with these lawsuits in the beginning of '95 [1995], and as--what else is going on?  Now you're president [of Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we were talking, we were talk--we're president.  But, but the lawsuit was filed while I was dean [of Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, and you gotta remember this is a lawsuit.  Now the crazy thing about it is the people who filed the lawsuit, their claim is that they were people who opposed me when I came as dean.  Is, is--they're saying it's race, but the reason, the real reason is they opposed me when I came as dean.  All right.  And that's why I underpaid them in comparison to the other African American law professors.  And so one of the things--it was really fun that, that when I met with the lawyers before the trial and I'm looking over their charts, one of the things that's missing is a chart that lays out the salaries of all the law faculty because out of all the people who are complaining, all right, they are three of the top seven paid law professors, all right.  And of the top seven paid law professors, five of 'em opposed me when I came as dean.  Those five are all, they were all a part of the prior administration's cabinet.  So they're five of the highest paid law professors.  So I said to the A.G. [attorney general], "Well you need to--you don't have a chart showing the jury what it is we're arguing over.  They don't even know we're arguing over pennies.  How can you not have an exhibit to show the salaries?"  So they said, "We forgot about that."  I said, then we gota--they say well--and it's, it's true.  I mean the judge, the judge's rule was all exhibits had to be presented thirty days before trial.  So we can't get this exhibit in.  So I said to them, "It's an important piece of information the jury need to have.  Let me tell how--what we gone do.  When I'm on the stand, I want you to get a chart, an easel and come up and ask me what are the salaries of the top ten faculty members.  And as I tell 'em, I want you to write 'em on the board.  That's the way we gon' get the information in."  I testify.  The first thing I say when I get back to the table with the lawyers, "Y'all didn't ask me anything about salary."  "Oh, we forgot."
Speaker 1: Well you know I'm tempted to think that, you know, you (unclear).
Speaker 2: Now the other piece of it, and you won't believe it.  I mean two of the people who testified against me and said, yeah, they were overpaid because they were black, were the two, was the dean and his right hand man.
Speaker 1: The former dean.
Speaker 2: The former dean and his right hand man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they were two who they were arguing and got paid more than the white professors.
Speaker 1: So anyway, so then did they ever ask you the questions about the salaries, your lawyers?
Speaker 2: No, they never did because I was the last witness.  One of the things I did, when I got to Texas Southern, Texas Southern was losing all of their lawsuits.  I mean they did not win one lawsuit.  And there were a couple reasons.  One was nobody demanded that the A.G.'s office provide them adequate representation.  And the other one was the A.G.'s office was not preparing for the case.  And the third one is some of the times when they sent inadequate represent--representatives, nobody knew how to deal with it.  I worked--every case I got sued on, I worked with the lawyers.  We won every case but that one.  And one of the things that I always did was I always made sure that I was the last witness to testify for the university.  And the reason for that was I could clean up everybody else's mess.
Story_ID: 165799
Speaker 1: But in this case, so, so how was this case resolved?
Speaker 2: They all won.  It only came to like maybe twenty-five thousand dollars.  I mean it--it was something minimum.
Speaker 1: Well it had to be like a, a letdown to lose a case like that, you know.
Speaker 2: It, it was a letdown, but I mean I, I was not, I was not hurt because I, I knew we didn't lose the case on the facts.  And I, I tell my students every day, I say look, the best way to really understand litigation is to be a defendant.  Because when you're a defendant, you come to understand that facts don't mean anything.  It's what you can convince the jury of that counts.  And I guarantee you once you've been a defendant, you gone be a better litigator.
Story_ID: 165800
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-six [1996], the U.S. Education Department [sic, U.S. Department of Education] was investigating--
Speaker 2: That was, that was, that was interesting.
Speaker 1: About financial aid?
Speaker 2: I walked, I walked in one day and there's a letter on my desk from the Department of Education, and basically it says look, we have been dealing with a financial aid issue with TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] for the last eight to ten years.  And you have failed to address the issues we've raised.  Now this is my first knowledge that we have, we've had problems with the Department of Education.  So and we, we've addressed--you have not addressed the issues you, you've raised.  We have concluded that in fines and penalties and all of this, you owe us thirty-five million dollars.  You can either wire us thirty-five million dollars, or you can put a check in the mail tomorrow for thirty, thirty-five million dollars.
Speaker 1: Either or.  Either or.
Speaker 2: Either or.  That set off an unusual chain of reaction, 'cause they also decided also because of this, we're gonna put you on what's called reimbursement.  Now what happens is let's say if the university getting six million dollars in financial aid, what generally happens is the Department of Education in July will send the university six million dollars.  And we would deposit it, and as students qualified, we would then draw from that six million dollars to pay their fees.  What they said is we're not gonna send you anything.  What you're gonna have to do is you're gonna have to cover the fees for the students, and then as you process the paperwork and we approve it, then we'll send you the money.  But it has to be on a case-by-case method.  So one of the things that happened when, when that occurred, the state auditor had a press conference in Austin [Texas].  And this was the beginning, the real beginning of the battle with the board.  They had a press conference in Austin.  And the state auditor announced to everybody that because T.S.U. was placed on a reim--reimbursement, that he projected the university would be about eight to ten million dollars in the red by the end of the fiscal year.  So the press as they normally will do, when he issued that statement, naturally everybody appeared in my office to get a response.  So my response was the state auditor doesn't manage the university; I manage the university.  And I guarantee you we will not be in the red at the end of the fiscal year.  They asked me, "How can you be so sure?"  I said, "When I have a dollar, I spend a dollar.  But when I have seventy-five perce--seventy-five cents, I only spend seventy-five cents.  I know how to manage us through this situation."
Story_ID: 165801
Speaker 1: So the first thing I got was I got a lot of anger in the next board meeting.  Because the board took the position that I was embarrassing the leadership of the state by issuing that statement.  And I said, "I'm not embarrassing the leadership of the state.  I'm defending my ability to manage this university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and I know I can manage this university in the black."  So the second thing that happened was we were getting ready to go into a legislative session.  So we go into a legislative session, I discover that some of the board members had approached members of the legislative black caucus to say to them, Douglas has a lot of pride.  There is no way he can manage the university in the black.  So what's gonna happen is the session ends at the end of May.  The fiscal year doesn't end until the end of August.  Somewhere between May and August we gone in the red and we won't have any way to manage the university.  I had a very good relationship with the caucus, but I couldn't convince the caucus we did not need a ten million dollar buyout reserve.  So against my wishes, the caucus had the legislature to improve, to approve a ten million dollar pot of money that we could tap if we went in the red.  The ten million dollars set out there for two years.  The remainder of my time at the university and we never went in, in the red.  In fact, one of the things that I think angered the board was that they, they kept asking me to take the money and I said, "No, you don't understand.  In order for me to take some of that money, the university has to be unable to pay its bills.  I'm not gonna manage this university to a situation where we can't pay our bills." I, I know because some of the vendors call me.  I had board members calling vendors.  Do we have any outstanding debt that the university--to make sure that I wasn't delaying paying, paying my, my debt.
Story_ID: 165802
Speaker 1: One of the interesting cases, Sheila Jackson Lee, who is our local congressperson, and I was working with the [U.S.] Department of Education, dealing with this issue.  And I remember one day I said to the board, I said, "look, we're in good shape with the Department of Education.  All right.  And let me tell you why."  Longerfellow [ph.], and I can't remember Longerfellow's first name, but he was the assistant secretary of education in charge of financial aid.  I had gone to Austin [Texas] to meet with him, and I went to, went to Austin to meet with him.  And I told him, I said, "I'm gonna be honest with you."  I said, "The main reason I'm, I'm here to meet with you is"--I said, "I know the people in Texas.  People in Austin have told you that I don't consider this a very serious problem."  I said, "I'm here to meet with you because I want you to know that I know the seriousness of this problem."  I said, "The people in Austin don't understand that I don't stress over anything, I don't pull my hair out over anything, I don't jump up and down over anything."  I said, "I understand the serious--I understand it's complex.  I'm here to assure you that I have a plan to deal with it and, and we're gonna work it out."  I said, "Plus on top of that, not only do we communicate," I said at one point he and I were playing telephone tag.  And so when I finally got him, we finally got to talk, he said, "Look Jim," he said, "we don't need to continue this."  He said, "Whenever you need to talk to me, call me at night.  Here's my home number, call me at home."  I said now if somebody is not willing to work with us, that's not--one of the other big problems is, and you have to know the congresswoman.  I don't know if you've heard of her.  But she's active in everything.  She discovered that two board members had been meeting with Department of Education unbeknownst to me and her.  And she called a meeting with the board and raked them over the coal.  I mean, I mean she raked them over the coal.  I was sitting there.  So they got a little upset that I saw all of that.  She, she, she raked them over the coal.  But we moved on.  I mean we, we--and I think the, the turning, the turning point probably for the board and to some extent the governor, was after two years when was still in the black, the [Houston] Chronicle, the local newspaper, printed a big article about the fact that against all predictions, I had managed the university in the black.
Story_ID: 165803
Speaker 1: Okay, you think that some, some of these--I mean the board, were the board members, were they Republicans do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were, they were Republicans.  The first year and a half we had three Democrats.  But when they went off the board, it was, it was a Republican board and so that was what I, I had to deal with.  There were two interesting scenarios in it and even though the lieutenant governor was, was a Democrat, I got a call one day from one of the senators who told me the lieutenant governor [Bob Bullock] wanted to meet with me.  And I went to meet with him and basically what he said to me, he started--after we had, you know, friendly conversation at the beginning.  He said, "Let me, Mr. President let me tell you why I wanted to meet with you."  And I said, "What is that [Lieutenant] Governor?"  And he said, "I wanna know which university, no which system you like to put your university in."  And I said, "Governor, we're not going in the system."  He said, "Yeah, you're going in the system."  Now when I came to Texas [Southern University, Houston, Texas], there were thirty-four independent universities that were not in the system.  At this point in time, there are only four.  And we're one of those four.  The other thirty volunteered to go into various systems, which they later regretted.
Speaker 1: The systems mean--
Speaker 2: University of Texas System, [Texas] A&M [University] System, University of Houston System, and [University of] North Texas System.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: All right.  They've since created a fifth system, and it's called the Texas State [University] System and it's made up of about ten smaller universities.
Speaker 1: Now that's really, that's remarkable.  I mean where Ohio, Illinois and Michigan, they, they have the state systems, you know, where you have like Eastern Illinois University [Charleston, Illinois].
Speaker 2: At, at one time Texas, every university was independent.  And that the system slowly started to progress.  And, and I've been asked--
Speaker 1: So the state system is an anomaly--I mean state sys--I mean the state system is new here.  But you got like several, you know, regional sys--well systems I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  I think the largest is I think [Texas] A&M [University System].  I, I think A&M has about sixteen [sic, currently has twelve].
Speaker 1: Schools.
Speaker 2: Schools in, in their system.  And, and the problem with it, 'cause I, I was asked by a number of African Americans why do you think it's a bad idea to go into a system?  And my reasons were, were twofold.  One is what we do in our mission, there's not one of the systems that understand our mission and is willing to assume the mission that we have.
Story_ID: 165804
Speaker 1: Educating people who are underprepared for college is extremely, extremely, extremely difficult.  I was asked a number of times, even by people in my administration when I was dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], why I is it, why is it you insist on this very, very difficult mission?  When I came to the law school, one of the things the board asked me, well the president asked me, he said, "The board wants to know what your plans are to improve the bar performance?"  Remember I said it was, it was very bad.  And I told him, I said, "In order for me to explain it to you, I need a, a day with the board."  I didn't say an hour, I didn't say thirty minutes, I need a day so I can explain to them what the issues are.  And so they did.  I spent a day with the board laying out the problem.  And I told them there are, there are three ways to address the problem.  One way is to bring in a lot of white students.  All right white students do better on the bar and therefore you can just bring 'em in.  We can immediately--but that would do harm to the mission of the law school.  The second one is there are about eight hundred African Americans every year in this country who have the kinds of scores that are readily admittable to law school.  We can do like Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], we can buy about a hundred or so of them every year.  The other one is to continue--
Speaker 2: Scholarships and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The, the other one is to continue to admit the same kind of student we've always admitted, but develop a huge, horrendous academic support system.  Take them as they are and make them better.  And that's the mission that I wanna undertake.  That's the mission that the president agreed to and the mission the board brought into.  And I said to the faculty, "You all say that one of our missions is to increase the number of African American lawyers.  I can't increase the number of African American lawyers if all I'm doing is taking a student and convincing him to come to TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] rather than U.T. [University of Texas School of Law, Austin, Texas], or convincing him to come to TSU rather than University of Houston [Law Center, Houston, Texas].  The only we can increase the number of African American law students is we have to admit students who can't get admitted anywhere else in the country, and make them lawyers.  So it's a, it's a, it's a hard task.
Story_ID: 165805
Speaker 1: When--and this is jumping ahead.  It has more to do with Priscilla Slade.  When Priscilla Slade was fired, the governor called a press conference, said he was tired of dealing with TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], he was always bailing us out.  The state was always bailing us out.  I produced a thirty-page paper pointing out why the problem exist, but also proving that TSU had never been in the red.  We had never--the state had never bailed us out, even though they talk about all the financial problems, all that other stuff.  In fact when they talk about bailing Priscilla Slade out, the black caucus called a press conference 'cause the university had thirteen million dollars in reserve.  We didn't need a bailout.  The state didn't give us anymore money.  But as I explain to people, and I make it short, all of this started in the early '70s [1970s].  Because remember when TSU was created, it was to keep African Americans out of U.T. [University of Texas at Austin, Houston, Texas]  In 1962, '63 [1963], all right, the state had to make a decision.  It was whether to put more money into T.S.U. and really increase the white enrollment in TSU or to make the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] a public university.  University of Houston was a private university.  They decided to make the University of Houston a state institution.  So they'd take it over.  In 1970 it's clear integration is the name of the game, all right.  African Americans can go anywhere they want.  People look at--we're a block from the University of Houston.  What happens?  You got two public universities a block from each other.  It doesn't make any kind of economic and business sense.  So what ought to be the word?  You ought to close one of 'em.  Well you're not gone close the University of Houston.  So what's the target?  The target is Texas Southern.  What is the best way to get African Americans to agree to close one of their institutions?  To say that they don't know how to spend public money.  So try to prove to African Americans that everybody at TSU, all right, is throwing away our dollars.  And so there's never been a time when the state has bailed TSU out.  They come up with all these issues, they, they do this.  But you can go back and look at the records.  The state has never bailed us out in any way at all.
Story_ID: 165806
Speaker 1: We were talking about my meeting with the governor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The lieutenant governor [Bob Bullock] and him telling me that, that he wanted me to go into the system.  So I said, "We're not going into a system."  He said, "Yeah, you, you're going into the system."  And he said, "If I can give you a piece of advice," he said, "I'm gon' do it now."  He said, "While you have an opportunity to influence which system you go in," he said, "What I'm gonna ask you to do is write me a letter requesting that Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] be placed in the U.T. [University of Texas] System."  He said, "I've already talked to [William] Cunningham," and Cunningham was chancellor of the U.T. System.  He said, "I've already talked to Cunningham, and Cunningham has agreed to take you."  He said, "Now A&M [Texas A&M University System] wants you, they want you real bad.  But I don't know why in the hell anybody would wanna be a Aggie."  A&M has always wanted to have a hold in Houston [Texas].  [University of] Texas [System] has a fairly good footprint in Houston 'cause they, they have so much over in the medical center.  But A & M at that point had absolutely nothing in Houston.  So A&M has always wanted, wanted to be in Houston.  So he said, "A & M want you, they want you real bad."  So I said, "[Lieutenant] Governor, we're not going in a system."  He said, "Well what are you gonna do with the state audit?"
Speaker 2: Now is this Governor George [W.] Bush?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, this is lieutenant, this is, this is before--
Speaker 2: George Bush, okay.
Speaker 1: No, Bush is governor, but [Bob] Bullock is the lieutenant governor.
Speaker 2: This is the lieutenant governor, right.
Speaker 1: So he said, he said, "What are you gonna do with the state auditor?"  And I said, "We'll be all right with the state audit."  So he said, "You think you gone be all right with the"--I said, "Yeah," I said, "the comptroller just completed a review, and it was very good."  He said, "I don't give a damn what the comptroller said, I guarantee you you won't get a good review from the state auditor."  I said, "Then I just have to take my chances."
Story_ID: 165807
Speaker 1: So, so what's, what, what happened?  I mean what was the, what was the upshot of that?
Speaker 2: The upshot is, let's fast forward about another year or so, maybe a year and a half.  A couple of things happened.  When my first contract was up, it was kind of funny because I think the board--some of 'em probably thought I was crazy because most presidents you know six months to a year before the contract is out, most presidents start negotiating their new contract.  I, I never said anything to--I didn't say one word to the board about a contract.  About five, 4:30 on the last day of my contract, I get a call from the chair of the personnel committee of the board.  And he say, "Jim, did you realize your contract runs out today?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "If I hadn't called you, what were you gonna do on Monday?"  I said, "Stay at home."  He said, "You know we want you to stay on."  I said, "How the hell am I supposed to know, you all hadn't said anything."  So they, they, they decided to, to keep me.  I mean it was, it was really fun--funny, because at one of the board meetings that they were gonna fire me, the rumor was out that the board was gonna fire me.  And the board had convinced [then Governor George W.] Bush that if it happened, it was gonna be a riot.  And so Bush sent down the, the Texas Rangers just in case there was a riot.  Also--
Speaker 1: Were they visible?  Were they visible around here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had on their uniform.  Also at about the same time, there was one crazy guy on the board that I fought with publicly.  The community held a big rally at Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church.  Did a huge march from Wheeler Avenue to the backside of the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], held a press conference and ask the, the governor to get rid of this board member.  And a week later the board member resigned.  Now people in politics told me, which I know, they said man you know if you force--if, if the community force this guy out, you gone.  I said I, I know.  You know I'm not concerned about it.  So what happened was it was kind of funny.  There was a guy on the board, I'll call his name, [HM] Alphonso Jackson, who later became the, the Secretary of HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development], housing.  He claimed to have a, a wonderful relationship with Bush and I, I assume he did.  I think in a, in a national article he said he had--he was closer to Bush than any other African American in the world.  But he, he came on the board.  Two things happened.  One, he met with me.  And he told me, he say, "Look," he said, "George [W.] Bush is, is going to Washington [D.C.].  And my job is to make sure that nobody gets in his way, including you."  He said, "I don't care that the students love you, the faculty loves you and the community loves you."  He said, "The governor doesn't, so you gone have to go."  About a month after that I was in city council.  Had gone--not in city council--I had gone down to city hall to meet with [HM] Lee [P.] Brown who was the mayor at the time.  And bumped into an African American woman who, who was head of one of the departments, who happened to be real big in the Republican Party.  And I was talking to her while I was waiting to meet with the mayor, and she said, "You know James, I am really, really disturbed."  And I said, "About what?"  She said, "Alphonso [Jackson]."  I said, "Why are you disturbed at Alphonso?"  She said, "I asked him, 'Why did you resign as chair of the commerce commission to go on TSU's [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] board?'  And he told me, 'The governor asked me to.'  I said, 'Why does the governor want you on TSU's board?'  And he said, 'The governor wants to get rid of Douglas, but the board doesn't know how to do it.  And my task is to get rid of Douglas.'"
Story_ID: 165808
Speaker 1: How did they get rid of me?  Is that your question?
Speaker 2: Well, well they renewed you in '98 [1998], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you, you left in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: So okay, so this is '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So the pressure is being applied here.
Speaker 1: The pressure's always been applied since, since, since probably '96 [1996] sometime.  The pressure's always been applied.  But so anyway the state auditors come in and it's--I can't say they did a hatchet job.  But their report is like a newspaper article in the sense that there's no relationship between the headline in the report and the report itself.  Have you, have you read a lot of newspaper articles where they sensationalize the headline, but then you read the body of the report and it's totally different from the headline?  Well this is the way--the body of the report is horrible.  TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] is doing horrible.  But when you read the, the actual report, the audit report is good.
Speaker 2: Now the, the issue is that most people don't read the rest of the text.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They, they flip through, you know they see TSU's doing horrible.  And they probably not gone read the tedious auditor's report to find out what the--
Speaker 1: Right.  All right so anyway, the report comes out.  The report says it's horrible, but the report is really not that bad.  I can't tell you what happened.  All I can tell you is that at, at some point five people on the board, it's a nine member board, five people on the board got together and agreed to fire me because on the meeting in which I was fired, the chairman opened the meeting, [HM] Alphonso [P. Jackson] made a motion to terminate me without cause, it was second.  Cabel [ph.], who had been the former chair and was the chair when I was hired, objected.  The chair ignored it, took a vote, the five people voted for it, I got up and walked out of the board meeting.
Speaker 2: This is 1999.
Speaker 1: That was in 1999.  One of the things that was sure because they called me--the four people who did not vote to terminate me had no idea.  The other thing that was clear, and a lot of people called me, which was true.  Obviously the five people, since there was no discussion, the five people had gotten together and discussed the motion before it happened, which was in violation of the open meetings requirement, Texas, because that can't be any decisions made without a discussion in a public board meeting in Texas.  So it was clear that they had discussed it.  So people said, "Why don't you just file litigation and, and have it overturned?"  And I'm like, "Yeah, but then they can come back the next meeting and do the same thing."  So it was, it was clear that, that [the governor of Texas, George W.] Bush had--and the fifth vote, the fifth vote was a woman who had not been to a board meeting and didn't know anything at all about me.  So I mean it was clear to me that, that Bush wanted me gone and so--
Story_ID: 165809
Speaker 1: Who, who is Willard L. Jackson?  Who is that?
Speaker 2: Willard Jackson was the chairman of the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was [HM] Alphonso Jackson's godson and was very, very weak.  I mean he was so weak that at one point--the board didn't get along.  They couldn't get along with each other.  So at one point we couldn't have board meetings because I couldn't get five board members that wanted to be in the room with each other.  And so we went to--I had to then work--we had three board members who lived in Dallas [Texas].  And one of the state senators lived in Dallas, and I knew him fairly well.  So working with him and one of the board members who was one of my biggest supporters, lived in Dallas.  Working with him, I finally got the three board members in Dallas to, to work together, along with Willard.  I took Willard [L. Jackson] with me to all those meetings.  So the four of us--and we managed to convince a fifth person.  So I managed to, to broker a deal to, to get all the--at least enough board members to meet so that we could do business.  Flying back form that trip, Willard said to me, he said, "You know I'm young, and there's a lot that I don't understand."  He said, "I need your guidance."  He said, "I know everybody complains that I vote with all the white members on the board."  He said, "I do that because the black members don't respect me."
Story_ID: 165810
Speaker 1: Priscilla [Slade] was dean who later became president [of Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  She's the one who, who, who replaced me as president.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the one who you asked me about, who got into all the difficulty.
Speaker 2: She got into financial trouble, deep financial troub--trouble.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: With a criminal trial.
Speaker 1: It was.  And I, I will say this.  I will say this publicly.  I was approached to do some underhanded things by the board, things that I, I knew was criminal.  But I wouldn't do it.  I--you know I, I always tell people that the only thing you have to live with is your reputation.  And so I've never been willing to do anything in which my reputation would, would be tainted.  But it was a situation where the, the board was too involved in the day-to-day operation of the university, wanted to be too involved in contract selection and distribution and stuff like that.  So there were a lot of--it was, it was a troubled board.
Story_ID: 165811
Speaker 1: So you continued to teach law.
Speaker 2: I went back to, to the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  That was an interesting case.  Because remember they fired me for no cause.  What, what they did was really funny.  In the fall of '98 [1998], when they renewed my contract back in, in, in the spring of '98 [1998], they set out a long list of objections that I was to obtain.  I knew that their intent was I would not obtain, I will not satisfy these objections, and but I did.  And in fact it was funny 'cause I, I met with the chair of the personnel committee, this was in early December.  And they had indicated that a number of the objections had not been met.  But when I met with the chair of the personnel committee, I had documentation to prove that I had met all the objections.  So they couldn't fire me for cause.  So they fired me for no cause.  So I walked out of the, the meeting and went home.  So about two or three days later I got a call from the chair of the personnel committee who said, "You know Jim, we need to sit down and talk about your termination and, and what we do financially and what we--what your relationship with the university going forward," and I said, "All right."  So I meet with him.  He said, "First, you know that you were terminated.  The board has decided that since you're a member of the law faculty, in the fall you can go back to the law faculty.  But between now," and this is February, "between now and September, you on leave with no pay."  So I said, "Well one of the things the board needs to do is read the contract."  So he said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Well"--and he's a lawyer--I said, "the contract says whenever I am--whenever I resign or am terminated as president, I can go back to the law school if I so desire."  I said, "So the decision of going back to the law school, and when I go back, is my decision, is not the board's."  So he said, "When do you wanna go back?"  I said, "Tomorrow."  He said, "But the semester's already started, there are no classes for you to teach."  "That's not my problem, that's the board's problem."  So they had to pay me for the rest of the semester even though I didn't have anything to do.  So they had to pay me until the next fall.  The second I said, "And the other thing is there's a penalty for firing me."  He said, "What do you mean?"  So I explained to him what the penalty was for firing me.  He said, "Man that's hijack."  So I said, "Look, let me tell you the way the contract reads.  The contract gives the board the ability to fire me for no cause at all, which means I've given up my right to due process, said it doesn't come free.  You all have to pay me."  So they ended up having to pay me and in fact when we finally ended up settling the whole dispute, the press release, the payment said TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] president fired and he's making more money now than he made when he, when he was president.  But one of the things I know, knew that the gov--that they didn't know, was [former Texas governor, George W.] Bush was afraid I was gonna sue.  And Bush had told the board to do whatever they needed to do to settle with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: 'Cause the last thing he wanted was, was that to play out in the press.
Story_ID: 165812
Speaker 1: One of the other problems that they were confronted with was OCR, Office of Civil Rights because Sheila Jackson Lee and I, and she was the [U.S.] Congresswoman.  I told the--the [U.S.] Department of Education had, had--was-TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was under review.  TSU and Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  The state of Texas I should say was under review.  And I said, "If we are ever going to get the kind of settlement we need, now is the time because [former Texas governor George W.] Bush is running for president.  He cannot allow this issue to taint him."  So I met with some of the leadership in, in, in the state and let them know that I was not ready to accept chickenfeed.  That I wanted to take a group of the state leadership to Tennessee so that they could see the kind of settlement that [HM Frederick] Humphries had gotten from the University of Tennessee [sic, Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And one of the reasons--and I remember--
Speaker 2: Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Tennessee State.  A few years ago under the present administration when we were talking about-we were meeting with the Department of Education and I told 'em that TSU's settlement was lousy and all of them were lousy except for the University--I mean Tennessee State.  And she asked, representative from the Department of Education, said, "Why did Tennessee State get such a good settlement?"  And I said, "Because Fred Humphries was the only president with enough balls to stand up and demand what was necessary under the settlement.  All these other presidents are afraid."  Remember they work for the state.  That's their ob.  Their job is on the line, so they're not gone fight with the people they work for.  So they end up taking what they want.  I worked on the Ayers [Jake Ayers, Jr. v. United States of America] case, the case out of Mississippi.  Near the end of that case and which ended up settling for a half billion dollars, which really wasn't enough money.  But when we were holding out when they reached a half billion dollars, our biggest problem was the presidents of those universities who was pushing us to take the settlement, which is a bad settlement for, for Mississippi.  So my was I'm not gonna settle for anything.  You're gonna do the same thing, you're gonna rebuild--you're gonna completely rebuild the campus because one of the things I did when I was president, I had a, a facilities audit done.  And I was able to demonstrate that every building on this campus from Hannah Hall, which was--construction was started before the decision in Sweatt [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950].  But it was the first building that was constructed on this campus by the state of Texas, all right.  But it was appropriated, designed and construction was started while we was still going through the Sweatt decision 'cause the idea was to show that we were equivalent to U.T. [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas].  From that building until I think it was 1997 when under my administration, we built the School of Business [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Every building built between those two buildings were underfunded.  Every building built between those two were underfunded.  And it took me a year of fighting with the state to put as much money into the School of Business as we did because they didn't wanna approve me putting that much money into the School of Business.  So the state really didn't wanna put it, put the money into the university.  I was talking about maybe a half billion dollars.  They ended up settling for chickenfeed.  I think they ended up agreeing to give each university thirty million dollars over a six year period.  Some--no, twenty-five million dollars over a six year period.
Speaker 2: That's Texas Southern and Prairie View?
Speaker 1: Texas Southern and Prairie View.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, so that was another big battle that was going on.  If I remained president, there's no way I would have settled for the amount of chickenfeed that the university settled for.
Story_ID: 165813
Speaker 1: So but you left TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] in 2005 to go to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What, what happened was actually in 2001, I was contacted by [HM Frederick] Fred Humphries, who was at that time was president of Florida A&M.  And Fred, Fred had been trying for about sixteen years, fifteen years at that point, to get a law school at FAMU, which is an interesting story 'cause they'd had one and then they closed it down and he was trying to, to bring it back.  But it looked like he was gonna get a law school, so he called me and he said, "Look, Jim."  He said, "I'm, I'm getting ready to get a law school, I want you to come down and be the dean."  So I said, "Fred, I mean Tallahassee [Florida] is the last place I wanna live."  He said, "I need somebody to plan it for me, put together the plans and all of that."  And I said, "Fred, I can do that for you, but I can do that from Houston [Texas]."  And so I spent a year putting together the plans for the law school, doing the design for the building, and I helped him do everything other than go as dean.  So then they brought in the dean and then in '05 [2005] I guess the law school had been opened about three years.  Oh five [2005] I got a call from Castell Bryant, who was the dean.  And she asked me, she told me she was having some problems in the law school and wondered if I would fly over to Tallahassee and talk to her.  So I flew over and she said, "I, I need a dean.  And can you start in about two weeks?"  So I said, "You know you are blessed," because this was in, first week in June.  I said, "for the first summer in my life, I'm not doing anything this summer.  So I can come over and, and help."  And she said, "let me tell you something about the law school at FAMU [Florida A&M University College of Law]."  And I said, "I planned the law school at FAMU, in fact I thought that was why you called me."  And she said, "No, this is news.  I didn't know you put together the plan for the law school."  She said, "I, I called around the country asking people who would be a good person to come and rescue us, and your name kept coming up."  So I did.  I went home, then that Thursday I got a call from her and she said, "Monday week is, is, is not soon enough, can you come Monday?"  So I said, "Yeah, I'll be over on Monday."  So I go over on, I go over on Monday.
Story_ID: 165814
Speaker 1: The next one is an interesting discussion because it's one of the things, and I missed it when, when I was talking about the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  When I came to the law school, the faculty salaries were horrible.  In fact at that point in time, the ABA [American Bar Association]--one of the elements that they looked at was salary, all right.  Because their position was you can't hire good people if you don't pay enough, which was really true.  So they looked at salary.  We had by low--by far one of the lowest salaries in the country.
Speaker 2: What was the salary then for law school professor?
Speaker 1: Probably about twenty-one, twenty-two thousand dollars.  At that point everybody else was paying like thirty-five and forty.  So one of the first things I did, I negotiated coming in, and this was an interesting piece.  I negotiated coming in and immediate 25 percent raise that fall, and a 30 percent raise the following fall.  And so an interesting thing was--and he didn't know--I knew him fairly well, but he didn't know my real relationship with Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas].  And that was the consultant for the ABA.  Because after I had negotiated and done all the changes, he told me this was about November or December some time.  He called me and he said, "Jim," he said, "you know in all honesty, you have probably done enough to be removed from probation."  He said, "But my real concern is some of the things the university has promised you, especially 30 percent raise next year, is in next year's budget."  He said, "I know the president has committed."  He said, "but you can't really trust the people at TSU"  "Now," he said, "so my advice to you is to let us keep you on probation for another year.  And then once you get your promises that made in next year's, then we let you go."  So I said, "All right, all right with me."  He didn't know I didn't trust the people at T.S.U. administration either.  So anyway he did.  But to make a long story short, in '95 [1995] when I left the law school to come across campus, we were the second highest paid faculty in the state, second only to the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: I remember once having a meeting with the provost at one time and we were talking salary and he said, "Jim," he said, "I don't understand it."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "You always talking about salary increase, salary increase, salary increase for the law faculty."  I said "Provost," I said, "I thought I was the dean of the law school."  I said, "That's my job to advocate for the law faculty."  I said, "If I was provost, no," I said, "If I was dean of education, I'd give--I'd be arguing for faculty of dean of ed--in education.  If I was in pharmacy, I'd be arguing for pharmacy."  I said, "And if I was provost, I would give everybody a raise."
Story_ID: 165815
Speaker 1: Yeah tell the story about your godson.
Speaker 2: So my godson taught here [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] for a year or two when I was down at Florida [at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida].  And so he was looking for a permanent position 'cause he was here as a visitor.  He was looking for a permanent position.  And one of the schools that was really interested in him was, was North Carolina Central [School of Law, Durham, North Carolina].  And they interviewed him.  And they really wanted him.  But when they sat down to negotiate, he told me the dean told him, he said, "You have a--you gone have a problem."  And he said, "What is that?"  And he said, "Nobody can meet your salary demands."  He said, "No one from Thurgood [Marshall School of Law] can go to another HBCU [historically black colleges and university] because none of the HBCUs gonna pay that kind of money."  He said, "Jim Douglas just screwed all of you all up.  He paid you, he paid you all too much money."  But you know I'm a person who believe people ought to be paid adequate wages.  In fact, that was, that was one of my mission statements when I was president, is to provide adequate wages for people.  I really believe people ought to be paid adequate wages.  So when I went down to Florida A&M, in fact when I was doing, doing the consulting job for Fred [HM Frederick Humphries], Fred actually paid me more as a consultant than he was making as president.  And, and I told him, I said, "Fred one of the good things that's gonna come out of this law school is that you're gonna get a raise,"  I said, "because you can't find a law school dean that's gon' make less money than you.  So in order to bring in a law school dean, they gone have to raise the president's salary."  But anyway so I go down as, as, as interim dean at Florida A&M.  And the first day on the job I get a call from the associate vice president for human resources.  And she calls and she says, "Dean, we have a problem."  And I said, "What?"  And she said, "It's with your salary."  I said, "What's the problem with my salary?"  She say, "It's, it's too high."  I said, "I have a signed contract with the president, what do you mean my salary?"  She said, "We, we can't pay this kind of money."  I said, "You can't pay this kind of money?"  She said, "No," she said, "and plus I think the president made a mistake."  I said, "What do you mean she made--?" She say she must have meant salary plus benefits."  I said, "When have you ever seen benefits included in salary?"  So she said, "Well we can't pay that kind of money."  I say, "Well don't worry."  She said, "Don't worry."  I said, "No, don't worry."  She said, "What do you mean don't worry?"  I said, "Let me explain something to you.  You all called me.  I didn't call you."  I said, "When I get off the phone with you, I'm gon' put what little stuff I have in my briefcase, I'm going back to my hotel and I'm gone pack and I'm gone catch the next plane to Houston [Texas]."  She said, "No, no, no, don't, don't worry."  Because when I negotiated with the president and I told the president what I was making, and she called TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] to find out what my salary was, she said well you're right.  I, I, I mean I can't expect to pay you less than you, less than you're already making.  But if salary was, was, was a big issue when I was down at, at FAMU--
Story_ID: 165816
Speaker 1: But it was a, it was a good experience.  One of the things that came out of that, Florida created two law schools at the same time.  One was supposed to be an African American serving law school, and the other one was an Hispanic serving law school.  They put the Hispanic serving law school at Florida International [University, Miami, Florida] in, in Miami [Florida], FIU.  And they created both of 'em and the, the intent was to increase the number of minority lawyers in Florida.  At the time when we were putting together the law school at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida], only one percent of the lawyers in Florida were African American.  So they have a, a dearth of African American lawyers in, in Florida.  But it turned out to be a, a really, really good experience.  At the end of that process, I came back to Houston [Texas], was on the faculty at Texas Southern [University, TSU, Houston, Texas], and then we got a new president.  I think I remember I told you earlier the CFO [chief financial officer] [Dr. John M. Rudley] and, and I that met with [Dr. Leonard H.O.] Spearman to try to convince him not--he left TSU.  It was kind of a funny story.  He left TSU right after Spearman left.  No it wasn't, it was a little before Spearman left because he, he could not deal with the board.  He thought the board was just crazy, it was too much overreaching.  And he was out of here.  He went to become the CFO at the University of Chattanooga at Tennessee [sic, University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee].  But when he left, he said, he said, "Jim," he said, "one day you're gonna be president."  He said, "And when you are, I'm wanna come back and work for you."  And so when I did become president, I called him and reminded him of it.  And so ultimately he agreed to come back and work for me.  We had a contract.  One day in the board meeting, the board asked me well what is the contract with the new CFO?  And I told 'em.  And they didn't like the fact that it was three years.  They wanted me to give him a one year contract and I said, "I'm not gon', I'm not gone ask him to come here for one year because he has moved his wife all around, and I'm not gonna ask him to move her again for one year," because when I first called him, he said to me, "I moved my wife so much," he said, "I wanna come and work for you.  But you're gonna have to convince her that we should move back to Houston [Texas]."  So I called his wife.  She gave the okay.  So he was coming to work.  So anyway, we had an agreement.  The board raised all this hell.  So one of the board members said, "Well why don't we invite him down to talk to him again?  So they invited him down.  He up--he ended up agreeing to two years rather than three.  A few hours he left, I got a call.  He said, "Jim, I'm at the airport, I just got off the plane in, in Nashville [Tennessee]."  He said, "I, I hope, I hope this doesn't destroy our friendship."  And said, "What?"  He said, "I forgotten how crazy the damn board is at TSU"  He said, "I, I can't step into that."  He said, "I, I can't do that."  I said, "I understand."  Fast forward, he later ends up going through the system, going to [Washington] D.C., coming back to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee].  And then he became the chancellor, I mean the vice chancellor for [business and] finance for the Tennessee system [Tennessee Board of Regents].  He left there and came to the University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  And he was vice chancellor and vice president for finance at the University of Houston System, which is where TSU hired him.  So anyway after Priscilla [Slade] left, he was interested in coming over here, he called me and asked me whether I thought it was all right now.  I told him I, I really thought it was all right now, especially given the board that we had now.  And he said, "If I, if I come back, will you help me?"  And I said, "Yeah if you come back, I'll help you."  So he got the job.  The first day on the job at nine o'clock I got a call from him.  He said, "Man, let's talk."  So I came over, talked to him.  He asked me if I would be the provost while he search for a permanent provost.  So I said yeah, I'm thinking it's gone be six months, nine months.  So we do a search, we hire a provost.  And I'm readying to go back to the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and he said, "What can I do to get you to stay on?"  I said, "The only way I'll stay on is I have to have broad based responsibility," and he said--so we ended up agreeing on me being the executive vice president.  So I was the executive vice president and as I told you, I was later--
Speaker 2: This is 2008.
Story_ID: 165817
Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008], yeah, 2008.  So I'm the executive vice president [of Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Because I came back in I think the spring of 2007, so this is about a year later that I go back to central administration as interim provost, and then later as executive vice president.  During the time that I was executive vice president, the general counsel left.  And so I was also for about a year, executive vice president and interim general counsel.  And then we were--we started having a lot of problems.  Not, I won't say we had a lot of problems, but we had a lot of work to do in Austin [Texas].  And so at the end of this day, he [Dr. John M. Rudley] asked me if, if I would stay another year and be the vice president for, for governmental affairs and, and community relations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in 2012.
Story_ID: 165818
Speaker 1: When you, you constructed a program FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University College of Law, Tallahassee, Florida], or reconstructed it, right?  So--
Speaker 2: No, I con--I constructed it because they closed the law school and--
Speaker 1: Okay so you, you had to construct it from the ground.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they closed the law school in '68 [1968, sic, 1965 but the last class graduated in 1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it's a crazy story and I'll run through it right quick.  In '68 [1968] see Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] is like the University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  Florida State had been a small, private women's college [Florida State College for Women].  The state took it over.
Speaker 1: And you can see it, you can see it from FAMU.
Speaker 2: Right, state took it over.  So in the late '60s [1960's] they started pushing for other programs 'cause now they're growing and one of the things they don't have is a law school.  So one day there's a debate in the state legislature and somebody says where we gonna get money for a law school at, at Florida State?  The response is why don't we take it from FAMU?  So they took the budget from FAMU, gave it to Florida State.  They took the furniture from FAMU, gave it to Florida State.  They took the library from FAMU and gave it to Florida State.  They took everything from FAMU but the people, and moved it over to Florida State.  In fact it was so funny, I used to tell-
Speaker 1: This is in '68 [1968, sic, 1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It, it's so funny, I tell people all the time.  I used to tell 'em all the time when, when you could go to Florida State's library and there were law books that says "Property of Florida A & M University."  But one of the things that happened when I went down as dean, the dean [Donald J. Weidner] at Florida State then, and he's still the dean now, the dean of Florida State then was a guy that I had mentored in Cleveland [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] when he started law teaching.  We worked together in Cleveland.  When he started law teaching, I was one of his mentors.  So he was dean at Florida State.  So he called me and he said, "Jim," I said, "Yeah."  He said, "You know those books we have with Florida A&M on 'em."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Would you like to have them back?"  So I said, "Yes."  So the president's first response was now that they can't use the books, they wanna give 'em back to us.  And I said, "Dr. [Castell] Bryant, this is Rosa Parks' bus, all right.  We're gonna take the books."  At that point we were constructing the new building.  Even though the law school was three or four years old, the building hadn't been completed, we were constructing the build--so I had a, a special section of the library built that houses the books from the original Florida A&M law school.
Story_ID: 165819
Speaker 1: You did something similar in terms of culture here at Texas Southern [University, Houston, TSU, Texas].  You were telling me that you were responsible for the museum and the archives.
Speaker 2: Right.  One of the things--there had been a lot of talk around Houston [Texas] about an African American museum.  And it really--if I remain president, we would have completed it 'cause we still don't have a real thriving African American museum.  And so if you go--it's constructed in a way that you can add on, 'cause they had--the idea was to take it and, and it on.  We had an old building when I became president.  Fairchild Building, which was the only building on campus, in fact at the time it was constructed, it was the only building that belonged to Houston College for Negroes.  Houston College for Negroes [later, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] owe its beginning back to 1927.  In 1946 they brought--purchased 150 acres on this land, and they built the--they started building a campus.  That was the first building that they constructed, Fairchild Building.  And so but by this time, by the late '70s [1970s], they closed it down 'cause it was--they were--and in fact it was on the, the plan to, to demolish it.  When I became president, I had a, a group of engineers, I mean construction engineers to look at it.  And they told me that it was, it was structurally the soundest building on campus.  So I decided if it's the first building on campus, the soundest building on campus, we shouldn't tear it down, we should remodel it.  So I got the plans from the architect and the, the problem that they were having was we had the gymnasium.  That was the old basketball arena, that basically even when I was a student in '62 [1962], was boarded up.  And I figure--I was telling you about the problems we had with the dean.  One of the problems I had with the dean is we, we broke in it every night and, and played.  And, and the dean he called me in 'cause he would always have the police to come over to try to run us out.  And I told him, I said, "Dean there's nothing for us to do on campus after, after dark.  And we gon' break in it every night until you open it up.  We gon' just break in."  So they never knew what to do and by the time I came back as dean, they had boarded up the whole building 'cause they were gonna tear down the building.  But anyway, so the old gym was a problem and they couldn't figure out what to do with it.  I was on the board of what's called Five-A, African American Art Appreciation [sic, Advisory] Association.  But Five-A was created to work with the Hughes Museum of Natural Art [sic, Museum of the Fine Arts, Houston] to help them select artwork by African American artists.  But I got this idea, since everybody was talking about an African American museum, the best place to create an African American museum was here on, on TSU's campus.  And it just hit me the perfect thing to do with this old gymnasium is to turn it into a museum.
Story_ID: 165820
Speaker 1: When you mention art and stuff here in Houston [Texas], I guess it was--John, [Dr.] John [T.] Biggers, right?
Speaker 2: John Biggers.
Speaker 1: One of the greatest artists we've ever had.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who's work, you know, yeah--
Speaker 2: Biggers and I got along really, really well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, 'cause he was known as a maverick, I was known as a maverick.  So you know mavericks kind of migrate toward each other.
Speaker 1: He's certainly one of the greats, one of the greats.  Now so, so the museum [University Museum at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was founded when, when you were the president, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In, in what, in 2000 and what?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We constructed the museum, we started constructing the museum in '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, right, 'cause you left in '99 [1999], that's right.  So, so you started constructing it in '98 [1998] but it, it hasn't had the--as you were saying, didn't have the--it hasn't had the kind of support you would hoped it would had.
Speaker 2: No, because the idea was to build an addition to it, all right, and really expand it.  And I don't know if you've seen the museum, but that area ar--there's enough land around the museum to really expand the museum and, and make it into a, a real museum.
Story_ID: 165821
Speaker 1: Now, now you, you're involved in community, a lot of community ac--activities here, 100 Black Men and some of the--what are some of your favorite?
Speaker 2: Probably my most active one is NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that one is almost like a full time job.  Almost like a full time job.  The other one, which I'm, I'm, I'm starting to be more and more embarrassed with, is the Boy Scouts.  I'm on the, I'm on the board of the Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: So now why is that becoming embarrassing?
Speaker 2: Be--be--the whole homosexual gay issue, which doesn't make a lot of sense.  You know I, I've explained to them a number of times it's hard for me 'cause I'm on a, a lot of civil rights organizations, involved with a lot, a lot of first amendment issues.  And they always ask me how can you be on the Boy Scout Board when, when they, they discriminate?  And the only response I had, and, and I've told the, the people at the Boy Scouts, it was my experience.  I, I, I truly believe that my experience as a Boy Scout helped make me what I am.  It was, it was a tremendous growing experience for me.  I had a wonderful scoutmaster.  I mean I probably had the best scout master in the world.  He was, he was one of the, the best African American leaders.  I mean he was devoted to making sure that, that we grew into successful young men.  And so it was a tremendous experience of mine.  I had a big battle with the board, I think it's been about six or seven years ago, because we had, we had developed a program here in Houston [Texas].  National had launched a program, Houston was probably the only board that had really adopted the program.  But it really developed a non-traditional program where we were working in the high schools.  More of a motivational program for--in, in the inner city high schools.  And I thought it was, it was really, really successful.  Some of the more traditional members of the board thought that we ought to focus more on traditional Boy Scouts and not on this, this new thing.  And my job, which I failed at, was to convince them that the people who really needed the Boy Scout, the whole concept, the, the, the, the pledge and the motto and all the other things that the Boy Scout teaches, were in the inner city.  And it didn't make sense for me to take that away from them.  I lost out.  And so they really restructured the inner city program, it's not near as effective as it was.  So I spent a lot of time with the Boy Scouts.  I spent a lot of time with, with the NAACP.  Hundred Black Men, it's a really good program.  It's, it's a mentoring program.  You know I, I, I got involved with that because back in the early '90s [1990s], there was a, a friend of mine who's an Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  We, we were both Alphas.  And he came to me and he say man, he said, "I been looking at this 100 Black Men and we don't have a chapter in Houston."  He said, "I'd like for you to work with me and let's establish, establish a chapter in, in Houston."  And so I worked with him, we established a, a chapter in Houston.  But it, it's a really, really, really good program.
Story_ID: 165822
Speaker 1: I know you--now you attend meetings of the ABA [American Bar Association], right?
Speaker 2: I, I attend meetings of the ABA. I'm not as involved in ABA as I used to be.  I'm involved in the National Bar Association.  I guess I, I've been involved in both.  I guess I was involved in, in the ABA and the, and the Texas Bar because I just really think if, if we're not involved, then it's hard for us to complain when they don't, they don't deal with, with our issues.  And I--one of the things that I've always been involved with, was no matter where I've been, I've always made sure that they understood black issues.  In fact, it's, it's really funny.  Early in my career, right after--a little after I came here [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], dean of the law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] back in the, in the early '80s [1980s], I went to a BLSA meeting, Black Law Students Association meeting in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And when I walked into the lobby of the hotel, a friend of mine, Ralph Smith who at the time was on the faculty at University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], called across the lobby.  He said, "Jim Douglas, Jim Douglas."  So I went over to talk to Ralph and while we were talking, a student walked up to me and he said, "Are you James Douglas from Thurgood?"  And I said, "Yeah."  He said, "You know I wanted to meet for the last nine months."  I said, "Well you, you, you see me.  I don't know why you wanted to meet with me."  He say, "Yeah I wanted to meet with you," he said, "because I was the student member of the search committee at my law school for the last dean."  He said, "And, and you were one of the five finalists."  I said, "Well you, you, you got the wrong James Douglas 'cause I haven't applied for a deanship anywhere."  And he said, "No you didn't apply."  He said, "I'm a, I'm a law student at Stanford [University Law School, Palo Alto, California]."  He said, "And you know they don't seek applications."  He said, "One of the faculty members nominated you for dean, and you were one of the five finalists."  He said, "The reason I wanted to meet you, was that when we did our background checks," he said, "It was two things that people said about you that really made me wanna know you."  And I said, "What is that?"  He said, "First everybody said you were very pro-black."  He said, "And second, everybody said they love you."  He said, "I have never known white people to love somebody that's pro-black."  And he said, "How do you do it?"  So I had to go on to explain to him how--you know it's not always what you do, it's how you do it.  Like people ask me sometime how did I get away with all the stuff I did in elementary school and high school, and how did I charge up faculty and administrators and all of that.  And, and my thing was it's, it's not what you do, it's how you do it.  One, when I approached anybody, everything was on my side.  And, and I never approached anybody in a confrontational manner.  I mean I'm always been soft spoken, which is, you know when I told you the woman at Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] accused me of cursing her out and she say I was yelling and screaming and they said, "Jim has never raised his voice at anybody."  So people know.  And so when I sit down to talk to people, and I try to tell my wife.  I said one of the things you always wanna do, is you want people to reject your ideas because they think they're bad ideas, not because they don't like you.  So I, I, I get along with everybody.  And so people deal with me and they deal with my ideas, they don't deal with me on a, on a personal level.
Story_ID: 165823
Speaker 1: Now, now is there a, a strong chapter of BLSA [Black Law Students Association] here at, at Texas Southern [University, Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: There is, there's an extremely strong chapter.  In fact, BLSA got started when I was in law school.  I can tell you I probably was not that supportive of BLSA when I was in law school because one of my classmates was instrumental in starting BLSA.  He, he was just so happy 'cause he told me man, I'm getting ready to go to New York.  I'm trying to remember the guy's name at the time he was at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  But he's now somewhere in Alabama.  God, I can't remember the name.  The guy was (unclear) and they were having a powwow in New York to talk about creating this black law student, and they were gone deal with all these racial issues related to blacks in law school and all of this.  I'm like, "John, we at a black law school. We don't have any damn racial issues."  But, but yeah and in fact I spent a lot of my early career before I became dean, I was faculty advisor to National BLSA.  So we have a really, really active chapter here at, at Thurgood Marshall.
Story_ID: 158478
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do over again or change if you could?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Nothing?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I tell you why.  It, it seems kind of funny that somebody will say no.  Back when I was a young man, I was asked that question.  I was staying in Cleveland [Ohio].  The godfather of my girlfriend's father, lived in Pomona, California.  And she was visiting her, and this lady was celebrating her ninety-fifth anniversary.  And I went out to visit my girlfriend.  And somewhere in the conversation she and I were talking.  And she had all these old pictures showing me, you know, what Pomona and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] looked like in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  I mean they were beautiful.  Palm trees, it wasn't a lot of people but it was, it was beautiful.  And so she started reminiscing.  And she started telling me about everything in her life and she started talking about the things that she would do different if she had to live life over again.  And somewhere in the conversation she said, "James, if you had to live your life over again, what would you do different?"  Since that time I've been asked that question a number of times.  And my answer has always been the same.  And I said to her, "Nothing."  And she said, "Nothing?"  And I said, "No, because I am pleased with who I am and what I am."  One of the things that I learned from my experience in flight simulation, is just a minor change in an enclosed environment can upset everything.  And so if you change everything that happened to you goes into making you who you are and what you are.  And if you change one thing, it could make you something totally different.
Story_ID: 158479
Speaker 1: In that same regard, you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Probably that I really cared for people.  I really care for people and I try to make everything better.  When I got to law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas], there was a slogan that they developed in the early '70s [1970s] right after I left.  They were pushing the state to build a new building for the law school and couldn't get any traction.  So they called a strike.  They, they marched off campus and agreed with a local church that they could use its buildings for classrooms.  And they held classes in the law school--in the church until the state agreed to build a, a new building for the law school.  As a result of that, they developed a slogan.  That slogan was "protect it and pass it on."  So at the end of the year for May Day, law schools have a big banquet.  And so at the banquet for my year, I announced to everybody that I couldn't pick up anything without making it better.  So that we were changing the slogan from "protect it and pass it on" to "protect it, improve it, and pass it on."  And so that's, that's my motto.  I, I try to improve everything that, that I touch.  But I try to do everything in a kind, friendly, kind and friendly way.  I'm, I'm a people person, I, I like people.  When I thought about my life when I was about twelve years old, one of the things I decided to do, and sometime people ask me why twelve?  Well I think I told you earlier my father [Desso Douglas] was very religious.  It flowed to me.  When Christ was twelve, he said I, I need to be about my father's business.  So when I was twelve, I figured I need to decide what I was gonna be in life and who I was gonna be.  I decided to be a lawyer, and I decided I wanted to have the kind of personality that people liked.  I wanted to be friends with everybody.  And so that's what I, I, I want people to say he loved everybody, and he tried to make everything better.
Story_ID: 158480
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Though its--the answers are implied in the interview.  But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think one of our biggest issues is public education.  It's, it's the one that, that takes most of my life outside of my job is trying to improve public education because we--most of us depend on public education in, in, in, in order to, to achieve.  When I was--my senior year in college [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], I, I wrote a--I used to write essays all the time.  I think I told you at one point I wanted to be a philosopher early in, in the career.  And so I used to write a lot of essays.  And one day I, I can never remember, I have tried and tried to remember why I wrote this essay.  But the essay is called 'Mr. American White Man.'  And one of the things--the theme of the, the, the article is that I'm gonna be successful.  And the reason I'm gonna be successful is, is that I'm gonna be well educated.  And I know that the, the, the thing that allowed me to rise to where I am has been education.  And I look at what's happening in most of the public schools, and I see the under-education, under-educating of, of African American kids.  And so if I had one thing that I could wave a wand and improve, and it would be the education experiences that African American kids have.  I think they can be educated, and I think the solution is real simple.  But believe it or not, as simple as the solution is, it appears that all of these people in public education don't know how to address the issue.
Story_ID: 158481
Speaker 1: Now, now you've been married a couple times, right?
Speaker 2: Four times.
Speaker 1: Four times.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's not messing around there.  Four times.  Okay well, well you have children.
Speaker 2: I have two, two children.  Well two children and one, one stepdaughter.
Speaker 1: Well tell, tell us about your family and you know what they're doing today.
Speaker 2: My oldest daughter is a, is a teacher.  She's been teaching, I think this is her third or fourth year teaching.  She teaches high school English.  She's an English teacher.  We struggled for a while.  She was an excellent student in high school.  AP [Advanced Placement] student.  Knocked the SAT out.  Came to TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and wasted three years.  Decided higher ed[ucation] was not for her.  She told me she was doing it because that's what I wanted her to do.  And I said, I, I told you when you were growing up I didn't want you to do anything for me.  I told her, I say you remember the conversation we had when you were about twelve years old.  And the conversation was I'm never gonna tell you what to do.  I'm gonna give you advice, but I'm never gonna tell you what to do.  The advice I give you is to make your life better.  I'm living the life that I wanna live.  And so my advice is to help make you better.  Now you can reject my advice and you can grow up and be--I mean, let me (unclear).  You can accept advice and you can grow up and be happy and successful, and I'm gonna be happy.  Or you can reject my advice and you grow up and be depressed and a failure, I'm gon' still be happy.  I want you to know you can't mess up my life, so everything I give is for your life.  So she tells me well you know, this college wasn't for me.  Hey, don't do it for me; I'm trying to do it for you.  So she, she decides that she isn't gonna go to school.  She ultimately gets married, has kids.  She marries a guy who also dropped out of college.  Then she decides well maybe I wanna be a hair stylist.  So I said, "you know that's hard work.  Your grandmother was a hair stylist for a little while, that's hard work.  You don't, you don't really wanna be a hair stylist."  So her first response was you--see that's another example of you not being supportive.  I'm trying to--but anyway she goes to school, gets her license, works for about three or four months as a hair stylist and then she and her husband come to me and they say you know you were right.  We, we, we need college degrees.  So I said well if you all are willing to focus and get your degree, I, I will help you.  So they came back, they got their degrees.  In fact, she ended up graduating summa cum laude.  And she's a teacher now.  She's a, she's a high school English teacher and she's really enjoying teaching and, and taken to it.  She just sent me a copy of a letter she received from, from her principal.  'Cause this is the first year she's at the school that she's teaching now, that says he's putting together a, a small team of teachers to develop the curriculum for next year and he wants her to be a part of it.  So she's, she's really happy.  I have a sixteen year old son who's in the tenth grade and is, is doing, doing very well.  My only concern he's probably gone end up costing me a lot of money 'cause he's looking at, at a lot of private Ivy League-type schools.  But he has my personality, so I don't, I don't, I don't think he's gonna, he's gonna go wrong in any way.  But he, he's very successful.  My stepdaughter is--went to FAMU's [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M, Tallahassee, Florida] pharmacy school.  So she's a pharmacist working over in San Antonio [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So are you currently married?
Speaker 2: I'm currently married.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I read where you met your wife [Tanya Smith Douglas] in 2010?  That it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or you got married in 2010.
Speaker 2: I got married in 2010.  I met her in '04 [2004].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I met her in '04 [2004].
Story_ID: 158482
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I mean there's a whole lot, but I don't think we need to discuss it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  Well thank you for sharing with us.  And the last question is sir, it's like--similar to legacy, but a little bit different, more personal.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I thought I already answered that one.  I wanna be remembered as a person who really cared and a person who, who tried to improve everything that he touched.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well thank you very much.
