Story_ID: 136906
Speaker 1: I am Nefertiti Makenta here as the interviewer with Scott Stearns, the production director; and Ivan Katz, the videographer; and last but not least, Julieanna Richardson interviewing today, Dr. Leslie Duke.  Okay, Dr. Duke, could you please say your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: Dr. Leslie Duke, L-E-S-L-I-E, D-U-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And any middle name or--
Speaker 2: Dowling, D-O--D-O-W-L-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: All right.  Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Not to be made public.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you state today's date and where we are today?
Speaker 2: Today is the sixth month, 30th day '03 [June 30, 2003], and we're in my home.
Speaker 1: And your home at?
Speaker 2: 101 Shaw Avenue, Silver Spring Road [Silver Spring, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And how old are you today?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine.
Speaker 1: And your birth date?
Speaker 2: March 21st [1924].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the year you were born?
Speaker 2: 1924.
Story_ID: 136907
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to begin now.  Basically, we have this sort of preparatory questions for you just to sort of get you to open up and join route.  We start with what is, and they seem a little sort of cold, but they're pretty--they're good questions.  What would you say is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, probably blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have one that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place that I haven't been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think there's a fifth question.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Story_ID: 136908
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What is your--what are your parents' names?
Speaker 2: James C. Duke and Jennie L. Duke.
Speaker 1: Are those supposed to be spelled?
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No.  Just start by asking him about his mother and then to describe her background (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe your--can you tell me a little bit about your mother; your mother's name and then just sort of describe your fondest memories of your mother?
Speaker 2: Jennie L. Duke and fondest memories?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Can you just talk about first her background, sir, and sort of her (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, she was born in Washington [D.C.], and she went to public school in Washington, she worked in the Bureau of Engraving [and Printing] for thirty-something years and that's about it.
Speaker 1: What did she do at the Bureau of Engraving?
Speaker 2: She worked in different sections.  I can't tell you exactly what she did.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What about her family background?  Do you remember much of them?
Speaker 2: I only knew her father.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What did you know about him?
Speaker 2: That he was an old man.  That's the only thing I knew about him.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Do you know where he was from or where they're from originally?  Were they from Washington?
Speaker 2: I think he was from Washington.  I'm not sure of that.
Story_ID: 136909
Speaker 1: Can you state your father's name and just tell me a little bit about his background?
Speaker 2: James T. Duke.  He was born in Louisa County, Virginia, and he was a Pullman Porter; and that was about it.  He became ill when he was forty-nine years old and he passed away when he was fifty-two.
Speaker 1: And how did he die?
Speaker 2: He had a stroke.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were sort of your--if we can go back to your mom [Jennie Duke], what were your sort of fondest memories of your mother?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean, fondest memories.  What kind of an answer do you expect?
Speaker 1: When you think about your mother, what first comes to mind in terms of capturing who she was to you?
Speaker 2: She was a very easy going person.  That was about it, you know.
Speaker 1: Were you close to your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So if you can sort of describe any--if you can sort of describe sort of any, I don't know, if you want to say fondest memories, but then any sort of interaction you had with your mother that stands out to you?
Speaker 2: I can't place any interaction with her.  She lived here in the city [Washington, D.C.].  In her older days, I would go by and see her every day and it was a--that was about it.
Speaker 1: Were you closer to your mother or to your father?
Speaker 2: I would have to say closer to my mother because by fact my father died a young age, so--but he was a very easy going person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How about your memories from childhood with both of your parents.  How did you--what was a typical day?
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Ask him about his (unclear).
Speaker 1: No.  My father was a Pullman Porter, and he was on the road when--three days out of five, so it wasn't that close of a relationship.  We had no problems with each other.
Story_ID: 136910
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory then of your mother [Jennie Duke], your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No, of his growing up.
Speaker 1: Your earliest memory of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory of my growing up.  I could remember when I was hit by an automobile at three years old, and that's about the earliest memory.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that?
Speaker 2: Put me in the hospital for eleven days.  But I wasn't severely injured.
Speaker 1: Where were your injuries and how did your mother sort of respond to you during that period?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  You're asking me things that I don't remember, and I remember most things; but go ahead.
Speaker 1: So what were your injuries at that time?
Speaker 2: It was more observation than anything else.  I don't remember any significant injuries.
Speaker 1: When you say observation, you mean?
Speaker 2: Just that, observation.
Speaker 1: It's just something you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you recall the pain of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that wasn't painful.  It was only painful probably being separated from home.
Speaker 1: For eleven days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was most painful about being separated from home?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, just being separated from the family.
Speaker 1: What did you miss?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you.
Story_ID: 136911
Speaker 1: Well do you have any memories at all of your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Only of my maternal grandfather.  The others were deceased, so I have no memory of them at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is sort of the background of your maternal grandfather?  Can you recall anything regards to that?
Speaker 2: No.  Not that I have knowledge of, but I was told he worked in the White House and that was it.
Speaker 1: Do you know what he did in the White House or--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 136912
Speaker 1: Can you sort of describe for me--what, what was it like growing up for you in [Washington] D.C. during your formative years besides being hit when you were three.  What do you--what was it like growing up?
Speaker 2: It was just an average childhood.  That's about it.  I mean, I don't know what you mean, "what was it like?"
Speaker 1: Can you sort of describe for me the sights or the smells growing up in D.C., if you remember--
Speaker 2: No, I can't--
Speaker 1: --what stands out most?
Speaker 2: No, I can't describe anything like that because I never paid any attention to the smell and wasn't concerned about the sights.  I used to play football in Logan Circle [Washington, D.C.].  I can remember that.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: Was that your favorite sport growing up?
Speaker 2: Like football?  Oh, I played in all of them.  I played baseball until I was over thirty-five years old.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started baseball?
Speaker 2: When I can catch a ball.  I thought I was playing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you recall what kind of person you were as a child?
Speaker 2: What kind of person?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you if you had to describe yourself as a child, what would you say?
Speaker 2: I was just an average child.  My mother [Jennie Duke] said I was a devil, but I was just an average child.
Speaker 1: Why did your mother say you were the devil?
Speaker 2: She figured I was also getting into things, so that was it.
Speaker 1: Were you always getting into things?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No more curious than the average child.
Story_ID: 136913
Speaker 1: Now, you had other siblings?
Speaker 2: I had two brothers.
Speaker 1: And what were their names?
Speaker 2: James T. Duke, Jr. and Earland Alvin Duke.
Speaker 1: Can you sort of tell me where were you, in terms of order; first, second, third?
Speaker 2: We were all two years and two months apart.
Speaker 1: And you were?
Speaker 2: The middle one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't get into any more trouble than either of your brothers?
Speaker 2: According to my mother [Jennie Duke], I did.
Speaker 1: More?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that is?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have no idea.  I been trying to figure that out for all my life.
Story_ID: 136914
Speaker 1: What schools did you go to; elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Garrison [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], Shaw Junior High [School, later Asbury Dwellings, Washington, D.C.] and [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: What was it like at Garrison and what years were you there, how old were you up to what grade, rather (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was there from--oh, let's see, probably, 1929 to 1935; and then from Shaw from '35 [1935] to '38 [1938]; and Dunbar '38 [1938] to '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: When you were at Garrison, you said your mother [Jennie Duke] described you, she said, "Oh, he was a devil."  How do you think your teachers would classify you from Garrison?
Speaker 2: Oh, they thought I was fine.  I had--the teachers never had a problem with me.
Speaker 1: Were you very studious?
Speaker 2: I don't know about studious as such.  What do you mean by studious now?
Speaker 1: Bookworm--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --very academic?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I was academic, but that was more so from memory than being studious.
Speaker 1: What about at Shaw Junior High?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did anything change between Garrison and Shaw.  Were you--did you have any issues?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: What would your teachers say about you at Shaw?
Speaker 2: That I was a very good student.
Speaker 1: What about your friends at Shaw?
Speaker 2: They thought I was a very good student.
Speaker 1: How about you in terms of interacting with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was no problem there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, I dropped out when at--
Story_ID: 136915
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I want to take you back to, you know, just really discussions about your father [James Duke].  I know you said that you were closer, closest with your mother [Jennie Duke] and but you said your father was a Pullman Porter, and I want to know did your father, you know, like most Pullman Porters, was he on the road a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And do you know, you know, what his route was?
Speaker 2: From Washington [D.C.] to Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did he ever talk about, you know, did he ever bring back any trips--any stories of trips on the road?
Speaker 2: No, that I know of.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Did your father and you ever have any discussions, do you remember like being--
Speaker 2: I don't remember any as such.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So he wasn't a very talkative gentleman, sort of like you?
Speaker 2: Probably, you'd say that.
Story_ID: 136916
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, can you describe what--did you, as a family, sit down and have dinner together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Would there be discussion around the dinner table?
Speaker 2: I don't remember all that.  I guess we would.  We wouldn't sit there and not talk at all.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Do you remember any times, any special holidays or family gatherings or things; can you just sort of reminisce for me for a while?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember anything specific.  What do you want me to remember?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I don't care about what I want you to remember.  I was just thinking that if you were talking around with your buddies, you might talk about some things that happened.  Whether it's--let me ask you.  Can you describe your neighborhood, the street that you grew up on?  And I'd like to have the address.
Speaker 2: Describe the street in what way?  It was just an average street.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Who were your neighbors, who were the other families that lived on the street?
Speaker 2: All depends on when and what time it was.  What I am saying is when we moved on the street, we were the only black family on the block, and, of course, the neighborhood changed as time went on.  So--and, of course, when we moved there was 1928 or '29 [1929], and we stayed there until '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, how old were you when you moved in 1929.  How old?
Speaker 2: Either three or four.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Three or four years old.  So that was around the time of your accident?
Speaker 2: No, I was five then.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Five, okay.  'Cause--
Speaker 2: Four or five.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Do you remember or, you know, do you remember where your family moved from?
Speaker 2: Moved from then?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yeah, from--where were you moving from when you moved to?
Speaker 2: Somewhere on 1st Street, Northwest [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And where did you move when you moved into the all-white neighborhood?
Speaker 2: At 13th and Oak [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  13th and Oak, okay.  And do you remember any discussions about or any sense that it was a different type of neighborhood at that time at five--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --you weren't really aware--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Story_ID: 136917
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And your, your brother.  How old--was he much older than you?  I know you were the middle child?
Speaker 2: One was two years and two months older [James T. Duke, Jr.] and the other one was two years and two months younger [Earland Alvin Duke].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So you were right dab in the middle?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And were you a typical middle child?  You know, sometimes they say middle children have trouble finding their way.
Speaker 2: That's after years, you know.  I wasn't aware of it.
Speaker 1: When did you become aware of it?
Speaker 2: I haven't really become aware of it.  I've heard people talk about it.
Speaker 1: Talk about it in regard to you?
Speaker 2: No, not in regard to me.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So this neighborhood you grew up in, what were the neighbors like in that neighborhood?  And I'm talking about from like ages five to ten?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I don't remember what my neighbors were like.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you play with anyone or did you play just with your brothers?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember at that age.  After I started school, I would play with the people who lived in the neighborhood around Logan Circle [Washington, D.C.], 13th and P, 13th and Q.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And what--and the elementary school [Garrison Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] you went to was all black I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Garrison was all black?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So how did you get to that, was it walking distance then?
Speaker 2: Walk, yeah.  It was about five blocks, I guess.
Story_ID: 136918
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  When you--at Garrison [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], did you have any favorite teachers there?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject at Garrison?
Speaker 2: That was elementary, so I just followed the leader.  Whatever the teacher put up, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You know, if she asked a question then--let me just try to handle this, but if you do that, then he has--you have to look at me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Just continuing looking at me even if a question comes from her.  When you--so here you are you're going to school.  Are you going to school with anticipation or is it just something to do?  I'm just trying to get a sense of you as a young kid.
Speaker 2: I can't answer all of those things, Julieanna. I was five years old.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Well, I'm not talking about five.  Maybe you're seven.  Maybe you're seven and eight.
Speaker 2: I didn't anticipate on going to school at any time except the fact that the law and order required it, and it was routine of the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At what point, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Have a favorite subject?  Well, I was a math major to start school--start college.  So I always liked math.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And did your love of math, did it start when you were young?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Well do you remember when or what was most fascinating?  Was it your first math course?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Story_ID: 136919
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So you're saying that from all of from five to age fifteen, that you have no memories?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have memories, but I can't answer the memory--answer the questions that you were asking as such.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Well, just give me--why don't you just tell me some of your memories of growing up.  Anything.  I don't care what it is.  It may be an accident you had, it may have been a fight you gotten into.
Speaker 2: I gave you the accident.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Well, I know but give me some other things.
Speaker 2: I went to camp--let's see what else?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Where did you go to camp?
Speaker 2: Camp Lichtman, is a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp, and the only thing I can tell you is that I used to play ball with the fellows, and we'd go down to the monument bounds and play ball.  We had teams in the neighborhood, and, of course, that's all I can really tell you as such, you know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you have any people that you--any sports heroes that you liked or looked up to?
Speaker 2: Sports heroes?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yes, baseball players.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Who were they?
Speaker 2: Ted Williams, greatest hitter of all times and, of course, I--and from 1951 to 1953 this was after I was grown, I saw almost one out of every three games that was played at Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.].  Every time they would change--the team would change on tour, I'd go see one game.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Those were the Negro baseball league games?
Speaker 2: No, these were the Washington Senators.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't play much ball, but that's who they were (laughter).
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And why did you like baseball so much?
Speaker 2: I cannot tell you that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yes, you can (laughter).
Speaker 2: How can I tell you that?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Well, I don't know.  I mean, why did you like it?
Speaker 2: I just liked to play baseball.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And these guys nowadays are getting paid millions of dollars can't play no baseball.  I had baseball teams overseas, they won the championship on Uwajimaya, traveled around to Guam, Tinian [Northern Mariana Islands], Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands] and played ball.  I been playing ball all my life, or at least I played it all my life until I got too old to play it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And so you would say that it was math and the baseball.  Those where the two things that really sort of got you excited?
Speaker 2: Nothing really gets me excited.  No, nothing gets me excited.
Story_ID: 136920
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, so at Garrison [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], while you were at Garrison, you said that that were no necessarily teachers, you know, that influenced you during that time?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  I mean, a teacher was a teacher.  I really can't think of anyone--any one teacher, and I can remember all my teachers.
Speaker 1: Can you give me their names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I had Miss Vurk [ph.] in the kindergarten, Miss Webster [ph.] in the first grade, Miss Peters in the second grade, Miss Thompson in the third grade, Miss Webb [ph.] in the fourth grade, Miss Quarrels [ph.] in the fifth grade and Miss Chew [ph.] in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Pretty good.  Now, none of those were your favorite more than another one?
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And you said that as a young person, as a young child, that you weren't, you know, that your mother [Jennie Duke] said you were difficult.  But were you mischievous, were you a dreamer, were you--
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I really don't.
Story_ID: 136921
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Your brothers [James T. Duke, Jr. and Earland Alvin Duke].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICAHRDSON:  Did you, would you, did you play a lot with your brothers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Who of your brothers was, you know--a lot of times we may prefer one brother over the other.  Were you better frie- you know, did you get along better with your older brother or your younger brother?
Speaker 2: I got along with both of them very well.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Can you share any stories of times together with your brothers growing up?
Speaker 2: There were no times that I can--that I know of that would stand out.  You know, we, we all played sports together.  My younger brother, during World War II [WWII], I saw him on Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands].  My older brother didn't go in the service.
Story_ID: 136922
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  That's eleven years then, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  So you lived there until you were a teenager.  Is that about sixteen and then move, or am I wrong?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay, and did your family, you know, did they ever take summer vacations and things together?  I know you said you went to camp.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No summer vacation?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  No--what about church, were you a church-going family?
Speaker 2: My mother [Jennie Duke] was.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And what was her faith?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, she was Baptist, okay.  And did you go to church--were you expected to go to church with her?
Speaker 2: No, I went to a Sunday school, but we didn't go to the same one because I would be able to go to Sunday school and walk.  And if she went to church, it was on the other side of town, so, no.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And where did you go to Sunday school?
Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist [Church] at 9th and P [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And did you--was it a firing brimstone church, Baptist church or was it a more prim and proper Baptist church?
Speaker 2: More prim and proper.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I just learned that those type of Baptist church exist.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?  Yeah, well, you see I really haven't been to church, to my church, in a few years because the fact I cannot get used to drums and trumpets and all that.  And, of course, that's what happened when the other minster died and a new minster came in.  He brought these drums and trumpets and saxophones in.  I told him if I wanted to go to the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], I'd gone to the Howard Theatre.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, who is the minster that was at the church when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Which one?  You mean, when I was going to Sunday school there?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yeah, at Sunday school?
Speaker 2: Reverend [Earl L.] Harrison.  I don't know what his first name was.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And were there any lessons--so you stayed at [Shiloh] Baptist your whole--
Speaker 2: All the way.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And...would you go every Sunday?  Did you go just to Sunday school or would you just go to--
Speaker 2: I went to Sunday school and when I went to Shiloh, and when I came out of the [U.S.] Army I went to Israel [Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] because when I came out of the Army, I was living at 10th and I Northeast [Washington, D.C.] and Israel was right around the corner.  And, of course, I was--my name is still on the roll at Israel, I guess.  If they haven't kicked me out.
Story_ID: 136923
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, when you were in high school, and you went, you went to--
Speaker 2: [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dunbar.  Okay.  Dunbar is famous.  It's famous.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Was there any decision about--was Dunbar where you were closest located or was Dunbar because you were doing 'cause that was college preparatory, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  That it wasn't the closest.  Cardozo [Senior High School, later Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] was the closest.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, Cardozo was a trade school--
Speaker 1: No, was a business school.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Was a business school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you call them vocational schools then?
Speaker 1: No, vocational is Armstrong [Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  I see.  Now, had you--what grades did you make in school?
Speaker 1: I was an honor student up until junior high school and then I fell off as such.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And you fell off because that's typically what teenagers do?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  I had an ailment, and that ailment interfered with my going to school, so I went to work when the war [World War II] started.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Can you tell me what ailment you had?
Speaker 1: I had trouble staying awake.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Is there a name to that?
Speaker 1: They gave it a name, but I don't think they gave it the right name.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What was the name they gave it?
Speaker 1: They gave it the name narcolepsy, but according to my understanding of narcolepsy and the people I've seen with narcolepsy, is not the same thing.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So can you tell me what symptoms you had--symptoms you had, because people who've had narcolepsy they just--they may be standing and just--
Speaker 1: No.  I know, and I didn't do that.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So what were your symptoms?
Speaker 1: I would just go to sleep, and when I was in the sixth grade, they treated my head with radiation because of a fungus infection of the scalp, and I think that they didn't know what they were doing.  I thought it then, I think it now and that was what the results were.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And how did you develop this fungus infection?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.  Contact, I guess, through some way.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And so you're saying in, like, ninth, ninth grade or tenth you started falling asleep just--
Speaker 1: In the tenth grade.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Tenth grade, and did your mother [Jennie Duke] take you to--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Where did she take you to--
Speaker 1: [D.C.] Children's Hospital [later Children's National Medical Center, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And so what did they--so are you saying that even in terms in playing sports that you are unable to play baseball and things like that?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can play baseball.  About two or three times when I dozed in the outfield.  I remember once when they hit a ball between the right fielder and I they knew it was my ball and I didn't get it, and I told them that the sun got in my eyes.  The sun didn't get in my eyes, I was dozed.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And when you were dozed, how long would you doze for?
Speaker 1: Only for a moment.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  But this just sort of affected your concentration, basically, I mean?
Speaker 1: Not really.  Not really, because I was still a half-way decent student.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And it wasn't any form of epilepsy?
Speaker 1: You know, what I question.  And it didn't come on until, you know, after I had this treatment.  And one of the reasons I think that may have brought it on, because I remember when I was eight or nine years old, my mother said to me, "Man, you would never go to sleep if I didn't make you go to bed."  And, of course, that's the way it went on.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And did you--did it stop at any point in your life?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So you still--
Speaker 1: Still have it.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --it still may happen.  Okay.  Well, you know, people are more sophisticated about epilepsy now than they were previous, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Right.
Story_ID: 136924
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What other things about high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.] were, you know, were sort of significant in terms of your growth?  Were there, you know, you were playing baseball, you were, you know, in Dunbar.  Did you like Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was fine.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And the teachers, were there any favorite teachers you had at the time?
Speaker 2: Not really, you know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  A math teacher that you particularly liked?
Speaker 2: No, I, I--she and I didn't get along too well.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Jenny Wilder [ph.].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And she taught, what, geometry?
Speaker 2: Geometry, yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And did you take things like calculus and trigonometry?
Speaker 2: I never took calculus.  I took trig, and I took all the other courses; solid geometry and college algebra, all those in high school and when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I started taking math courses and the--we had a professor there who made a math course hard because he wanted to let us know how much he knew, and he gave me a "C" in my major, and it's, "I can't have this," so I changed.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, that's how you got out of math?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You got out of math because he gave you a "C"?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't (unclear) to get a "C" in my major.  I was afraid I'd run into him again, so just changed my major.  I changed my major to business administration.  One of the professors said to me, says, "I've seen fellows come here who's changed from math--I mean, from business administration to--wait a minute, how did it went?  I changed it from--well, anyway it was somewhere in there I changed it the opposite of what other people changed it, and he said he had never seen that happen.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So you mean most people might change from business administration to math?
Speaker 2: Math, yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Story_ID: 136925
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, you said that, you know, in--I just want to make sure I get this right.  That when you were in high school [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], you know, you start having this problem with sleeping.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And did you--you went off--you still finished high school and graduated or did you go into the--
Speaker 2: I finished high school before I went in the [U.S.] Army, yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You went in the Army first and then you went to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So now, what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: On the record it says 1944, but I was in the '41 [1941] class, and they drafted me in '43 [1943], and I was rejected.  That was in May of '43 [1943}], so in the summer of '43 [1943], I said, "Well, I'll go get the two courses I need to finish high school" and I did that and then they called me back in November.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You know, I find it very strange, how would you get drafted when you had, you know, a disease like you had?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't tell them anything about no disease like that.  I figured all the young men were going in, so I said I'll go in and if I can't do it I'll get out, you know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And why did you want to go into the service?
Speaker 2: Because everybody else was going, and I didn't want around there by myself.  And, plus, I figured that maybe in the service they would be able to do something for me.  So I went in the service and there was another fellow  in the outfit next to mine who had the same thing and, of course, the way they treated him I couldn't go along with it and so I said I will not complain about it because I'm not going to--treat me like that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And when you mean that.  What do you mean about treating you like that?
Speaker 2: They put him in sleep for two or three days and said he had battle fatigue, and I said, well, they didn't know what they were doing.  The man hadn't gone out of basic training hardly and they're talking about he had battle fatigue.  So I said that shows me that they don't know what they're doing.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Where was I stationed?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yeah, where did you do your basic training first?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And you were in the Army?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And what--New Orleans is that fort--
Speaker 2: That was [Camp] Plauche.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And you were there for like six weeks?
Speaker 2: Somewhere--close to three months we stayed there.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And then where were you stationed after that?
Speaker 2: Went to Camp Gordon Johnston in [Carabelle] Florida.  Worst camp in the country.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And why do you say that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was written up in the national paper as being the worst camp in the country.  They had no floors in the barracks, they had a walkway, you know, a wooden walkway, in the middle of the barracks but you had to prop the beds up on boards in order to keep them from sinking in the sand, and we would go out to dog island every other week to (unclear), which you had to sleep in the sand and you had to take--dig a trench around your tent and keep the snakes from coming in, and that was it.  But in the end, it paid off.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And when it paid off in terms of what?
Speaker 2: Well, we went in Iwo Jima [Japan], we had to sleep in the fox holes in the sand and it was raining and, you know, we've been used to it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I see.  So, the service was hard for you in many ways?
Speaker 2: It wasn't hard.  It was hard if you let it be hard, but it wasn't hard.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And you were there how long?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  In the service.  How long did you serve total?
Speaker 2: Two-and-a-half years.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, just two-and-a-half years, okay.  And was it during that time that you spent in Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands]?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I was only in Saipan temporarily; once going to school and once playing baseball.  I was on Iwo Jima for thirteen months.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And what period of time--this has nothing to do--Saipan had nothing to do with the service?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the service.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  It did.  Okay.  You were in the service and you--
Speaker 2: I was stationed on Iwo Jima and, of course, we won the baseball championship on Iwo Jima and then we traveled around to Saipan, go on in Tinian [Northern Mariana Islands].
Story_ID: 136926
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, were those--when you were playing in the service [U.S. Army] baseball, were you in segregated or integrated teams?
Speaker 2: We were a segregated team when we won the championship, and then the second time I carried a team around, we were integrated.  That was a All-Star team.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And you said your brother [Earland Alvin Duke] was also stationed over there?
Speaker 2: He was stationed on, on Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands].
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  And when had he gotten--when did he enlisted in the service?
Speaker 2: He did enlist at all.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I mean, when he was drafted?  Was he--okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: 1940--well, it had to be 1945.  Maybe he was drafted in 1944.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you ever think about making the service a career longer than the, you know, two-and-a-half years you served?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I was afraid I would run into some officers like the one we had.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And what was he like?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What was his name and what was he like?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not going to call his name, but he was immature, and he was just immature, and I just couldn't deal with that.  I said if I decide to re-up, I might run into another officer like that, and it's time for me get out.
Story_ID: 136927
Speaker 1: So you are, decide--you've decided that you don't--you're ready to leave the [U.S.] Military?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What sort of went into--how was that sort of closure for you and what were your thoughts in terms of what you wanted to do after?
Speaker 2: Well, the point was at that time, I had run into a couple of officers who were in over their heads, to my opinion.  They weren't qualified for the jobs.  I figured if I had to look forward to making a career of this and run into other officers the same way, that I would be in serious trouble.  So I just figured I would get out.  I got out, and I went back to my old job as a guard in the government.  And at that time, they--one night--I worked from midnight to eight, and of course I requested a change in shift because of the fact that I had trouble staying awake during the night.  The man told me, "Well, you can't work 12:00 to 8:00 then you can't work 4:00 to 12:00."    I told him, "You're crazy.  12:00 to 8:00 for an old man like you and I'm had twenty-two years old, and I have no business working in the shift from 12:00 to 8:00," so he says, "Well, we're going to reduce the guard force, so we'll take and put your name on the labor crew."  I said, "You're crazy again."  I says, "Uncle Sam is going to pay me to go school and I'm not going to push a mop for anybody," so I went up to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] that Monday and registered.  I said, well if I'm going, I'm not going to waste my time.
Speaker 1: So you went to register at Howard?
Speaker 2: At Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your thoughts going into that in terms of what you wanted to--
Speaker 2: Well, that's when I started winning and started to major in math, then changed it over to business administration, and I figured if I go into business administration I might want to go into business for myself and I would need money to do that, so if I needed money to do that, I get the money to go to medical school.  So I changed my major to pre-med.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you basically switched from business administration to pre-med?
Speaker 2: --to pre-med.
Speaker 1: And the reason was?
Speaker 2: Because of the fact that this is what I wanted to do and this is what I could do in order to try to help myself, and that was it.
Speaker 1: And when you say, "help yourself."  Help yourself just in terms of financially, or also--
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: --because of your--
Speaker 2: I've never been interested in a lot of money.
Speaker 1: But also in terms of answering your own questions perhaps about your illness?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So that was sort of the foundation then, your illness and sort of trying to figure that out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how--do you sort of regret that change or do you have any?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about, sort of, how that changed the course of your life?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't know how I can give you any answer to that. What I'm saying is that I went into pre-med and I wanted to go to med school, so I went to med school and that was it.
Story_ID: 136928
Speaker 1: Which medical school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: You did go to Howard medical school?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you feel like you were doing something phenomenal by going to medical school as a black man during that period, or how--
Speaker 2: No, but I figured when as far as the eyes could go who I knew and could do it well, I can do it too.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that were going to medical school at that time with you?
Speaker 2: Going to medical school with me?  Well, there were fifty-two of them.  I mean, I don't know if you would know any of them, but what difference does it make?
Speaker 1: Were there any sort of notable black doctors as additionally going at that time?
Speaker 2: No more notable than any others.
Speaker 1: Was medical school challenging for you?
Speaker 2: It's had its moments, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: You know, it also depends on what individual philosophy is about going to medical school.  That's what it depends on.  There are some people who think when they're going to medical school is the only thing in the world.  It isn't.  If you don't get in, you find something else to do.  If you get in, you make the best of it.  So that's about it.
Speaker 1: And which was your philosophy at that time?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Going into it, where you were just singlely [sic] focused on that or was it sort of, like, well, I don't get in then I'll do something else?
Speaker 2: Well, if I didn't get in I have to do something else, you know.  And, of course, they have many people who applied who fall into that category.  And back in that day, it used to be that individuals would put in applications for medical school and dental school; and, of course, I wasn't interested looking at anybody's mouth all day long.  So I never even applied to dental school, never even thought about it.
Speaker 1: Did you apply to other medical schools?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which ones did you apply to?
Speaker 2: I don't remember all of them, but I applied to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I applied to Wayne State [University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  I don't know.  There were a couple others.
Speaker 1: Why did you finally--did you get into any of the others and why did you finally settle on Howard, if so?
Speaker 2: One of the things most important thing, it was economically more important for me to go to Howard because I was home.
Speaker 1: Did you get into any of the other schools and think about traveling?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I only applied to them once, and, of course, I applied to Howard more than once.
Speaker 1: So you were in medical school for what years from?
Speaker 2: From '53 [1953] to '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: And then after you got out, did you graduate sort at the top of your class or?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know where I was in the class, but I wasn't on the bottom and I wasn't on the top.
Story_ID: 136929
Speaker 1: What was your foc- your primary focus during medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]?  What was your concentration?
Speaker 2: I took it one day at a time.
Speaker 1: But in terms of your concentration, what did you focus--
Speaker 2: No.  No.  The only thing I can answer that--the only way I can answer that question is to tell you the way I told one of my professors.  He says, "Duke, I met you six years ago and you didn't know what you were doing."  He says, "Do you know what you want to do now?"  And I said, "No, but I'll tell you what I don't want to do."  He said, "What's that?"  I said, "Pediatrics or psychiatry."  And he was (unclear).  So that was the way it was.  I mean, I can do anything else, but pediatrics or psychiatry.  I told somebody I would go back in the post office before I become a pediatrician.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: Children can't tell you what's wrong with them.  That's the toughest thing in the world.
Speaker 1: You said children--
Speaker 2: Cannot tell you what's wrong with them.
Speaker 1: Why not psychiatry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't listen to people's problems all day long and, you know, in order to be a psychiatrist you got to be able to tune in the same channel with the patient.
Speaker 1: So you wanted sort of a more direct--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did fairly well in medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you graduated, what did you do or what were your goals in your final year?
Speaker 2: My goals were just--as I went through the internship, then I decided that at least I hadn't decided what I wanted to do, so I decided right now do a residency in medicine, and after a couple of years I went to work.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the well-known faculty at Howard during that period, Howard medical school, during that period?
Speaker 2: [R.] Kelly Brown, Burke ["Mickey"] Syphax, Jack [E.] White.
Speaker 1: So Brown was noted for--
Speaker 2: He was a gastroenterologist.
Speaker 1: Syphax?
Speaker 2: He was a surgeon.  White was a surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you sort of--were any of the people at Howard at that time, at the medical school, were any of them--who could you say, did you have a mentor during that period at all--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that That was on the faculty?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No mentor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  How about other medical students.  Did you all study together a lot?  Was it a very intense period for you?
Speaker 2: I had a group of students that I would study with at times.
Speaker 1: But was it a difficult period going through Howard medical school for you?  Was it challenging at all?
Speaker 2: With those guys ego, sure it was a difficult period.
Speaker 1: But just in terms of the course work, you know?
Speaker 2: The course work was--wasn't difficult.  It was just so much of it.
Speaker 1: Pulling lots of all-nighters?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Story_ID: 136930
Speaker 1: So you were starting to talk about a professor you had at medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  Can you follow up with (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, he was the type of person when he would come in the morning, he'd call somebody's name and he started asking them questions and he would ask them five, six questions; and then until they couldn't answer one question and then he would start ranting and raving.  And, of course, one morning when I was going in and he said, "Mr. Duke," says, "What have you learned about this subject?", and I said, "You mean since I been in the course or last night?"  He said, "last last night."  I said, "Nothing."  "You mean you didn't study this course last night?"  I says, "No, I had a physiology exam this morning and I studied nothing but physiology."  And so then he started proceeding to ask me questions.  I answered about six or seven questions straight, and when he got to the next question, I couldn't answer it and then he started ranting and raving.  And I had to tell him, "Doctor, you don't upset me by ranting and raving 'cause I can't answer a question."  I says, "If I can't answer the question then you don't have any business being the professor of this course."  I says, "You're supposed to get a question that I can't answer."  And he never fooled with me since after that.  Not from that day on.
Speaker 1: So with everyone, how many students were in this class?
Speaker 2: Fifty-something, fifty or sixty or so.
Speaker 1: Was this the psychiatry?
Speaker 2: No, no, this was one of the anatomy courses.
Speaker 1: So were you at all embarrassed?
Speaker 2: Embarrassed about what?  I don't let anybody embarrass me.
Speaker 1: Did you feel-
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  He was embarrassed.  The teacher was more embarrassed, right?
Speaker 1: Probably so.
Speaker 2: Did you feel then like you had sort of won that day or--
Speaker 1: I felt that I didn't have any more problems with him, and I didn't.
Speaker 2: So would you say then that that the school was, I think, she had said rigid before--rigorous, very highly competitive?
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't think it was that rigorous, you know.  It was just a large volume of work.  And of course, you had to adjust your time to how much you could put on any one course and how much you would cover.
Story_ID: 136931
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, you had gone to school to, in some part, to even understand more about your own disease?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you get any, gain any inside story that your time at Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You don't want my answer to that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Well, my answer to that, that all the doctors in the [U.S.] Army and out in the street didn't know what they were doing.  And, you know, the most important thing in the practice of medicine if you don't know, say so.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So what did you learn about your disease then, because you weren't--
Speaker 2: I hadn't learned anything about it at such, but I, I, could come to the conclusion as to what caused it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And can you tell me what--when you had that revelation?
Speaker 2: Probably when, when I finished med school.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: There's nothing to talk about.  I mean, what I'm saying is that you know the effects of radiation and you know when and how some of these people will put on programs and experiment.  You know back in 1950 something the knowledge wasn't what it was today, so, you know--
Speaker 1: So, what did that tell you about the career path you had chosen, if anything?
Speaker 2: It didn't tell me anything that, you know.
Speaker 1: I mean, you went to school to find out, you know, sort of to get some questions about your situation--
Speaker 2: It showed me that whole lot of these doctors don't know everything that they think they know.  There are some of them that won't even tell you that they don't know.
Speaker 1: Did that sort of create any sort of resolve within you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: To--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't looking for any.
Speaker 1: To be different, I mean.  To sort of work harder, perhaps and to be a more--to try to be more--
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Skillful.
Speaker 1: Right, more skillful and to also try to be more forthright with patients, as well?
Speaker 2: No more than it did before I even started in medical school.  Like, several of my patients said if I didn't know, I would tell you I don't know and let you to go somebody else.  Well, I have had some patients come to me and say, well, doctor so and so has told me such and such thing; and I--if I knew and knew that I knew, I don't care what doctor told them that, you know.  And like I told them I'm not going to fool.  And at that time I wasn't making my living at Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] so if you didn't come back in this office, it didn't make any difference.
Story_ID: 136932
Speaker 1: So after--chart your path for me, if you will, right after medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: I did residency over in Baltimore [Maryland], and then I went to Fort Meade [Maryland] to practice as a civil service physician, and then I transferred into Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] and then I stayed there until I retired.
Speaker 1: So your residency, did you discover anything new?  Or did you learn anything new?
Speaker 2: No.  Exposure to sick people in the hospital, yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Was that off-putting?  Did that sort of getting out of the sort of theoretical into the actual practical sense, did that--
Speaker 2: Well, nothing that I did was theoretical.  All of it was actual practice.
Speaker 1: But I mean, dealing with actual patients.  How was that different for you in, in--
Speaker 2: From what?
Speaker 1: From when you were in medical school?
Speaker 2: Well, when you're in medical school after the first year you start dealing with patients.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  At Howard [University] Hospital [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: It was Freedmen's then.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Freedom, Freedmen's Hospital [Washington, D.C.].  That's right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So what was your experience then in dealing with patients.  Did you enjoy it?  Did you have any difficulty then--the first year after you started working with patients and it became practical, did you, did you--the gravity of, you know, being a doctor and helping people in--
Speaker 1: Oh, sure, because if not I'd have found something else to do.
Speaker 2: How did that sort of--
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Is he an internist? What is his specialty, that's what I'm wondering.
Speaker 2: General
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You were a general practitioner?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Internist?  At that time, they didn't call it?
Speaker 2: They did have internship, but just take anything that walks into the office and that what you can't handle, you refer out to somebody else.
Speaker 1: Were you ever squeamish about anything when you first started practicing?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 136933
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, when you, you said you interned in Baltimore [Maryland] then you came to--
Speaker 2: I interned at Freedmen's [Hospital, later, Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  At Freedmen's.  So you interned and then you did your residency?
Speaker 2: In Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: In Baltimore.  Where at?
Speaker 2: At Provident [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you came back to, you said, you came back and then worked at Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Fort Meade [Maryland].
Speaker 1: At Fort Meade.  Okay.  How long were you at Fort Meade?
Speaker 2: Let's see, about two years, I guess.
Speaker 1: And then, you know, how did it come that you came to work with Walter Reed because isn't Walter Reed sort of viewed as the creme de la creme of hospitals?
Speaker 2: They wanted the best.  (Laughter)  No--
Speaker 1: Well no, I'm just saying as a black doctor--I'm just--Walter Reed is where all the presidents were--
Speaker 2: A friend of mine was on the staff there, and he was leaving, so then I applied for his job and they accepted it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of your friend or what was his position?
Speaker 2: He was in the medical outpatient clinic, and his name was Hilton Wilson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Was he an African American?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now at this point in time, have you established a private practice also?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had--no, not at the time that I was--well, let's see--yes, because I opened my office when right at the time that I started at Fort Meade, and, of course, I practiced until '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: And what were all of the types of things that you were seeing, you know, in those early years.  This is back in--you started--
Speaker 2: What do you mean, what type of--like diseases?
Speaker 1: Yeah, diseases or--I mean, is it, you know, the flu bug and things like that? At that time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Hypertension, diabetes.  But any complaint that came in the office, you know, I would manage unless I had to refer them out and, of course, if I didn't know I would refer them out.
Story_ID: 136934
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And let me, let's go back to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] a little bit, because there's a lot, you know, there's the science of practice but then there's the actual, you know, practice itself?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And I'm wondering, you know, are there things that you learned there that sort of, you know, within the medical school environment.  It could be either within medical school, it could be, you know, during your internship or at, you know, at Freedmen's Hospital [later, Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  But during that early period of time, are there things that you learned there that have sort of--that sort of helped you later in your career?  You know, whether it was about how to treat patients, or, you know, what to do and what not to do in certain cases, or, you know, because you're really servicing the black community as--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --that was the only place that could go.  I mean blacks went to black doctors?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So I'm just wondering if there was anything that you learned, you know, in those early years?
Speaker 2: Not really because philosophically speaking it's the way you treat people.  You don't have to be a doctor, so that was what it was all about.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Well, what did your patients say?  Did they say that you had a good bedside manner?
Speaker 2: What is a bedside manner?  When you go to a doctor, you want a doctor who knows what he is doing.  You don't worry about his bedside manner.
Speaker 1: But, you know, sort of having your own ailment, did that in any way sort of make you more sensitive to the patients that would come to you that were black and--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  And most of my patients at Walter Reed [National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] were probably white.
Story_ID: 136935
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So when you joined Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], how many blacks were on the staff at Walter Reed?
Speaker 2: On the staff or in the clinic that I was in?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay in the clinic, sorry.
Speaker 2: I don't remember any others in there, you know, when I--and, of course, the personnel rotated, you know. How many officers coming in and going out, who were physicians, and I don't remember no more than one or two civilian, black civilian doctors, who were there, you know, in the whole fifteen years while I was there.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, can you tell just, you know, for purposes of people who don't know about the history of Walter Reed, just some of the history about that hospital and that institution and its main purpose?
Speaker 2: Well, it's main purpose is to treat soldiers and dignitaries, and usually when they had problems out in the outlying posts and things of this sort, they would come to Walter Reed or some of the dignitaries here in Washington [D.C.] who got ill, they would come to Walter Reed.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You were there for fifteen years, beginning when?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two to '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any challenges in terms of non-black patients and accepting you as their doctor?
Speaker 2: One, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you describe--
Speaker 2: But that was at Fort Meade [Maryland].  Well, the nurse straightened him out or straightened her out and told her if she couldn't accept me as a physician, she can go somewhere else.
Speaker 1: What was her ailment and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: 1961 or '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: And did you feel anything regarding that?
Speaker 2: No.  I was thirty-something years old, I been living that way all my life.  No.
Speaker 1: But at Walter Reed itself, you didn't experience anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't have any problems.  Oh, I had a problem with one man.  One colonel.  You know, retired colonels think they own everything.  And he came in, and I forgotten how it was; but anyway he and I got into a controversy and I didn't like what he said and I told him, I said, "You forget I'm not in the [U.S.] Army.  I'm a civilian." And he says, "I'm going to report you to the commanding general."  I says, "but I'll go get his phone number for you," and he came back the next day and apologized.
Speaker 1: What did he say to you?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what it was.
Speaker 1: So you seem to take those sorts of incidents in good spirits?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't give anybody a hard time, and I don't let anybody give me a hard time, so even-steven.
Speaker 1: Do you remember treating anyone when you were at Walter Reed or even prior that, you know, you sort of that made you feel like, okay this is what I'm here for.  This is why I do this and, you know, or was it--is there any sort of situation that stands out where you really felt like you were fulfilling your mission?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt that way with all of my patients.  Because if I wasn't I'd be wasting my time and their money.
Speaker 1: Who did you--you helped mostly old--adults, no children at all?
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: You didn't deal with children?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't even treat my own children.
Story_ID: 136936
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, can you--you had, so you had your private practice that was mainly servicing the black--where your patients were black.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And then you were at Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] where your patients were all white or almost all white, especially during those early years.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And I'm just wondering the difference in the nature of those practices.  You know, the cases you saw in the black community and the cases, you know, the things that you treated, you know, at Walter Reed.  I was just wondering was there much difference or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No.  So you would be treating diabetes in both places--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --or hypertension in both places?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Did you see, you know, a lot of times there's always been the perception, especially during that time, you know, medical--now people are acknowledging that there's difference, you know, we call come from the same entity like the blood that runs through our veins is the same; but before, you know, there were, you know, with the race theories and things like that, was always perceived that black people were different than the whites.  Did you see more advanced cases like diabetes because in the black community people were, you know, not having access to medical care as soon and--
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  You would see more diabetes among the blacks, more hypertension among the blacks, but that was about it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And if you, you know, go back over--because of the time that you got the position at Walter Reed, that was a big deal.  You said you were in your mid-thirties by then or you were in your early thirties?
Speaker 2: I was thirty-eight.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Thirty-eight, okay.  And was it unusual--had that position been held by an African American?
Speaker 2: The fellow whose place I took.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Yeah, but before, was he--when he was hired was he, was there African American?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You don't know.  Okay.  Okay.  But what I am trying to understand is that, you know, that was a big deal for you to have a position like that?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Story_ID: 136937
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And were you at the time--I'd just like you to sort of describe some of the highlights of your medical career.  You said the medical career just ended really in 1998, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And if you could talk about some of the sort of key things that, you know, you are either proud of or, you know, maybe cases you saw.  You know, you talked about the, you know, the one colonel I think it was or whatever came in and was--had to apologize for his behavior.  But I just was, you know, if you could sort of look back over which was really a fifty-year career or so--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --A doctor and talk about, you know, some of the key highlights.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had a couple of cases that I diagnosed that, that other fellows couldn't diagnosis.  One example was--of course, this was a pediatric case too and the doctor said, "Duke, you want to see something?"  I said, "What's that?"  He said, "Come here and look at this and see what you think?"  So the girl, young girl, was running a temperature of 104 [degrees Fahrenheit], and she had broken out, and all.  He says, "What do you think?"  I says, "What did you diagnosis?"  He said, "I don't know what it is."  So I said to the mother, I said, "Has this young lady been bitten by a tick, and she says, "Yeah, she was bitten by a tick about six days ago."  And I says, "Well, then this young lady has Rocky Mountain spotted fever," and the doctor jumped on her, and says to the mother, "Why didn't you tell me she was bitten by a tick?"  She says, "You didn't ask me."  So that was a very interesting case.  And, of course, then he went around and--pardon me and asked all the people in the clinic if they wanted to see a case of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but he didn't say that Duke told me what it was.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, how did you know that it was Rocky Mountain spotted fever?
Speaker 2: Just from the fever, the distribution of the rash, the palm of the hands and, of course, you always have to ask the patient what's wrong with them.  And of course, you had to had to ask the mother because this was a eleven or twelve-year old girl.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And other stories like that, because you said you had some others.
Speaker 2: I had maybe one or two others like that.  I can't, I can't remember them offhand but I remember that one distinctly.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And had you read about Rocky Mountain spotted fever or had you treated it before?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had never treated it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You had never treated it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So is it because you were reading lots of medical journals and had heard it described or?
Speaker 2: Oh, I read it at some time or had heard it in a lecture or something.
Story_ID: 136938
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So you have a good memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And, you know, because I think even when I look at your pattern to go from math to business to medicine, people don't always, you know, math--
Speaker 2: That's what the professor had said.  He said he had never seen anybody do that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Right.  And your love of numbers also extended into an ability in the area of science then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  But did you feel that you just have a natural affinity for things that were scientific or understanding scientific principles or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I never looked into it like that.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Do you have a visual memory, what they call--when you read things--what is it called?
Speaker 2: Photographic memory.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Do you have a photographic memory?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Usually when if I ever hear, though, I would remember it.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, so you have--what do they call it?  Auditory memory?  There's a term for it.  What is the term, can you please?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what the name is, but that's reason in class I had no problem, I'd sit up and listen and listen and listen and if I ever heard it before, that's the reason that I said, if I want to get a good grade just ask me a multiple choice question.
Speaker 1: Oh, and so you didn't really have to take many notes or anything in school, then?
Speaker 2: We well, as a group, we would take notes and combine them, you know, so that everybody would get whatever it was.
Story_ID: 136939
Speaker 1: That was the other question I wanted to ask you.  So you said there were fifty-five people in your--
Speaker 2: There were--it might have been more than that.  There may have been seventy-something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But are you telling me that everyone--were you all in class [at Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] together?  Like, did you all take because you said--was that, or were you broken up into sections of the seventy, or did you all go to the same class?
Speaker 2: As I remember, we were all went to the same class.  I don't remember where one group being here, and one group being there.
Speaker 1: And did, did, did any of the professors say that they saw something special about you or try to encourage you along, you know, besides making the comment that they had never seen someone go--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So really that's what you were describing that it wasn't a particularly nurturing environment?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But Howard's reputation in terms of medical school was pristine at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was there a difference in the training?  Did people ever say, you know, Howard versus Meharry [College of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee]; you know, you get trained this way and, you know, or you can tell a Howard doctor from a Meharry doctor?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did say that.
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: Because of the fact when if it came out of the book or out of the lecture you knew he came from Howard.  If he was in the clinic and hands on, then he did not come from Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Howard was the very academic--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, sort of--so Howard was the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in many ways?
Speaker 2: Well, I won't go so far to say that.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Meharry--
Speaker 2: Although, I will say this, the Harvard graduate from medical school is no different than any other graduate from medical school, because graduating from medical school depends on the student not the school.
Speaker 1: And what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what the student wants to do.  The student learns--he hasn't learned necessarily from the lectures and things of this sort.  He learns from practical application.
Speaker 1: And that's where you think the medical training really takes place--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --so so really you felt that your training really really started to take root when you were working at Freedmen's Hospital [later, Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that, that hospital was very much centered in the black community?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --everybody--that's where people had to go, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 136940
Speaker 1: Are there any other highlights about your medical career and also where were you when you diagnosed the child with the Rocky Mountain [spotted fever]--
Speaker 2: Fort Meade [Maryland].
Speaker 1: So did you get any confirm- you said you didn't get any confirmation from sort of other doctors while you were in school, or what have you, or rather from professors, but about how about your peers?
Speaker 2: What do you mean didn't get any confirmation?
Speaker 1: Any sort of kudos for your ability to recognize things or to diagnose something that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not, not, not any more than anybody else.
Story_ID: 136941
Speaker 1: Now, you said you lived at 13th and Oak Street [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of sort of the famous sort of U Street [Washington, D.C.] nowadays, anything that stands out?
Speaker 2: U Street?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Before the riots of '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, what do you want to know about them?
Speaker 1: That was sort of at one point, a while ago, that was sort of a place where, you know, that was sort of [Washington] D.C. society sort of gathered?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you see all of the three of theaters are right there on U Street, and the clubs were within one or two blocks of U Street.  And that's where they would all gather.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were coming through Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and that sort of thing, what did U Street mean to you during that time before the riots and that?
Speaker 2: It didn't really mean anything to me.  It was just another street, you know.  I would go to the movie up there every week just about.
Speaker 1: The Howard Theatre?
Speaker 2: But it was just another street.
Speaker 1: The Howard Theatre?
Speaker 2: Howard, Lincoln [Theatre], Republic [Theatre], Booker T [Theatre].
Story_ID: 136942
Speaker 1: Can you state your wife's name for us?
Speaker 2: Dolores [Douglass] Duke.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met her--she was a pharmacist at Freedmen's [Hospital, later, Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] when I was a student.
Speaker 1: And is she, where is she from?
Speaker 2: She's from Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was that sort of like when you first met her?  Was it sort of love at first sight?  Did you have this sort of long courting period?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Fact, it was relatively short, I would say.
Speaker 1: Can you elaborate?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: When you said it was relatively short, how long did it take from the day you met her until when you married her?  How about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, I guess right about eight months.
Speaker 1: That's very swift.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you see I was a student, and I didn't have whole lot of time to be socializing.
Speaker 1: Now, but you say she's very--she's sort of more social than you are or?
Speaker 2: Very much.  Very, very much.
Speaker 1: So can you sort of describe your--the beginning of your relationship in terms of the courting process, in terms of--
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What attracted him to her.
Speaker 1: What sort of attracted you to?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you.  I really don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in terms of your participation in Washington [D.C.] society, if you will, where did that lead you?  Where did that take you when you all first met?
Speaker 2: Where did it take me?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: It didn't take me anywhere.
Speaker 1: I mean, just in terms of places that you would go frequent and sort of the--
Speaker 2: I really don't know that, but after we got married, we started traveling, which I probably not have done, you know, if I'd still been single.  And we've driven to every state in the union except North Dakota, and we've driven across country three times.  So that's one thing that, you know, came out of it.
Speaker 1: So would you say she's pretty adventurous or--
Speaker 2: She just likes to travel.
Speaker 1: But you're not a big traveler or you weren't a big traveler?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not really, you know.
Speaker 1: Where were you going in terms what was attracting you to the various places?  What were you going to see or--
Speaker 2: Because I hadn't been there before, and, of course, twice when we traveled across country.  The first time was vacation, the second time was carrying my daughter [Lori Duke] to Stanford [University, Stanford, California], the third time was when she graduated.  But I, I--we never go or we try not to go to the same place twice.
Speaker 1: Now, you have a daughter and a son?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was oldest--
Speaker 2: The son.
Speaker 1: --and what are the names?  Their names?
Speaker 2: He's Leslie [Duke], Jr. and she's Lori.
Speaker 1: And how long after you got married, did you have children?
Speaker 2: Eleven months.
Speaker 1: That's very swift.  Was that swifter that time or?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's very quick.
Speaker 2: That was one of those things, but like I told people who when, talk about "I can't afford a family and so forth," and I tell them, "You can't put your order in," so--
Speaker 1: So your wife was a pharmacist?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Is she retired as a pharmacist?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was a chief pharmacist at the Psychiatric Institute [of Washington, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Did she ever assist you at all in your work in your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--practice or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I kind of want to go back to job situations. What do you think Julieanna? Is that not--
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Wherever you want to go; I want to ask one more question about his wife [Dolores Douglass Duke].  Did she--do you feel that she's been a good partner to you and that she was understanding of your medical career because, you know, she had medical training, too?
Speaker 1: Let's hope so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Otherwise I'd went out and have gotten a substitute.
Story_ID: 136943
Speaker 1: People who succeed tend to have some sort of formative influence in terms of an individual or individuals who they can look back and say, you know, "That person really sort of helped me sort of become who I am," or what have you.  Is there anyone that you can think of that really sort of influenced the direction you took in your life?
Speaker 2: There's no one that I can put my finger on that I would say that.
Speaker 1: Were there family?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Family friend?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What sort of--when you were growing up before you decided to join the [U.S.] Army, you said you started working--
Speaker 2: I didn't decide to join the Army.
Speaker 1: Rather before you got?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Wait, you said that you were--you started working when you were fourteen years old?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you do when you first started?
Speaker 2: Well, I started off just a paper boy and then became a station manager for the newspaper, then I worked in the drugstore on Connecticut Avenue [Washington, D.C.], then I went into the government.
Speaker 1: You worked in the drugstore as a cashier or?
Speaker 2: No, I--what would you call it?  A porter, I guess.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you started working when you were fourteen.  Did you feel like you had to start working at fourteen or--
Speaker 2: That would be difficult to say, too.  I guess wherein I had some responsibility to go to work.  My father [James Duke] went taken ill, and that was it.
Speaker 1: So you--did you sort of help your-you helped your family out financially during that period?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in terms of your socioeconomic background, what would you say?  Where did you all fall during that period?  I know you lived--you were the first black family in this sort of Logan Circle area, correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What would you say then was your socioeconomic background during that period?
Speaker 2: It was--what do you call it?  Right in the middle.
Story_ID: 136944
Speaker 1: Did you have any--sort of, we sort of tried to get around sort of fondest memories of your mom [Jennie Duke], or your dad [James Duke], or what have you.  Do you have any that you can recall, any sort of irreconcilable memories?  Something that didn't quite--you didn't quite understand growing up with regard to your family life or your family situation?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Speaker 1: How about your environment?  In terms of your environment.  Did things at some point or at any point not quite make complete sense to you in terms of growing up in [Washington] D.C. and in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: No.  You see one reason is because in the '30s [1930] and in the '40s [1940], we had--the blacks had everything that they needed in their area.  They didn't have to ask anybody for anything, they didn't have to go anywhere to get anything, they had the best schools in the city, you know.  We had it, so there was no problem.
Speaker 1: And how did that feel to you back then?  You know, I guess it just probably seemed normal at that time--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --I would imagine.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: When did it sort of dawn on you that that wasn't quite--that it wasn't the community maybe wasn't as insular or would never be perhaps as insular as it was at that point?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean when you that the community won't be quite as insular.  What I am saying is that I was aware of the circumstances around the rest of the country, you know.  And we didn't have them there in Washington.
Speaker 1: But, I mean, it was strongly segregated?
Speaker 2: It was segregated, but it was segregated but we didn't--there was nothing that anybody else had that we needed.  Maybe except jobs.
Story_ID: 136945
Speaker 1: So can you sort of describe for me, I guess, what you think are maybe some of the more difficult decisions you've had to make in the, in the course of your life?  Whether it be familial, professionally or--actually those.  Or socially, just sort of.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I should answer that question.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: Hmm?  Well, one of the most difficult decisions that I had to make was in the [U.S.] Army.  And it was during the invasion of Iwo Jima [Japan, 1945], and the officer on my truck wanted me to drive that truck at such and such a way, and I said, "If I do it, we're going to get the whole convoy bone [blown?] up," and I just wouldn't do it.  And, of course, right after he suggested it, the marine colonel on the boat told him to keep his mouth shut and leave me alone.  But that was it.  That was one of the hardest decisions in the world until the marine colonel got me out of the bind, because I wasn't going to do what he wanted me to do.
Speaker 1: That may have been a hard decision, but it sounds like it may have also saved a few lives, you think?
Speaker 2: It may save a whole lot of injuries and maybe some lives.
Story_ID: 136946
Speaker 1: How about the sort of most rewarding thing you feel like you've--your most rewarding accomplishment or--and it doesn't have to be one.  It can be two or three things that you're proudest of in your life?
Speaker 2: My two children [Leslie Duke, Jr. and Lori Duke].  Those--that's about the most rewarding thing that there was.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Hmm?  Well, it was just that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Now, your son is a successful golf instructor?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What sort of people does he teach?
Speaker 2: Anybody who comes to Florida and goes to Twin Eagles Golf Course [Naples, Florida], which is one of the top golf courses in the country.
Speaker 1: And your daughter--
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Ask him about that story with his son and golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your son start playing golf and how old was he?
Speaker 2: Oh, I took him on a golf course, I guess, when he was ten years old and when he was twelve years old, they tried to stop him from playing down here on Sligo [Creek] Golf Course [Silver Spring, Maryland]; at least, one fellow did.  And he asked him how old he was and he said twelve, and he says, "Well, you're supposed to be fourteen to start playing out here."  And one of the other starters happened to walked up, and says, "Leave him alone."  He said, "He'll rip everybody out here.  So leave him alone."
Speaker 1: And he kept playing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you ever play your son in golf, and did you ever--
Speaker 2: I could play with him up until he was fourteen, and after that, well, I couldn't deal with him.
Speaker 1: You couldn't deal with him because?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: Because he was that good.
Speaker 1: What about your daughter, what is she?
Speaker 2: She's--she was a schoolteacher, and she's not teaching right now.  She's staying home, being a housewife.  When she finished the education at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], and then got a master's degree down here at--what is that college on Michigan Avenue?
Speaker 1: Trinity [Washington University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Did your children become what you expected them to become, your daughter and your son?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I expected my daughter to be a physician.  She went two years to med school and gave it up.
Speaker 1: Why?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  She--just wasn't for her.
Speaker 1: Were you disappointed?
Speaker 2: I wasn't really disappointed because I was going to let them both be what they wanted to be.  I tried to get my son to take pre-med courses, but he didn't want it.
Speaker 1: So you did want your children follow in your footsteps in that regard?
Speaker 2: I didn't want them.  I always said let them be what they want to be, you know.  I would encourage them to do it, but if they didn't want to do it, fine.  You know, there was one young man years ago and he graduated from medical school and he took his degree and put it on his father's desk, and says, "There's your degree."  So that was four years he had wasted.
Story_ID: 136947
Speaker 1: In terms of professional--your own professional pride, though, is there anything that you can say--we talked a little about the highlights of some of the highlights of your career that you sort of look back and with pride in terms of your own professional accomplishments.  Anything you've done?
Speaker 2: Finishing medical school is one.
Speaker 1: Were you the first doctor in your family?
Speaker 2: No, I had an uncle who was an eye specialist here in Washington [D.C.] who had his own hospital at 12th and U Street Northwest.
Speaker 1: An uncle?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he influence you at all growing up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And he was your mother's [Jennie Duke] brother?
Speaker 2: Brother.  That's right.
Speaker 1: But he was an eye specialist?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: No influence?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 136948
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, when you, well when you--are, are you--do you think that the medical profession is still the profession to go into?
Speaker 2: Is still what?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Is it a good profession still?  Would you encourage young African Americans to seek a career in, in medicine?
Speaker 2: A little.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  A little?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Now, why do you say a little?
Speaker 2: 'Cause this country is going down the tubes, you know.  People have to charge such high fees to pay malpractice insurance, people can't afford to get sick.  When they do get sick, the doctor always wants his money, you know.  So, you know, I, I wouldn't go overboard trying to encourage them to go into medicine.
Story_ID: 136949
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And if you were coming along now, is there a career that you would choose instead of, you know, if you were, you know, yourself but in a, you know, different age?  Would you choose a different career now?
Speaker 2: I might, but what career, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Baseball star?
Speaker 2: Well, if I had started that earlier, I might have tried it.  At least, I put it like this, I could baseball as well as these guys making these millions of dollars now.
Speaker 1: What have been the greatest obstacles for you in your life?  And it could be an event, or it can be a character hurdle.  What is--
Speaker 2: I really don't know what the greatest obstacles are or have been.  I really can't answer that.
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: I can't answer that.
Story_ID: 136950
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Dr. Duke, with--you know, you were saying that you would--I would like to take us just sort into a reflective period right now.  And I'm wondering when you look at the--I mean when you look at the black community now, and, you know, we can even say Washington, D.C.'s, you know, community and this is a community that you were born increase and raised in and, you know, have a career and raised kids in.  Now, I'm wondering when you look at the community, what hopes and/or concerns do you have for the black community?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by what concerns do I have.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  What hopes do you have for it?
Speaker 2: Everything will work itself out, but it's a gradual thing.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Do you think that, you know, that integration was good for the black community?
Speaker 2: It had its moments.  I would put it eighty-five to ninety-five, good, yes.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  But, you know, the reason I'm asking that is you had said, you know, you think back over at, you know, the black community you knew and that grew up with, when you think back on it, you--that community was self-sufficient. It didn't really need anything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You know, outside.  And now, the community has been integrated, and I'm wondering, you know, do you think the community is better off for it or worse off for it?
Speaker 2: It all depends on what areas you're talking about.  In some areas is better and some areas it isn't.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  But if you could direct the chart, chart for the black community going forward, what would you like to see happen?  You know, because for future generations?
Speaker 2: I don't know because I don't know what avenues they would take to get there.  I don't know.  That's a hard question to answer.
Story_ID: 136951
Speaker 1: Have you liked your life, sir?
Speaker 2: Have I what?
Speaker 1: Have you liked your life, when all is said and done, have you liked your life?
Speaker 2: Have I liked it?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I would say, yes.  People who don't like their lives, go ahead and usually take them.
Story_ID: 136952
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  I want to ask you, sir, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: After I'm gone, it doesn't make any difference what it is.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  What do you want?  Can you look at Nefertiti instead of me.  Can you turn around a little bit and just look at her.  Okay.  What do you want to be remembered for?  What do you want people to have said about, you know, Dr. Leslie Duke?  What do you want them to say?
Speaker 2: The only thing that they can say, one, he was a good fellow, you know.  What else would I want them to say?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And he was a good fellow because dot, dot, dot.  Because of what?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing was 'cause he was a good, understanding doctor; he knew his limitations; he would admit them; and I don't know.
Story_ID: 136953
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Sir, your, your mother [Jennie Duke], she passed away when?
Speaker 2: 1973.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So she was able to see you when you, you know, as a, as a physician?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So what did she, what were--I know she was proud, but did she ever talk about the child who gave her--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  --trouble and how he had developed into this fine young man?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Your brothers have they--what did they end up doing?
Speaker 2: [Earland] Alvin [Duke] worked for Internal Revenue [Service] for thirty-something years and--
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Is that the oldest son?
Speaker 2: That's the youngest one.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Oh, the youngest, okay.
Speaker 2: And the oldest one, James [Duke, Jr.] ran--drove a cab most of the time.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  So why do you think you were, you know, and I don't know mean this, but why were you the most successful? What happened?  What do you think that happened?
Speaker 2: One reason is because I had the opportunities.
Speaker 1: How did you have more opportunity in that you all three of you grew up in the same family, in the same area?  How did you have more opportunity?
Speaker 2: Because of the fact when I--well, for the first thing, I went in the service.  The service paid for six-and-a-half years of college education, and the other thing was I was at the right place at the right time when the man wanted me to take and go on the labor crew 'cause otherwise I would have been government employee.
Story_ID: 133050
Speaker 1: First photo shows my family.  That's Leslie [Duke], Jr.; my wife, Dolores [Douglass Duke]; my daughter, Lori [Duke]; and myself and the dog is named Duke.
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  And how is Lori spelled?
Speaker 1: L-O-R-I.
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  See now, Nefertiti [Makenta] and Ivan [Katz], anytime you have a proper name, you need to be sure to get a spelling particularly if there's more than one variant.  Even Smith, even that, you know, with a Y or something.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Can you spell your wife's name also?
Speaker 2: D-O-L-O-R-E-S.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And your son's?
Speaker 2: L-E-S-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Thank you.  Dr. Duke, when was this taken, do you remember?
Speaker 2: 1972.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Great.  Okay.  Any particular occasion or just a family--
Speaker 2: No, this is just a family picture taken soon after we moved here.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  Next photo.  Why don't you pull the other one out and set that against the back.  There you go.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure what the general's name is, but that is presentation of the citation for the invasion of Iwo Jima [Japan].
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  When this take place, this photo?
Speaker 2: 1970--1979, I think.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  And why were you presented the award?
Speaker 2: Well, the whole invasion force received a presidential citation and, we hadn't received ours, and this was issued, I think, back in 1947.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's myself and my two brothers.  I'm on the left; my younger brother, [Earland] Alvin [Duke], is in the middle and my older brother, James [Duke, Jr.], is on the right.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  When was this taken?
Speaker 2: Let's see, it had to be taken somewhere 1994.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Any particular occasion?
Speaker 2: I cannot tell you.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Alvin is spelled A-L-V-I-N?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Now, Nefertiti and Ivan, you guys are going to take over and control the process, okay.
Speaker 2: That was--you ready?
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Sure.
Speaker 2: That was my graduation from medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] in 1957.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  And do you know where it was taken, the photo?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been taken at the medical school.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  It was taken in 1957, right?
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS:  Did you say when or where, Ivan?
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS: Go ahead.  Do your thing.
Speaker 1: And that was taken in January of 1957.  That was my wedding day.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And where did you get married?
Speaker 1: At St. Luke's church.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  In what city?
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C. (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  I'm not sure how we want to go about this.  I know this is your mother [Jennie Duke] right here?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And this is her in both of these pictures?
Speaker 1: No, that's my aunt and that's her grandmother.  The one is Alvin and the older one is James.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No, but go from left to right?  Is it Alvin?
Speaker 1: Alvin is on the left.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Leslie and James?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Approximately what year was this, 1929?
Speaker 2: 1929.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  And the military picture, then?
Speaker 2: That's when I was in New Orleans [Louisiana], I think.  Christmas of 1943.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Basic training?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And where were the three, when you were younger, was that in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Okay.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  We're going to focus on this one here.
Speaker 2: I guess it's--that's the medical class, I think, in freshman year, 1953.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  At Howard University Medical School [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Howard, yeah.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Anybody significant stand out to you there?
Speaker 2: Me.
Speaker 1: Where are you then?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Look at the monitor.  Can you see yourself in there?
Speaker 2: Let me put my glasses on.  I don't have my glasses.
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: I'm in the middle.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Are you ready to go to the next one?
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Miss Jennie Duke.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And can you spell her name?
Speaker 2: J-E-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And about how old was she in this photo?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Any idea where it was taken?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my aunt Gertrude Freeman [ph.].
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  On the left or the right?
Speaker 2: On the right.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.  That's Gertrude Freeman right there, if you look at the monitor?  On the right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Gertrude Freeman?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  And then next to her?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's grandmother, Jane Chew [ph.].
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Okay.  And this here is your uncle, correct?
Speaker 2: No, that's my grandfather.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And his name?
Speaker 2: Meade Dowling, M-E-A-D-E.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And do you know how old he was then or when--
Speaker 2: Old as the hills.  No, he was eighty-something.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  In that photo?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Now, was that taken in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was taken right there at 5th and (unclear).
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Can you get the one down right hand corner--left hand corner?
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  You?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  Thank you, doctor.
Speaker 2: And that's my picture in 19--well, one of them is 19--that one is about 1953, my freshman year in med school.  And that one was, probably, in 1957 when I graduated.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.  And the one on the stairs?
Speaker 2: And that was 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure when that one was.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  Just tell us what we're looking at, even though it's written on there.
Speaker 2: You're looking at my picture in 1950--
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  All right.  Is there anything in here?  I see one golf picture over here.
Speaker 1: That was taken in Texas, but I'm not sure what year.
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  Do you know where in Texas?
Speaker 1: Houston.
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  Houston, Texas.  Okay.  Who were the people from left to right?
Speaker 1: I don't know who that gentleman is, but that's Lynn--Dr. Linwood Rayford Dr. William Brown [ph.], Dr. Hilton Wilson [ph.] and myself.
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  So Hilton Wilson was a good friend of yours and he was the doctor that you replaced--
Speaker 1: At Walter Reed [National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  Anything else about that relationship?
Speaker 1: No.  Association meeting in--
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  National Medical Association meeting?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Houston, Texas in 1967.
Speaker 2: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 1: It was the year the National Association meeting.  It was a golf tournament.
Speaker 2: SCOTT STEARNS:  Right.  Thank you, doctor.  Any others?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Do you have anything with you at your office or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  At Walter Reed?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Why are you so definite about that, Dr. Duke?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  You're sure there's no pictures of you at Walter Reed?
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  Guys, let's get it all together.  Can you repeat yourself and in that you give Corky, but it's Leslie, sort of in quotes, "Corky" Duke""?
Speaker 2: Leslie "Corky" Duke, and Lori Duke, and I think it was taken in 1963.
Speaker 1: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  And how old were they, and where was it taken?
Speaker 2: I don't know where it was taken.  Lori looks like when she was one year-old and Corky would have been, what, 1962, five.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  Okay.  I know one of those guys.
Speaker 2: That's Leslie, Jr.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Leslie, Jr. Duke.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that's your father.  I don't know who the other guy is.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Julius Richardson?
Speaker 2: No, I'm talking about--I don't know who the other fellow is.  Do you know him?
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  No, I don't.  So you would say it's Leslie Duke, Leslie Corky Duke?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Julius Richardson and then unidentified person.  Do you know what year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but it had to be within the past couple of years.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  So in 2000?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Occasion?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  He doesn't know.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's my daughter, Lori, with her baby.  I guess that's her baby daughter, Jasmine.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.  Do you know what hospital?
Speaker 2: It was probably taken--that wasn't taken in the hospital.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Do you know where and how old the baby was?
Speaker 2: The baby was only about a couple of weeks old.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  How about the baby's name?
Speaker 2: Jasmine.
Speaker 1: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Jasmine, last name?
Speaker 2: Duke--I mean, Roberts.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And that's Jasmine Roberts.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.  Let's go ahead and start from the bottom here.
Speaker 2: And that's my wife and I, Dolores Duke; Leslie Duke, Sr. and it was taken--let's see ten, twelve years ago, I guess.  So what was twelve years ago?
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  This one down here.  This one down here.
Speaker 2: That's my wife and I, that's me and Dolores.
Speaker 1: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Duke.  And the one above right is my daughter's wedding and--
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: IVAN KATZ:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's see--I guess she got married twelve years ago, thirteen years ago.  What is this?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)?
Speaker 1: She got married in 19--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)?
Speaker 1: No.  It would have been 1990--1991.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Okay.  And where did she get married?  Do you know where the service was?
Speaker 1: She got married in a chapel at Walter Reed, but that was taken here.  That's the thing up in the front room.
Speaker 2: JULIEANNA RICHARDSON:  Okay.  You need to go--I don't remember hearing by person by person, left to right, unless I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay Leslie Duke, Jr., Lori Roberts, myself, Dr. Duke and my wife, Dolores Duke.
Speaker 2: NEFERTITI MAKENTA:  Thank you very much.
