Story_ID: 220277
Speaker 1: We're gonna get started by stating that my name is Jodi Merriday, and I'm your interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and there are no observers.  Please state and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: It's Jocelyn, J-O-C-E-L-Y-N, Alane, A-L-A-N-E, Dorsey, D-O-R-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Do I have to (laughter)?  It's 10/30/50 [October 20, 1950], Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 23rd, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: WSB-TV [Channel 2], Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 220278
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish kinds of questions.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Just bear with me, they're meant to warm the process.  Could you tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  Hamburgers.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Duh (laughter). That's it.
Speaker 1: That's your favorite one (simultaneous) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 220279
Speaker 1: We're going to begin the interview by exploring your family background.  Could you tell me about your mother? What was her name, where was she born and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Her name is Helena Fredericka Harris Dorsey.  She grew up in Ecorse, Michigan on--and moved to Paulding, Ohio in northern Ohio and lived on a farm.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: I know that it was a very rural farm life where she walked to school several miles, about six miles to school.  Attended the only high school. It was a very small, small town.  Had three siblings--or, has three siblings.  And grew up in rural America.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Fun loving, humorous, intelligent, feisty, defiant.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you growing up that you'd like to share today?
Speaker 2: She shared many stories with me growing up.  And I--that's probably what has shaped me today.  The biggest--I think the biggest thing that I know about her is how close the family was, and how much time they actually spend together, and what they did together, and how important family was.  The funniest story--or not the funniest, but the story I remember most, is the story of she and my father [HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey], and how my grandfather [William Harris] didn't like my father, because he was a big city guy, supposedly, from Houston, Texas.  He was from the South, they were from the North.  He didn't know the family, didn't know the family background.  And as you can imagine in a small town, if you didn't know somebody's mother or father that was very difficult.  And how--she, in defiance of him, married my father.  And he didn't go to the wedding.  The wedding was in their house (laughter) in her parents' house, and he didn't go to the wedding, and how much he regretted it later when he saw, you know, how good my father was to my mother.  How many years they have been married.  They've been married over fifty-five years, and what they did with their children.
Story_ID: 220280
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What was his name and where was he born?
Speaker 2: His name is [HistoryMaker] Robert Sherwood Dorsey.  He was born in Lafayette, Louisiana; grew up in Houston, Texas; was very poor; was raised by his aunt most of the time, who was from New Orleans [Louisiana] and moved to Texas; and really grew up under the wings of neighbors, because often his mother [Rita Allen Sterling] wasn't there.  Neighbors who happened to be educators who stressed the importance of education to him, and as a result, he went into the engineering program at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], went off to war, came back, found that he had no money, his mother had spent all his money.  And begged [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] to bring him on on a scholarship, because he had no money, and because he really wanted to get the engineering degree that he couldn't get in his home state of Texas because of segregation.  Ohio State accepted him, because he told them he could play football, and he became one of the few foot--there were only two black football players at the time in the late '40s [1940s], and he played football for Ohio State University.  Later, was taken under the wing of Woody Hayes.  Woody was kinda like my godfather when I was at school.  And he became the first black on the board of trustees of Ohio State University.  The first black alumni president, national president of Ohio State University.  In fact now has a terrace in his name at the alumni hall at the school.  So he's had a wonderful history, a rich history of how he has turned struggle, and he has struggled continuously because of his position of being poor and black, and how he has overcome those struggles to become who is and hopefully instilled that in me.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Well, as you can imagine (laughter), he's my hero.  I'd describe him as a sensitive, warm, charismatic, intelligent, persistent and loving.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that he shared with you growing up that you'd like to share with us today?
Speaker 2: I think I just told you the story (laughter).  Those are the stories that, you know, he has shared with me about how difficult it was for him during the time and how important it was for him to get an education, because he didn't want the same thing to happen to his children.  And he did this all for us.  So those are the stories, you know, he shared with me: that during college he had one pair of pants.  He was constantly washing out his underwear, because he was so poor he didn't have anything else to wear.  He also had to hitchhike to school.  He was a football player on a scholarship, but because of segregation he couldn't live in the dormitories, and he had to hitchhike to school just to get to school.  So, if you can imagine all those barriers that he had to overcome just to get an education and how determined he was to really get that education.  You know, there's a lot of history there that we stand on the shoulders of that we often forget.  And those are the stories I remember.
Story_ID: 220281
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: On my mother's [Helena Harris Dorsey] side, boy, I can go back probably about seven generations, not by memory, but it's written down.  My grandmother had a very large family.  This is my mother's mother, had a very large family with thirteen brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Emma Gretchen Vinegar.  And she-now, don't ask me where she was born (laughter).  Her father was one of the ancestors of the slaves who went over to Canada.  He was a high warden.  He went over to Canada, because Canada had freed the slaves forty years before what is now the United States, and so the slaves would go across the Detroit River into Amherstburg, Canada.  I'm digressing now, but kinda giving you a sense of history.  And there were eighty thousand that went over and--to Canada and settled all along Amherstburg, Windsor [Canada], Toronto [Canada].  And forty thousand of them never came back.  And my grandfather--yeah my grandfather was one of the ancestors of those forty thousand who never came back and actually lived in Canada.  So there's a whole line of our family, the Harris family, that is in Amherstburg and in and around Ontario [Canada] and some in Detroit [Michigan], and as a result, my grandmother's family moved back into the Michigan area from Canada which was where my mother was born.
Speaker 1: And what was her husband's name?
Speaker 2: His name was (laughter), oh boy, we just called him grandpa, so now I gotta (laughter), Boyd [ph.] Vinegar.  That's what his name was.  And then she was also married to my mother's father who was Harris, William Harris.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about the ethnicity of the origins of your family.  Do you know of any African American--any Native American heritage or any other mixes?
Speaker 2: My great-great-grandmother on my mother's side was a Blackfoot Indian, and she married a French fur trader (laughter).  So that's about what I know.  I have a picture of her: very dark, very stately, very tall.  Our family is very tall.  And I have a picture of her and have seen it ever since I was a child.
Story_ID: 220282
Speaker 1: What were your paternal grandparents names and what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Very little.  My paternal grandmother's name is Rita Sterling, who is my father's [HistoryMaker Robert Sherman Dorsey] mother.  He never knew his father.  And he met him I think when he was forty years old, and that was it.  So I don't know a lot about that side of the family unfortunately.  There is a part of the Louisiana family from my father's side that is still in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and Lafayette, Louisiana called the Gilbos [ph.] and other names that I don't know, but I hope to explore very soon, because I'm very anxious to find out a little bit more.
Story_ID: 220283
Speaker 1: Are there any stories, legends or songs that were passed down through your family?
Speaker 2: The stories are the stories of--on my mother's [Helena Harris Dorsey] side--of how our family sort of got started.  And the story was that there was a brother and sister on a Virginia plantation called the Chambers [ph.] plantation.  And the sister was the daughter of a slave and the master of the house.  So of course that was a very forbidden thing to do.  She was shipped over to France because they were afraid that she would be killed and lived in France for some time.  And her brother, Josiah Chambers [ph.], was the one who actually started our side of the family.  She came back later.  We don't know quite what happened to her.  But we did follow Josiah Chambers, and that's where our family starts.  And he migrated to Canada as well because slavery was very prevalent.  He actually formed two families.  He had a family in the United States, and he had a family in Canada.  So there's in fact a manuscript that's been written about the family in Canada that's quite extensive.  I don't think it's ever been published, but it's type-written which is pretty interesting.  And we've found from that account and from the family that we had been looking for that we have double cousins.  I mean, you know, we have two sides that have married two sides so it's pretty interesting and, you know, we can go back to that.  So we often talk about that and the fact that they were very lively people, very fun-loving people that seems to have passed down to our Chambers' generation today.
Story_ID: 220284
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: I have sort of two memories because I grew up in the city and then during the summer I grew up on my grandparents' [Emma Gretchen Vinegar and Boyd (ph.) Vinegar] farm in northern Ohio.  So my fondest memories are probably the farm and having a great understanding of what rural life was all about.  I can remember I thought it was a big deal when my grandfather wrote my name over the cow stall.  You know, he had dairy cattle and that meant that I had to take care of that particular cow.  I didn't realize the burden that that name came with it when you get up at five o'clock in the morning and you have to milk the cow because their udders will burst, and if their udders burst then obviously the cow is not any good anymore.  So every morning I was there you have to get up so early in the morning, and I understood now why you had steak and eggs for breakfast because you were up so early in the morning and you worked literally from sun-up to sun-down with all of the chores.  Of course, I was lucky because it was only three months out of the year, so I could go home and really relax the rest of the time with city-living.  And to be able to compare the city-living to the country-living to my friends was just amazing.  I had friends who didn't even realize that milk came from cows.  They thought it came from the grocery store.  So, you know, I spent a lot of time explaining where things came from.  Had to gather the eggs, we had two hundred chickens in a chicken house and I'd have to get up in the morning and get the eggs and, you know, that was quite an ordeal especially when you had a couple of roosters who didn't want you in there in the first place.  So (laughter) there were a lot of fond memories.  I could go on and on about the farm that I really enjoyed, and I think has really helped me become the person that I am today in that grounded work ethic that, you know, the rural America had, not unlike urban, but it was, it was much more embedded because of what you had to do to survive.
Story_ID: 220285
Speaker 1: Could you describe what your family life was like? Any holidays, special events or something related to your daily life?
Speaker 2: I can tell you for people who have ever seen 'The Cosby Show' and didn't think it existed, because there was a lot of criticism when Bill Cosby first did 'The Cosby Show' because they didn't believe that African Americans lived that way, you know.  I look back now and realize I probably have one of the most fortunate childhoods ever.  I had two loving parents [Helena Harris Dorsey and HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] who always expressed love.  We grew up on a street where, I found out, because of segregation--I didn't realize it at the time, I just thought, you know, everybody lived on the same street--but what I realized was they had no opportunity to buy houses anywhere else and so most of the professionals in a small town called Lincoln Heights, Ohio had nowhere else to live unless they wanted to live in the projects.  So they bought--went in together, they bought property together.  They couldn't get loans from a bank so they pooled their resources and bought this property, and then there was an architect who was my godfather who designed most of the houses.  My dad is an engineer, so they supervised most of the construction of the houses.  It's a phenomenal story how they all came together, there were about a dozen of them that came together and built this neighborhood so that their children could be in the type of environment that they wanted them to be.  So I grew up on a street that had--was all African Americans.  There were about twenty to thirty houses.  It was a no outlet street.  They were doctors, lawyers, architect, engineers, mechanics, all sorts of professions.  Basically all grew up as one family.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that street?
Speaker 2: The name of the street, and we talk about writing a book about it.  But the name of the street was Forest Park Drive and it was in Cincinnati, Ohio.  And if you look now at the siblings, all of us that have grown up, it's amazing to see what we have all done with our lives.  And we have often talked about writing about the street, because we all got together, we all went trick or treating together, we all had Christmas carols at one end of the street that we'd go around the whole street.  The entire neighborhood were like brothers and sisters.  So I grew up with people, twenty-five to thirty people, that today I can still call my brothers and sisters.  You know, we have been in their houses; we know their parents; their parents know us.  It was just an unbelievable childhood, and I am, I am just grateful that I had that opportunity to grow up in that manner.
Story_ID: 220286
Speaker 1: Could you please give your siblings' names in birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, and I gave you my name, [HistoryMaker] Jocelyn [Dorsey].  My sister who is six years--five years younger is Karen Dorsey--Karen Elizabeth Dorsey; she's a veterinarian.  Thirteen years younger than that is my youngest sister, Robin Dorsey--Robin Loraine Dorsey, and she is a graphic designer in Naples, Florida.
Story_ID: 220287
Speaker 1: Can you describe a little bit more about the block that you were living on.  Were there any particular neighbors or people in your community that you remark, or any sights, sounds or smells that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I think the trees.  There were a lot of trees, and there was a big creek that always ran back behind the house.  And in the creek, I'll never forget, were tadpoles.  So we'd (laughter) go down and get the tadpoles and we'd always bring them home and watch them turn into frogs.  You know, they do turn into frogs.  And my mother [Helena Harris Dorsey] would be so upset because we brought them, because she didn't like those types of things, didn't like snakes or any type of critters.  So we would always somehow hide them in--in her car.  I--the smells I remember, believe it or not, are the zoo.  We lived very close to the Cincinnati Zoo [Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And so when I hear tigers roar and lions roar, I've heard that.  I used to go to sleep at night listening to that, because the zoo was so close that when you had your windows open and were getting fresh air, the animals roar at night.  So those are some of the sounds I remember.  And always hoped that they wouldn't get out, but I could hear them roar.  It was almost like being in Africa.
Story_ID: 220288
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: It was a small school called Rockdale Elementary [School; Rockdale Academy Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio], which was within walking distance of my house.  It was--the first school I went to actually, Rockdale was not built at the time, and I went to school in a Jewish temple, in the basement of a Jewish temple.  So I came to know the Jewish culture at a very early age, because we integrated with the other students who were there who happened to be attending the Jewish school.  The Jewish community was very open to our community at the time.  And because we didn't have a school building and we went to school in the basement of the Jewish temple.
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that you recall?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Miss Douglas [ph.] was my fifth-grade teacher (laughter).  Miss Jones [ph.] was my sixth-grade math teacher, she was one of my favorite teachers.  Miss Douglas, of course, is one of my best teachers that I remember.  She was language arts, social studies and health.  And Miss Jones though was my favorite teacher, because she was a math teacher, and there were very few African American women math teachers.  And she was over six feet tall, and because I was tall growing up, and I always felt like I was the tallest, it was great to see someone who was much taller than me, who everybody admired, and so she was kind of my role model because she was very professional and very tall.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Oh an excellent student (laughter).  I was straight A's until I hit college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and then I--and you looked surprised.  No, I was actually a very good student because I was very sheltered in high school [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], I wasn't really exposed to a lot of things, because again when you live in this little homogenous community, you know, and everybody is just goody two shoes you don't really get exposed until you get away from your parents.  And I think once I went into school the bottom fell out.
Speaker 1: So was your elementary school, was it K [kindergarten] through five, or was it just elementary and then high school?
Speaker 2: It was K through five.  In fact my mother taught at the school.  She didn't teach us but was a teacher at the school.
Story_ID: 220289
Speaker 1: And then you went on to a middle school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I went to--no, there was a school, a college prep school in Cincinnati [Ohio] called Walnut Hills [High School, Cincinnati, Ohio]; it still exists. And at fifth grade you took a--some type of a scholastic achievement test.  If you passed the test, regardless of the district that you lived in, you could attend the school.  So I was very fortunate to go to a school that principally was all college preparatory.  You know, there were advanced placement courses and college preparatory courses, and you were in a diverse setting of students from all over the city.  And that started at sixth grade and you had to maintain a certain average, I think it was that of three-point average in order to stay in the school (laughter).  So, you know, the mean average was three points and you can imagine it was extremely competitive.  But I was very fortunate to be able to attend then because my parents [Helena Harris Dorsey and HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] were not rich and they couldn't afford to send me to a private school.  But this school was probably better than all the private schools in the city.  In fact, most parents were trying to get their kids into this school.  It was called Walnut Hills--
Story_ID: 220290
Speaker 1: What was your personality like as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh I was very shy (laughter).  No, as you can probably tell, very outgoing.  Had a--I got in trouble a lot because I grew up with a bunch of guys and so I always wanted to do guy things.  And so I was forever jumping on the back of motorcycles or going off and flying with somebody in a plane, and my father [HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] was very concerned that I was putting my life at risk at a very early age and very upset with the fact that I was putting my life at risk at a very early age.  And so I was--I was constantly getting into things.
Story_ID: 220291
Speaker 1: As you were growing up, did you have any particular dreams or aspirations?  Who did you think you were going to become?
Speaker 2: I actually wanted to become a marine biologist, because I loved the ocean, I love water, I love fish and I grew up around the ocean, growing up partly in Boston [Massachusetts], and then, even in Ohio, going back to the ocean for summers.  And so I had always wanted to have a tie to the ocean and animals.  And I like science.  So who'd of thought that I'd ever been a journalist.  I think the sense of adventure that marine biology, you know, the idea of becoming a marine biologist is really a sense of adventure, and I think perhaps that sense of adventure carried me into the field of journalism which I'm so happy I fell into.  But I'd--it was an accident.  I didn't wanna be an anchor from the time I was little.
Story_ID: 220292
Speaker 1: How did that transition occur? At what moment did you realize that you were (simultaneous) gonna go into journalism?
Speaker 2: (Simultanous) By accident. It actually--I had a roommate who was a journalist.  I was an engineering student at the time, and because my father [HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] was an engineer, and he thought I needed to be an engineer, because he felt that women needed to have nontraditional careers in order to support themselves, because he had always said, you know, "Don't marry a rich guy; be a rich woman."  And so he wanted to school us in that way that we could support ourselves independently and would not have to depend on a man, which is why I was in engineering.  And I really didn't like it, because it was--at the time there was so few women in the field that it was very difficult.  The attitude was not necessarily welcoming.
Speaker 1: What college were you at?
Speaker 2: This was at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  I went--I had no other choice (laughter).  I had to go to Ohio State.  And of course it was very difficult because I was entering the engineering school where my father was an honor student, and I was nowhere close.  I mean I was good in math, but it just wasn't my interest.  And so if you don't have an interest in something, generally you don't do well.  So what happened was, I had a roommate who was from Chicago [Ilinois], and she wanted to be a reporter for the Chicago Tribune.  That's all she ever talked about and, you know, these journalism courses that she took, and so I was asking her, you know, I'd watch her and see what she did, and I was like, "Well, this isn't quite like work at all."  So can I go to class with you and sit in and see what you do, and that was the beginning.  I sat in the class and I'll never forget it was a producer who happened to work with NBC and he was working on the documentary of building the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany].  And he was talking about, you know, his tour in Germany and watching all this.  And I thought, "Gee, how interesting it is!"  I didn't even realize, I really had a love for history.  But I got fascinated about what he was doing and I said, you know, "This sounds like a pretty interesting career."  And at the time, I came up during the '60s [1960s] which was pretty turbulent as you can well imagine.  It was the era of the Vietnam War.  We were war protestors.  College then was very politically active for me.  And so in the age of trying to change the world, because we thought the world was not the way we felt it should be with the war, a senseless war going on, many of our friends going off to war, many of them being drafted, campus unrest of, you know, students wanting more African American studies on campus, all that was going on at the same time.  And so I felt that journalism was the way to express that.  And it was fun for me.  I enjoyed it.  I enjoyed going after the stories.  So, I was geared toward newspaper reporting initially.  Really had no--we didn't have a broadcast major when I was in school, so I really didn't know anything about television and really didn't care because newspaper reporters were kind of sniffy at TV reporters, saying that anybody who went into that field were people who couldn't spell.
Story_ID: 220293
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --high school teachers or was there anyone who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Miss Stanley [ph.] was my biology teacher--(off-camera interruption) Miss Stanley was my biology teacher, and she was probably my biggest influence, because again here is an African American woman at a very elite high school [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] that had very few African American faculty members, much less an African American woman who was teaching biology, botany, physics, chemistry, phys. chem. [physical chemistry], all the sciences, and she was very good.  And I just admired her tremendously, because she was so professional, and she was interesting.  And so, yes, I do remember her.
Story_ID: 220294
Speaker 1: So as you were transitioning from there [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], you'd begun to discuss going to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: There was no discussion (laughter).  It was mandated.  I had to go to Ohio State, and I had to live in a dorm, because my dad [HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] never got to live in one, and so he wanted to make sure that I got the dorm experience even though he didn't.  And you know, during those days nobody wanted to live a dorm; we all wanted to live in apartments.  So yes, I had to live in the dormitory at Ohio State and major in engineering, which I changed to journalism much to my father's chagrin.  I think he's okay with it now.
Speaker 1: And what was that year like, you're entering into Ohio State as a woman of color, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: And what types of things were going on in the climate in that particular community or even politically in the nation?
Speaker 2: Politically, it was a time of great tension.  You know, you were going, you know, I have to think back to the years of--I remember riots.  All the riots were going on in Los Angeles [California], Detroit [Michigan], all over the country.  Burn, baby, burn was the word.  Black power was very popular.  You know, we all wanted to have the big afros like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis.
Speaker 1: Did you have a big afro?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, (laughter) oh yes.  We all had those, you know, out to here.  I have pictures.  And we were very aware and proud of our ethnicity.  It was a time that it was okay to be black with frizzy hair and to be proud of that.  That we didn't have to assimilate necessarily.  Now, it still caused a struggle, because we were young and defiant, but the society really wasn't ready to accept us quite frankly.  You know, I encountered that when I came on the job.
Speaker 1: When you came on the job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When I came on the job in Cincinnati [Ohio] at WKRC-TV [Channel 12] and here at WSB-TV [Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia].  You know, there weren't any blacks in the newsrooms, and certainly, I mean, they were but they were in technical positions, certainly not on the air.  So, you know, that whole era of black is beautiful had an undertone to it with the rest of society saying, "No, it's not, and we're gonna show you that," especially in the South.  So it was an interesting time.  I would not give up that time for the world, because it really opened my eyes in terms of what the reality of the world was.  The harshness of war, what that meant.  We had [Ohio] National Guard on campus.  You know, we were the ones who were--Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] was our sister school.  I was there on campus at Ohio State during the time of the Kent State shooting.  There were riots at the Ohio State campus.  We shut that campus down.  There were police on campus, National Guard.  They were firing the same way they were firing at Kent State.  It was a very, very turbulent time.  And I guess it was a time that we, as young African Americans, were coming into our own--of demanding, you know, that people know our history.  You know, black studies was a big thing that we were demanding that we had at the university because we felt that our history was not being told.  So I came out of that era, out of the Vietnam War era, the flower child era.  You know, the era where drugs were plentiful all over the campuses.  It was unreal.  There was a lot of societal change during that time, and coming up during that time, to me, was a phenomenal experience.  It was very different from what campuses are like now, very serious.  We had very--what we thought were very serious political and civil rights issues.
Story_ID: 220295
Speaker 1: And so, when you were graduating [from The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], you, of course, went from graduation onto the air?
Speaker 2: I actually dropped out (laughter).  I dropped out--actually, what happened was, my senior year--the last quarter of my senior year when I was doing my internship, what is now called internship, I worked summers at the paper and it was an African American weekly paper, historic African American paper.  The publisher, an African American woman, had a dialogue with the general manager of WKRC-TV [Channel 12] in Cincinnati [Ohio], which was my home town.  And he had told her, the story goes, that he had told her that he couldn't find any qualified blacks.  At the time, remember, there's a lot of pressure by civil rights organizations to get people of color on the air.  I didn't know it at the time, I was a young college student, but it was a tremendous amount of pressure.  And so there had been dialogue with this publisher of an African American newspaper and the general manager of a television station about why don't you have people of color on the air.  And he retorted he couldn't find any.  And so she said, "Well, I got one."  And so she took me into the office.  Of course, my parents [Helena Harris Dorsey and HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] are furious, because it was the last quarter of my senior year.  But I had decided that I could always go back and get an education.  I may not have the opportunity for a career.  And so I quit school, because they were only gonna hold the job open for two weeks for me to make a decision.  And so I quit school and started as a reporter at WKRC-TV in Cincinnati.
Story_ID: 220296
Speaker 1: How do you recall your first day [at WKRC-TV, Channel 12, Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I really don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was the climate welcoming, did you feel as if you were belonging, did you feel any sense of hostility? What was your sense (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't--I was so busy learning that it didn't even dawn on me, and I had never been raised to feel less than anybody else.  I'd just never been raised that way, so it never computed with me that there was a problem.  I--it did not exist for me, because I knew I was as good as anyone there.  I knew I was competent, I knew I was capable, so I really didn't see it at first.  But there were vestiges of it.  But I felt that the key to breaking those barriers is having people come to know you as a person.  You know, to put all that stuff beside and get to know me as an individual.  And once you know me as an individual, there is a lot of surprise, that people were surprised that I had the same ambitions they did, I wanted the same thing for my life as they did, I was really no different.  And then the light bulb started going off, and they were going, "Well, you must be one of the only ones, because not everybody of your color can be like that."  And I said, "Well, there are thousands of us, you just haven't gotten to know us."  And so I think when you approach it in that manner, it sort of disarms people because they are not expecting you to come at them that way.  And so I constantly challenged it, because I was like get a grip.  And I think that helped me, that ignorance really helped me just barrel on through get done what I had to get done and to learn what I wanted to learn.  But at times it was very tough, because it was surprising.  It was surprising to me that people were that ignorant.  That simply because of the color of your skin they were going to judge the content of your character.  And I couldn't accept that.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that were allies in that community for you?
Speaker 2: One of them is probably still on the air now in Cincinnati [Ohio], was Elaine Green.  She was a young reporter at the time.  People may know her; there was a time when someone [James Hoskins] stormed into a newsroom [WCPO-TV, Channel 9, Cincinnati, Ohio] and took an anchor hostage, and she was the one that made national news years ago, because someone had stormed into the newsroom, and she continued the newscast.  But she was one and her--at that time her boyfriend, who was a photographer, was another one who basically took me under their wing.  She was very powerful woman, and she basically shielded me.  And the assignment editor, who I didn't even know, respected me because I worked hard.  I was taught to work hard, you know, to do a good job, try always to do your best, all the characteristics that people would want in an employee.  And so he was really the one that was instrumental in recommending me to the job [WSB-TV, Channel 2] here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 220297
Speaker 1: So, how long were you in Cincinnati [Ohio] (simultaneous) before you moved to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven months (laughter), seven months.  And everybody kept saying, "You're not ready to go to the big city," you know, "you're going to the sharks," and, you know, "you'll never survive because Atlanta is a big TV market."  And what they forgot was that I had training in print, so I was grounded in writing and knew how to construct stories and I felt that my training at the university [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] had given me everything, plus my parents [Helena Harris Dorsey and HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] had given me everything that I was armed with to do the job.  And I came here [WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia] and couldn't understand why people thought it was so difficult.
Speaker 1: And you couldn't have been more than twenty-two?
Speaker 2: I was about twenty-two, and it was--coming to the Deep South was a challenge.
Speaker 1: What was some of the challenges? (Simultaneous) What did you encounter?
Speaker 2: First of all, I was from the North, and there really is, you know, a difference between northern experiences and southern experiences.  The problem I had was that, you know, from a southern, even a black southerner's perspective, the view was that I didn't know what was going on, because I'd never experienced segregation, you know, for the most part they didn't know my parents.  They went to predominantly white schools, you know, Ohio State University obviously is not a historically black college.  So now I don't have the historically black college experience, I don't have the southern experience, I'm not one of them.  So I was ostracized by both communities.  I was ostracized by the white community because I was from up north and I talked funny, and they didn't understand me anyway, and because I was black.  And then ostracized by the southern African American community, because I talked funny, and because I was from up north, and because I couldn't have had any relationship to them with a southern experience.  So it was very, very lonely--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --it was very lonely.
Story_ID: 220298
Speaker 1: Did you feel as if the barriers were more so related to race than gender?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Both?
Speaker 2: When I was working in the newsroom [at WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia], of course, there were only two women.  (Laughter) There were only two women in the editorial side in terms of reporting and anchoring.  And so you can imagine, you know, I can--I can remember, jokingly, some people telling me, "Well, that's why we didn't wanna have women in the newsroom."  They didn't go so far as to say, "That's why we didn't wanna have blacks in the newsroom."  But there were times when I was challenged both as a black and as a woman.  I had photographers who would embarrass me when I would go out on stories, because I was a photographer, but most of them didn't believe it, because I couldn't touch the gear here because of union regulations.  So they automatically assumed that I had lied on my resume.  So they were constantly--you know, I had one photographer literally on a news conference that basically handed me the camera and said, you know, "Well, if you can shoot, why don't you shoot this?"  And after I did and went back and told everybody what happened, then that kinda changed that story, because I did embarrass him with it.  You know, I had phone calls, you know, when I came here--when I was hired as a general manager told me, "We didn't hire you with an afro, so we don't expect you to have one."  And my retort to him was, "As long as I am clean, neat and accurate, I don't think you should have an issue with my hair."  Well needless to say you don't say that to a general manager and expect to be a six o'clock anchor, which I didn't because they felt that I was too militant and that, you know, they were afraid of what would happen if they gave me that kind of control on the air.  Obviously if you are a six o'clock anchor you're gonna be a very powerful person, and they felt that I was a little bit too outspoken to have that position.  I don't regret it, because I think it took my career in a totally different direction.  But there were things like that that were constantly facing me.
Story_ID: 220299
Speaker 1: Then you had the--the pressure of stories.  There were stories I couldn't cover [for WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia], because it was the burning of a cross on top of Stone Mountain [Georgia] with the Grand Wizard of the Klu Klux Klan [KKK], and they were afraid for my life.  I covered one story, I'll never forget, with J.B. Stoner who was a white supremacist.  And at that time, you know, here I am a young kid--what do I know about white supremacy?  I'd never come up against it.  And the assignment editor said to me, "Well, are you sure you wanna cover this story?  Because he's a white supremacist," and I was like, "what the heck is a white supremacist?"  Well, I quickly found out.  It was in The Biltmore Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia], which is still standing today, which was originally the headquarters of WSB.  And I walked into the ballroom, and I should've known something was wrong when state patrol were all over the place.  I was the only black reporter.  My photographer was white, scared to death.  I walked into the auditorium with 250 people.  And there were posters all over the wall that said, "Kill the niggers."  "Down with the niggers."  And I'm looking at these posters not really believing what I'm seeing, because I'd heard about it, but I didn't know, you know, that that was really still in existence in the '70s [1970s], now this is 1973-74 [1974] in Atlanta, Georgia.  And everybody got up; they were all upset because I had entered, and they started shouting profanities at me and, you know, "Kill the nigger," and, "what's the nigger doing in here?"  And here I am covering a story of someone who is announcing their candidacy for the [lieutenant] governor of Georgia, and we had to cover the story because of FCC [Federal Communications Commission] requirements that say you have to cover all political candidates announcing for office.  So you can imagine, I was terrified.  I mean, I was terrified, and to this day, I'm friends with a photographer, not my photographer, my photographer was like, "Don't say anything to me, I don't know ya."  But a woman got up and yelled, "Get her outta here before we catch sickle cell anemia."  And I thought it was hysterical.  You know, and so I am an arrogant, most stupid arrogant kid, and I started laughing, because I was laughing at the ignorance.  And all of a sudden they got angry; a woman spit in my direction.  A photographer from another station got up and started yelling at--you know, "Leave her alone," and called profanities back.  He was a white photographer, and they carried him out bodily.  They picked him up and carried him out.  And finally Stoner said, "Look," you know, "they're here to cover the story. They're gonna be gone in a few minutes," and I'm sitting there just, you know, I'm like, should I leave, should I go, what should I do?  And so I told my photographer, "Keep the camera rolling," but realized that the story was him announcing for governor.  It was not the story of the uproar that was created because a black woman walked into the room.  Look how times have changed, and that was in the early '70s [1970s].  So these were the things we had to endure.  I've been to places where I had to cover another candidate at a country club, and they tried to tell me to go around to the back door.  Well not being with segregation--you know, I didn't understand what they were saying to me at first, because I'd never been in a place where I had to go into the back door.  And they finally explained to me that they didn't allow black members at the country club, and the only people who were black were the help, and they went through the back door.  Therefore, I was supposed to go through the back door.  This was when Bert Lance was running for governor.  He since became the [U.S. Department of] Transportation secretary under [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.].  So these were things that we had to endure every day.  Every day, we were reminded, you know, who we were and what some people felt our place was in this place we call Atlanta--
Story_ID: 220300
Speaker 1: What are some of the stories that you think are by virtue of the fact that you are African American and a woman, you were privileged to tell?  What were the environments that you went in where you felt at home, golden opportunities to highlight our community issues or political events that were major in African American history?
Speaker 2: I think I have been privileged to have a wonderful relationship with Mrs. King, Mrs. Coretta Scott King and to hopefully, one day, tell her story from a perspective of a journalist covering her and realizing the struggles.  A lot of us take her for granted.  They don't understand what she went through.  Things that she did behind the scenes.  She is one of the reasons that I'm in the position that I'm in today.  And I got to see politics at work, real political power, when she engineered basically my job at this station.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?
Speaker 2: There was a lot of controversy.  I was--I had a news director, and there was a lot of turmoil.  And many times you have news directors that come in and they think the best way to fix things is to fix the anchors.  And having been one of the first anchors in Atlanta [Georgia] and to all of a sudden be told that, you know, we don't think you're gonna measure up anymore.  And literally, not to have your contract expire, but the way it was done was not professional.  And they found out about it.  I didn't tell them, but apparently, the community is pretty small, and it got back to Mrs. King.  And she was very upset.  And it wasn't because she knew me personally, it was because she felt that she knew me professionally.  And so she went to bat for me when nobody else did.  And I'm talking about all the other leaders, the African American men in this community watched the story unfold and did nothing.  And she was the one who stepped forward and made it an issue, which ultimately resulted in the general manager being fired, and ultimately resulted in me getting into a management position here at the station [WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia].  Because literally, I remember there was a board member that called me and said, you know, "What do you want to do at the station?  Do you want to continue to anchor?" and I said, "no, not as long as I live.  Because, you know, I will want to be judged on my competency and not at the whim of a news director.  So I wanna be able to determine my fate."  Secondly, that if you're gonna make an impact in television, it is not as an anchor.  You have to be making the decisions.  You have to have input into the decisions to make a change.  And so that was my goal here, was to really try to make sure that the images, at least, that were reflected on this television station were images that I thought, as African Americans, we would not be ashamed of.  I continue to fight those battles.  Continuously--
Story_ID: 220301
Speaker 1: When you look at newscasts here, you see images that are very disturbing sometimes because they--they're so prominent and you don't--I don't feel that there is a balance often.  So I'm constantly struggling with trying to sensitize reporters, anchors, producers to how to strike the balance of how you present the African American community.  I had the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What are some of your suggestions?  How do you best present?
Speaker 1: Don't parade these people with shower caps on their head and gold teeth when you can go out and find somebody else.  There's always an argument of, "Oh, I'm being objective."  You're never objective when you cover a story.  You always are making choices.  So make sure the choices that you make are sensitive to the images that we create.  Media is very powerful, and we can create images by showing them repetitively, and showing them repetitively, you know, many times gives people the impression of that's the way we are.  Not all of us run around with shower caps on our head with gold teeth and gold chains hanging out, and splitting verbs.  So if we're going to show that, and we understand those are stories that people see that often occur in poor communities, not to stereotype, but it's a reality.  But okay, let's show the balance.  Where are you gonna get a surgeon talking about [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton's heart transplant [sic. quadruple coronary artery bypass].  Why don't we get a black cardiologist talking about that?  You know, there are many of them, and they are world-renowned.  So, you know, I'm constantly giving advice in terms of here's some people I would suggest you talk to.  And fortunately, the fortunate part about it is that we now have a management who cares about that kind of stuff, because people don't understand that most people think of diversity as affirmative action.  Diversity is who we are.  We're different people from different cultures, not just African Americans, we have people from Europe, Asia, I mean, Latin America.  We are truly a melting pot, and if a business is gonna be successful, then they've got to tap into who their audience really is.  And you have to satisfy your customer and your audience and to realize that we are not a homogenous nation, we are very diverse I think is a smart thing to do.  And I--our company, I think, recognizes the value of diversity.  And so fortunately, the discussions that we have do have some impact, because the people now realize the value in diversity.
Story_ID: 220302
Speaker 1: When you said, "Men," the men in the (laughter) African American community in terms of them going to bat as it related to this transition that you made from anchor to management [at WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia], was there a particular reason why such emphasis was placed on that? Have you encountered resistance from African American men?
Speaker 2: No, I just remembered during that time that Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King was fighting these battles.  And the battle was basically removing an African American position from television.  It wasn't me.  It was--you know, now we have one less black anchor.  Here we go down the slippery slope, and if we don't stop the slippery slope before it starts to slide, then we're gonna lose the battle.  So she was very smart in realizing that this was a battle. First of all, she could afford to fight because, you know, I was a person who went to work all the time; there wasn't a lot of controversy about me; she could go to bat.  But the problem was convincing--because she was waging the war as an African American woman.  Believe it or not, she had a hard time getting support from many of the African American males.  I'll tell ya one who was really by her side the whole time was [HistoryMaker] the Honorable Andrew Young.  But he had been by her side since her kids were little.  He was helping when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died; he practically was the father to their children, because he was one of the few who stuck with her after he died.  Everybody else ran off and started doing their own thing and forgot about her.  And this is not her telling it; this is what I have observed.  And she wouldn't dare cast a stone at someone. But when you understand what she was coming up against as an African American woman--and I remember her having to call me and tell me, you know, "Call this person, tell them you need them.  You have to beg them, and tell them you really need them to help you fight in this battle."  And I was like, "I don't wanna call them, they didn't come to my--." She said, "No honey, now you gotta understand the politics," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: The southern way, perhaps.
Speaker 2: You know, "This is how you gotta do it, let them think that they are in charge."  And I mean, she was a master at it.  And so I did what she said, and I noticed what started happening, and finally she was able to get a large group of folks together, really to stand together to go and talk to the management of WSB[EH1].  And when she led the group, basically the general manager at the time told her that he didn't tell her how to run his television station.  Wrong, so she just took it upstairs, as I understand it, and went to our owners, who happened to be women (laughter).  And understand the politics, because our company is unabashedly a Democratic company.  I mean our founder was the running mate for [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt [FDR].  Actually he [James M. Cox] was the nominee for president, and FDR was his running mate.  So it's a very political family, and at the time, the Kings were a very political family that were helping the Democrats.  You know, there's a lot of politics that you learn about when you go under there.  So unbeknownst to our general manager, she was just doing that as a formality, and so she took it upstairs, and the rest is history.  And I've been a manager now at WSB since 1983.
Story_ID: 220303
Speaker 1: Let's come back to this, this notion of the southern way.  What is your perspective, given the fact that you've come from the North into the South, and you spoke initially about the transition being really interesting and challenging?  What are your reflections now within that transition?
Speaker 2: Well, I really did grow up most of my adult life in the South.  Because, you know, I was twenties when I came here [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I didn't realize, you know, at first I thought that, you know, they were just backwards because we were so--I mean--first of all, we were so open about stuff, that we made mistakes.  African American southerners are a lot more sophisticated in terms of, first, understanding the nuances of segregation and discrimination.  You know, we--I call myself we now as a southerner, but we look through the layers, and we can interpret what's going on a lot better.  Of course, in the South, it was in your face.  I mean, I never had it in my face in the North, but it was there, because it wasn't by accident that I went to an all-black elementary school [Rockdale Elementary School; Rockdale Academy Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio].  It wasn't by accident the only reason I went to an integrated high school [Walnut Hills High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] was because you took a test, and it certainly wasn't majority African American.  But my district school was, and I realized then that they didn't say they were segregated.  Of course there was not segregation in the North, they just drew the districts around you.  They drew the line, and there was a definite line, it was more pronounced then what the lines are now.  Black folks lived in one side of town, and the white folks lived in the other side of town, you just draw the line there, and that's your district school.  So it was very subtle, and it still was very subtle, because the North pretends that it doesn't have racism.  The South knows it has it, and it's open, and in many ways deals with it a lot more.  I find that I have opened up so much, and I'm not afraid to discuss race.  You know, we used to be even afraid to talk about it or afraid to even say that it's an issue as an African American.  But now we discuss it openly, and we throw it up in somebody else's face and say, "Wait a minute," you know, "let me explain what that means," you know, "when you call somebody a 'girl,' let me explain what that means and why that's offensive."  Now we can do that and, you know, that's very refreshing.  And I think the South does that more so than the North because the North is so busy blaming the South for everything.
Story_ID: 220304
Speaker 1: So, now you're transitioning into management [at WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia].  You are on board.  What is the experience like?  What are you doing?
Speaker 2: Horrible (laughter).  I was working with a general manager who felt that I was just there for a token.  You know, so he didn't really care what I did, which is probably the worst way to be in management, because you are again isolated.  For many, many years until just recently, and this is 2004, so from 1983 on to 2003, 2002, I was the only department head of color in the station.  Only.  So I'm in the management meetings; nobody else looks like me.  So it's always tough because people don't always understand, or care to understand, your situation or your plight or your sensitivities.  And so, when you're outnumbered many times it's very difficult to express your opinions.  And until recently, because now I've had so many years, and I'm much, much older and so you tend when you have the age and the years in service, you know, I've been there thirty years at the station, so basically I have carte blanche to say anything I want, and most people won't challenge me.  So you have to earn your stripes before you can talk which is a real tough thing to have to sit by and sometimes listen to things that are being said and often not speak about them.  But now I'm getting that chance to do that, and that's why I continue to remain in television, because the only time where you're really listened to, and you can really speak is when you have that seniority.  So now I use it as a bully pulpit.  I criticize constantly things I see that are offensive not only to African Americans, to people with disabilities, to women, people of all backgrounds, people of all religions.  Many times the majority culture is extremely insensitive, say things that--they can't imagine why we're offended, and you have to sit down and explain it.  And to me that's the education, that's where you break down those barriers.  Because you find a lot of people don't understand that they really--they don't get it, they don't know that we have had to live in layers, you know, we live in the layer that deals with the Caucasian race, we deal with that every day, but people don't understand that's not our culture necessarily, we don't come from that background.  So we're constantly interpreting and constantly wading through the fog index of what that culture is all about.  Constantly trying to filter what's being said to us to make sure that we're not bitter all the time and not taking offense all the time.  And then trying to figure out a good way of explaining to somebody who didn't even realize what they said to ya.  You know, going through and explaining it to them so that they're not offended and they receive the information, so they can then learn.  So that was the process that I think of management that was the toughest.  Because as you know, management is dealing with people, getting people to do things that you won't have to do and also, you know, increasing productivity, all those types of things.  And most of the issues in business today are people issues; they're all people issues.  So the better you can deal with people and understand the sensitivities, and I think people are starting to come around to understand that.  So I come from a management team that could care less whether I existed to now a management team who calls me all the time and asks for my opinion.  And I really think that those struggles that we've had and now coming together, because we're all of the same basic generation, we've all come up together, most of the management team.  And to be able to now open the doors of discussion in terms of understanding each other has made us a better television station.  You know, we're not the number one television station in the nation because of a single anchor; it's a team that works together and I think the team that works together is the one that really shares their sensitivities, their emotions so we can all understand each other better.  Because that's really what's it all about.  If we all understood each other better, we'd all get along a lot better in this world, and we wouldn't have half the problems that we had.  Most of the problems we have are fear.  And you know, if you can break down those barriers then I think you're better in understanding and you become a better people.
Story_ID: 220305
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of as a manager here [WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia]?  What types of strides do you think that you've made as a result of your work?
Speaker 2: I think I'm most proud of not being afraid to take a stand when it was necessary.  I'm proud that all the young people who are working here now--they may not know the history--but I'm proud to see that they have the opportunities that I didn't have.  And I'm proud to see that hopefully, and they generally do--what's really nice is when they come to me, and they find out the seniority and what I've done.  Is that we have these conversations, and I'm proud that they see that they have someone that they can be proud of, because that's real important in any company structure of having that role model.  You know, I never thought of myself as a role model, but I feel that I have a tremendous responsibility to be a role model for young people who are coming along in this business.  I think it's extremely important not to throw away that thirty years.
Story_ID: 220306
Speaker 1: How did you balance family, work, self?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I did (laughter).  I don't know that I have.  In this business, television is really your life.  I live it, I breathe it.  I'd say 70 percent of my life is spent in the job of television, because most of my job is out in the community trying to understand what the needs are of the community.  I guess I was raised always to be a community servant; my parents [Helena Harris Dorsey and HistoryMaker Robert Sherwood Dorsey] were.  And so I don't know what's it like not to (laughter) not to be working in the community and doing something.  And that really is my reward.  I get rewarded every day knowing that I can possibly make a difference in someone's life.  That's really why I'm in television is because the power of the media to make a difference for the betterment of life, to make it better for people who cannot make it better is really what I hope I am remembered for.
Story_ID: 220307
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that we haven't discussed here today?  Your life--I mean, you've lived through so many different periods in time and transitions and southern and northern cultures?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest--the biggest pain of this journey that we call growing up has been the pain of seeing what's happening to our children.  And this is gonna be a tough one for me.  Because I raised two boys in the same environment, as you've heard, that I have been raised.  And what's so disturbing to me now is to see that environment suck these kids up, African American males.  My son [Tewodros Gebre-Hiwet] was killed, and I got to know the horror of a mother losing a child, and the anger of seeing how this society can destroy these children.  Peer pressure is unbelievable now with these young African American males especially.  It's tragic.  It's tragic what's happening.  And to think that we have fought all this time to see our children destroyed is just frustrating.  And I think that's the hardest thing for me now is trying to understand what our society has become, what we have allowed our African American community to become.  Anytime that you find that it's not okay for kids to be good students, you know, my sons grew under the pressure, because of who I was, first of all, not being in with the crowd, so there was the pressure of, "You're not like us."  And there weren't enough African American young men to withstand that type of pressure, you know, not to be a gangster, not to skip school, not to do this.  And in playing sports, which they did, I found that they succumb to that peer pressure.  And there was nothing I felt that I could do.  There was no power, no television, nothing in the world that you could do to bring these kids back.  And that is what disturbs me about our business--thank you very much--our business right now is that the images that we, as African Americans, are allowing our children to be subjected to.  And it's not--I don't blame the rap artists, I don't blame--I really don't blame them, because they wouldn't exist unless we allowed it.  They couldn't exist unless our society allowed it.  And it's interesting because I think Bill Cosby is getting beat up about this, being vocal and critical about what we're allowing.  And it's us that are allowing this, because, you know, we perpetuate it.  You know, parents are buying the shoes, we're buying the CDs, all of this type of thing.  And so it's just--it's just when you look at history, and you look at all the things that people have fought for: the right to vote that we take for granted, the right to be equal, the right to have education, and we now as younger people take that for granted.  It really, really disturbs me, the time that we're growing up in now.  I hope twenty years from now it'll be a totally different story, that we will have turned the tide and it will have turned around and you know, perhaps our next generation will realize how critical it is to save ourselves.  Because I say that we're just--we're in jeopardy of not existing anymore when you think about it.
Story_ID: 220308
Speaker 1: When you think of young African--and it was funny, because a cultural anthropologist put it to me this way, and I'll never forget it, from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] as a matter of fact, that if we continue to allow our young African American men to be incarcerated, if you look at it now, how many young men are in prison?  Who are the young women going to be marrying?  Right, they are not going to have choices, and if you think about it, this is just a fact, you've got young women, more young African American women going to college then African American men by scores.  If you look at the colleges now, and this is 2004, you look at the college rate, you know, women outnumber men 10-to-1.  If they go to majority schools, who are they gonna marry?  They're not gonna marry somebody in prison if they're gonna go after their degree and try to better themselves?  So nine times out of ten, they are gonna marry someone out of their race.  Think about it.  If it continues, we will not exist as African Americans anymore.  We will not exist, because we are allowing our gene pool to remain in prison.  So those are the things that disturb me now is why we can't see what's happening, and why we aren't outraged as a society.  It's not just for the good of the African American community, but our society.  We continue--I know you people have heard, we continue, but it's so true, when you think of--this criminal justice system of ours is a business.  It's a business to me to put African Americans out of business.
Speaker 2: It's traded on the stock market.
Speaker 1: And we're allowing it to happen.  You know, and hopefully, if nothing else that this project, especially The HistoryMakers helps to preserve and helps to shine the light on all the things that we have gone through, so that our young people can appreciate the struggle and realize that the struggle is every day.  Chief Justice [Robert] Benham, African American chief justice of the Georgia Supreme Court [sic. Supreme Court of Georgia], and I'll never forget him telling me, "The struggle begins anew each day."  The struggle begins anew each day.  As a chief justice on the Georgia Supreme Court saying the struggle begins anew each day should really let our young people know that the fight's not over, and they need to be in the battle.  And I don't know what we can do to raise the awareness and shine the light bulb.  You know, now I worry about, again, coming out of Vietnam War, that we're gonna be sending young men off to war.  I predict the draft is gonna be reinstituted.  And there will be no college deferments.  And it will be our African American young men, the ones that aren't in prison, going to war.  So here we go all over again, and I hope history won't repeat itself and leave us worse off than we were before.
Story_ID: 220309
Speaker 1: Young women at Spellman College [Atlanta, Georgia] recently showed some resistance to the presence of the rapper Nelly on their campus, and you all [WSB-TV, Channel 2, Atlanta, Georgia] covered that story.  Do you have any response or reflections to what happened?
Speaker 2: It's about time (laughter).  It's about time.  I mean, not to cast dispersions on anybody, but how can you separate a person's character and then patronize them at the same time.  Why would you patronize someone who is offensive in character?  If you look at the strong Jewish tradition, I mean most people ought to know that, you know, many people in the Jewish faith don't even buy German products.  They still don't buy German products.  You wouldn't see them driving a Mercedes [Benz].  Trust me on this one.  I've been told that they still don't.  I mean, how many years ago was the Holocaust?  But that was so ingrained, and they were so determined not to repeat that again, that they still boycott products.  They still maintain.  And that's why Israel today is so fierce in its protection because they don't ever want to happen what happened to them again.  You know, we've had 350 years of it.  We're--as someone told me, we're only forty years of this integration thing when you think about it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We've had 350 years of discrimination and degradation in this country.  And we can't forget, we really can't afford to forget, because history will repeat itself.
Speaker 1: What are some of the ways that you would suggest resistance?
Speaker 2: Education.  To me, it's the key.  You[EH1] know, one of your HistoryMakers that I suggested has done a marvelous history, and I think he [HistoryMaker Michael Thurmond] is being interviewed, on the history of Georgia.  Most people don't know that Georgia was founded as the anti-slave colony.  And here we are talking about the stars and the bars, and people talking about Georgia being--you know, we're fighting for the independence of the North and the South, how in the world can you say that when the state was founded as an anti-slave state?  Who knew?  It's education.  The more you're educated, the more you're armed with knowledge, the more you can disarm everything else.  Many people don't know that for eighteen years Georgia had no slaves.  It was founded as an anti-slave colony.  So the vestiges, the reason Georgia is known for its civil rights struggle is not because of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], it started when the colony was founded.  And there were African Americans fighting the whole time for freedom.  We weren't just handed freedom by [President] Abraham Lincoln.  We fought for it.  So, the more you're educated, and the more you know about where you come from, and what your destiny really is, and what your vision should be, then I think the better off we're gonna be.  That's how you solve the problem, is through education.
Story_ID: 220310
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life, and what has been important to you?
Speaker 2: I hope, I hope that I've lived my life doing the right thing, really doing the right thing.  And it's funny, you know, doing the right thing can get addictive.  You know, the more you do the right thing, the more addictive it gets to do the right thing.  So I really hope the people view me as doing the right thing, regardless of what that means in terms of race, color, creed, national origin, but it was the right thing to do.  And that's how I hope I've lived it.  I know I've made a lot of mistakes, but people are human and I've, you know, continued to feel blessed.  I don't take what I do for granted.  I am very, very blessed to be in this position.  There are not a lot of people who have the opportunity to make a difference the way this opportunity has afforded itself to me, and I don't take that lightly.  I think the responsibility of having this job is tremendous, and I hope people realize that I take it seriously.
Story_ID: 220311
Speaker 1: For those going into the field of media, what types of suggestions would you have for them?
Speaker 2: I think what disturbs me the most about young people going into the media is they're doing it all for the wrong reasons.  You know, they're doing it because they think there's a lot of money in it, and there probably is.  They're doing it because they think there's a lot of fame in it, and there probably is.  But to me, those are all the wrong reasons, and I would like to see them do it, and I know it sounds corny (laughter), but to really make a difference.  There's nothing like it.  There's no feeling like it, to realize that when you look back, and it really does take a while for you to look back, because I never even realized I was doing anything other than surviving.  But now to be able to look back and say, "Well, gee, I think I helped pass that legislation," or, "gee, you know, I think by speaking out that," you know, "other people began to speak out and it created a domino effect," or, "gee, you know, I can look back and say I helped in the fight against AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], I helped in the fight against poverty, I helped in the fight against literacy, or you know, bridging the cultural gap."  So to me, those are the reasons you get into this business.  And if you get into this business any other--for any other reason, you probably aren't gonna last, and you're probably not gonna be fulfilled, because it is an unforgiving business.  It's not a business that pats you on the back every day.  It's basically is a business that says, "What did you do for me lately?"  And if you can't handle that kind of pressure, and you can't be gratified with something else that's motivating you other than the pat on the back or, "Ooh, isn't she wonderful?" then you're gonna have a tough time in this business.
Story_ID: 220312
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have done already that you would like to have done differently?  Any regrets?
Speaker 2: You know, you almost are afraid to say you had a regret about something, because it really kind of shaped your life.  You know, if I had regrets I probably would have spent, what I feel would have been a lot more time shielding my children [Tewodros Gebre-Hiwet and Robert-Fassil Gebre-Hiwet] from the evils of outside world and sheltering them a little bit more, on the one hand, but on the other hand, when you look at it and you shelter them too much, then when they come against that cold cruel world, they don't know how to deal with it.  So I constantly struggle with, you know, what could I have done differently with my children that may have had a different outcome?  So that's the biggest thing I, I keep saying what could I have done differently.  If I had done this, maybe this wouldn't have happened, but you can't keep doing that.
Story_ID: 220313
Speaker 1: What would you still like to do that you haven't done already?
Speaker 2: See the world (laughter).  My goal in life has been to touch every continent in the world.  Because to me, travel is education.  I have been so blessed to travel all over the world.  I've been to China; I've been deep into China.  I've been to Nicaragua.  I've been to Ethiopia.  I've been to Paris [France].  I've been to London [England].  I've been to Germany.  And there's nothing like traveling which broadens your horizon.  I mean it takes you out of this whole narrow, myopic American perspective and makes you realize that you are but a small cog in the big wheel, and there are a whole lot of people who don't think like you do, who don't even think like me.  You know, I used to think well I'd blend into Africa, because I'm black--oh heck no (laughter)!  They spot you a mile away, and suddenly you realize, "I'm an American," and you understand what that means.  You know, we've been denying who we were for so long and then you go overseas and they're like, "Excuse me, you are not African, you are an American."  And then you really come to understand what that means and to be proud of being that.  To be proud of your African American heritage.  So, to me that's what I wanna do.
Story_ID: 215231
Speaker 1: It's just--it's unbelievable what we're allowing.  And, I mean, we allow it every day.  And I had some kids walk down the street in front of my house, and I live in what is considered the inner city [of Atlanta, Georgia], and here these kids were throwing trash all over the place, you know, right in front of my house that I have to clean up every day, and there were a bunch of them, they were all boys.  You know, looking like little gangsters.  And I pulled them aside, and I said, you know, "Why would you do that?" You know, "What's so difficult about you holding onto the piece of trash until you got to a trash can?  Why you gotta throw it in front of my house, and then I gotta clean it up?  How would you feel if your mother had to do that every day?"  And they looked at me, and they said, "I'm sorry ma'am, I'm sorry ma'am."  And it's just a matter of how you approach young people, but you can't be afraid to.  Because if you continue to let them do that, then they're going to dictate that fear.  And you'll never get it through their head.  When we were growing up, it was not okay to be pregnant.  It was not okay.  And so you didn't do it, because society said it wasn't okay.  But now we're saying, "Oh, it's okay, it's okay, we're even gonna put the daycares in the schools.  It's okay, and you know, if you all walk down with your drawers hanging down.  You know, it's okay that you got the gold teeth in your mouth."  And we sorta look by and say, "Well, ya know, it's okay," but it's not okay.  It's not okay, and the more we say it's not okay, the better off our kids are gonna be.
Story_ID: 215232
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a good person, and that's the bottom line. I hope I'm remembered as a good person.  Someone who's--who tried to do the right thing, tried to make a difference.  Tried to be sensitive to other people, to respect people.  To just be a good person.
Story_ID: 215233
Speaker 1: And what message or lesson do you have for your children [Tewodros Gebre-Hiwet and Robert-Fassil Gebre-Hiwet], grandchildren [Zania Gebre-Hiwet and Tewodros Gebre-Hiwet, II] and the world?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What message would I have for the world?  Be true to yourself and always--I think the biggest thing that I'd tell my granddaughter, who I'm raising, is that you're in this world to do something for somebody else.  It's not all about you.  It shouldn't be about you; it never is about you.  But you're here, and you're put here, believe it or not, for a reason.  You just have to find out what that God-given reason is.  I believe that what I'm doing is what I'm supposed to be doing.  Because I keep getting pushed in this direction, and even if I had resisted, I think that I probably would be doing what I'm doing.  Starting out as a news reporter is not where I'm ending up.  I'm ending up as a community servant.  And I fought it.  You know, when I came into this position in community affairs, I was like, "I'm a reporter, what am I doing in community affairs, that's for somebody else."  And now I realize that that's probably the most important job I should be doing.  And what I've been prepared to do all along.  Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King has told me often, often, "You are being prepared, God is preparing you for something, you just don't know what it is.  You may never know what it is.  Or you may know years from now, you look back and say 'Ah-ha, that's why I'm able to survive this because I have been prepared all along,' He had laid the path for me."  And in so many ways I see that happening.  So I think the more people reach out and say, "What am I here for? What am I supposed to be doing?" you know, for the betterment of man.  Then I think the more fulfilled they will be in life.  And I feel pretty good.
Story_ID: 215234
Speaker 1: What do you want for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Someone who blazed the path for others to walk in.  You know, we often hear about trailblazers.  I hope I'm viewed as a trailblazer, because that's the best thing to be is to make that path for others to walk behind you.  To be the shoulders that other people stand on.  And hopefully that will be my legacy: that I have provided somewhat of a foundation that other people can now build on.
Story_ID: 215235
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  There's so much discussion now about to what degree the media is a part of the solution or a part of the problem.  And I just wondered what your thoughts are about that, and what you believe the media can do or should do, and what you feel personally able to do in your role here?
Speaker 2: Oh boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  In twenty words or less.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well (laughter).  It's like a vicious cycle, really.  I mean for me, it's--we shine the mirror and the, you know, the theory can be that we basically shine the mirror and the viewer really does have the ultimate decision.  Because we our bread and butter is built on eyeballs.  So while we can blame the media for creating the images, all we gotta do is turn the television off, and the minute we turn the television off and stop watching, the images are gonna change.  Believe it or not.  We look every day at the ratings, every day, every minute, we look at minute-by-minute.  You know, what are they doing, why are they watching, you know.  And there are so many choices now that people do have the choices.  The problem is, is that we tend to perpetuate and glorify images that don't really exist.  For example, you know, if people came to this country and saw our news, they'd probably think we were killin'-est nation in the world.
Speaker 1: Some people do.
Speaker 2: I mean they'd be scared to walk out their door.  They think Atlanta [Georgia] is nothing but everybody killing each other, because that's what you see so much of on the news every day.  So I think, you know, one of the things that disturbs me is I think the media portraying these images day after day after day contributes to us being less sensitive.  We're so used to seeing people shot, dead bodies on the street.  It doesn't even bother us anymore.  And that's the disturbing thing that I think the media desensitizes us to a lot of horrors that then allows those horrors to continue.  But at the same token, I think if you take it back to--and I hope I'm answering your question--but if you take it back to what our country--what the United States of America feels is important.  What is success in America?  Success is money.  Success is not knowledge.  Success is not how much you know.  You don't get rich by how much you know.  You know, you get rich by various means, and unfortunately those various means could be drug dealing.  And if you're a rich drug dealer and suddenly become a rich rap star, now you've got it made.  So to me the fact that it's okay in America to be determined to be successful when you're basing it on money and not what you know, not your integrity, not how you value people or things, but it's money.  And we're so driven by money.  Look at it.  I mean whose making all the money.  Course you got talk show hosts, but football, basketball, baseball, entertainers.  We're--our professors are not making the money.  Our teachers, our doctors--well, some doctors are.  But our teachers are not making the money.
Story_ID: 215236
Speaker 1: So you can't blame it all on the media.  But what I'm proudest of is trying to at least raise the bar for education.  You know, I've done a lot of documentaries.  My big thing is history now.  And I really--I'm working on this history of Georgia, so people will know how to dispel all the myths of what Georgia was and who they really are, and how the Confederacy lost the [Civil] War, which by the way was by choice of slavery or not.  The war was about slavery, it was not about states' rights.  Because General [Robert E.] Lee decided that you could win the war in the South if you freed the slaves, because that's what they were doing in the North.  And that's why the North was kicking the South's butt was because they had all the black folks going up to the North joining the Union Army, because they'd be free.  So you see education dispels all of that.  And so I'm really proud that I'm trying to raise that level and balance all the entertainment television with some educational television and people do watch.
Speaker 2: What is your response to 'Fahrenheit 9/11'?
Speaker 1: Haven't seen it yet and I'd like to see it.  I've heard it was very good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we live it every day.  I mean I watched--I remember watching the reaction of the President [George Walker Bush] when that happened in the school room.  And so when it's brought to my attention, you know, I remember thinking some of the same things that they were talking about in 'Fahrenheit 9/11,' you know.  In many instances, countries like Iraq--to me, countries like Iraq have issues with people like us is because of many--because of poverty, because of lack of education.  They don't hate us because we're Americans, they hate us for what we have, and what we stand for, and what they don't have.  And so, you know, the better we understand each other and appreciate where everybody comes from, I think that's probably half the problem.  We don't understand them.  We don't try to understand them.  We don't appreciate them.  And in many instances, don't respect them.  And the horrors we're seeing now are the things they've been doing in their countries for years, you know.  I remember going to Ethiopia and someone stole my then-husband's wallet out of a marketplace, and they cut off the guy's arm.  That was acceptable.  So, you know, what we don't understand is that these things are common everyday things happening in their society.  But I knew that diverted off your point.  But--so the media, I think, is a reflection of what we allow to be seen on the screen.  We research every day [at WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia].  We are probably the most well-researched television station in the country, and we research what people want to see.  We ask them.  What do you want to see?  What do you want on a newscast?  And they tell us, and we give it back to them.  And they watch us, and we keep asking, "Okay, was that okay, or do you want more traffic and weather, or what do you want?  Do you want international news?"  And they say, "No, we don't want that."  So we are the mirror, we are the mirror that is shining the reflection, and my response to many people is if you don't like what we see, change it.
