Story_ID: 54211
Speaker 1: --This is a photo of my mother and her three sisters.  It was taken, I don't recall the year but I've had it for a very long time.
Speaker 2: Do you know where it was taken?
Speaker 1: Where was it taken?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the place.
Speaker 1: I think it was taken in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay, and counting from the left, which one is your mother?
Speaker 1: Coming from, from the left.  The first picture would be my mother and then the next pictures would be her sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.  So she had four sisters?
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Three, and who is the other person?
Speaker 1: That, that person I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay and which, which one is the, the unidentified person?
Speaker 1: The one in the very front.
Speaker 2: Okay, perfect.  Great Larry, next photo please.  All right you want to (unclear) this one?
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my wedding, and that was in 19--in December of 1960 in North Carolina.  To my right obviously it was a daughter that we didn't have at the--
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: I know, it's a wedding, it's not our wedding, it's the wedding of our daughter.  And that would have been in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: Can we get the spelling of your daughter's name and your wife's name for the caption?
Speaker 1: My daughter's name is Shelley, S-H-E-L-L-E-Y, last name Davis.  And she's standing to my right.  And on the other side of me is my wife Gertrude.
Speaker 2: Trudy.
Speaker 1: We call her Trudy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Would you--in the caption would you rather it read Gertrude or Trudy or do you care?
Speaker 1: Trudy.
Speaker 2: Okay, T-R-U-D-Y, okay great.  Next photo please. This is a birthday party in 1977, it says on the back.
Speaker 1: That is a birthday party in 1977 and with me are two good friends.  I think we gave a party and acted as waiters for it.  Serving our wives.
Speaker 2: High school graduation, no, college graduation. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my college graduation, which would have been in the summer of 1953.  Standing with me is my sister.  I had two sisters, this is the older one.
Speaker 2: And you graduated from?
Speaker 1: Yeah and graduated from Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my [U.S.] Army tenure.  I don't remember the year, but I remember we were in camp in Texas.
Speaker 1: Camp Lejeune [unclear].
Speaker 2: Is there a year on the back of there?  This is a vacation picture which would have probably been in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Do you remember where it was taken?
Speaker 1: My wife said we were somewhere in San Juan, Puerto Rico.  Her memory is very good, I don't--
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother and two of her sisters.
Speaker 2: Very good, next photo please.
Speaker 1: I don't know where she dug up all these things.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Again, one of my mother's sisters and her sister's husband.  And that would have been taken in Atlanta, Georgia also.
Speaker 2: Any idea what year?
Speaker 1: No, I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what--was there a spelling for your mother's sister?  Did you say--
Speaker 1: Her name was Shelley, same as my daughter's, S-H-E-L-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: This is 1920 at the Thomas School, 1920.  This is probably your mother and your sisters I guess.
Speaker 1: Well if that's the year that's on there, then it predates me.  That's a picture of my mother and two of her sisters.  I come from a long line of schoolteachers.
Speaker 2: This one is labeled really clearly.  This is 19- 1903.  And it's Ethel, Shelley and Fannie Lee.
Speaker 1: Well there again it's my mother and two of her sisters, and if that's the year on there, it would be 1903.  I didn't even- know we had that.
Speaker 2: Alright, next photo. This is your grandmother.
Speaker 1: That's my mother's mother, so it would be my grandmother, right.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Your maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Maternal, right.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: This is your maternal grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 2: Those are my mother's parents, right.  My grandfather and my grandmother on her, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and I don't know--does it have a year on the back?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I don't know when it was taken, but it would have been somewhere here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  What are you doing there?
Speaker 2: Looks like I'm playing chess doesn't it?
Speaker 1: It's hard to tell [unclear].
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Toronto? Okay vacation in Canada in '65 [1965].  That might be it.
Speaker 2: It's like these others, you're wearing the same shirt, so 1965.
Speaker 1: Very good, next photo.
Speaker 2: That would have been--that's another picture of a vacation somewhere.  I don't know exactly where.
Speaker 1: It's in Canada, '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: There again, we did a lot of traveling in Canada years ago.
Speaker 1: That's Niagara Falls.
Speaker 2: Niagara Falls.
Speaker 1: Right on the water?
Speaker 2: Right on the water. Close, on either side, right?
Speaker 1: [Unclear] the best side.
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: The view was better on the Canadian side.
Speaker 2: There again, that's a vacation photo somewhere.
Speaker 1: Canada.
Speaker 2: She says it's in Canada also, so--
Speaker 1: Very good, next photo. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: How about this one?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the two of us and our daughter, who was attending a music camp that summer somewhere in Michigan.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was what year?  Approximately?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Seven or eight years ago.
Speaker 1: So in the '90s [1990s], early '90s.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Maybe in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay, late '80s, early '90s.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's fine next photo.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That's a picture I didn't even--I didn't know we had it.  But there again it's my mother and her three sisters.  My mother being the tallest one, the upper left, cause she was the oldest child.  And her three sisters.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Okay, what about this one? What can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that's a wedding photo of some--after we were married.  I don't--it had to be here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Well I mean I said after we were married.  I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I think our daughter was in high school that was about '80 [1980], '88 [1988] maybe.
Speaker 2: So that's Shelley again, you have one daughter? OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken with me and some of my colleagues from the South ShoreBank soon after we had bought the bank.  So that would have been in mid--70s.
Speaker 2: There's got to be a publication date on there.  What's that say on the front of there, can you read it?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety six [1996].
Speaker 2: Ninety six [1996].
Story_ID: 54212
Speaker 1: That is a picture of an award that was given.  I don't--does it have a year on that picture?  At the bottom here.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: It says Nordstrom values Milton Davis for his long term commitment and contributions to the Chicagoland community, but it doesn't say the year.
Speaker 2: Well that would have been in the '90s [1990s] also.  That was an award ceremony.
Speaker 1: And what was the award for again, just so we can get that.
Speaker 2: Community involvement.  And it was given by Nordstrom.
Speaker 1: Okay, the department store chain?
Speaker 2: Department store chain, right.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  So N-O-R-D-S-T-R-O-M.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: You want me to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just tell us what, where (unclear).
Speaker 1: That is me, but I don't know exactly when or where.  Well it had to be Chicago [Illinois].  But I don't know when.  It is--that's a house, I recognize the house.
Speaker 2: You've got a name on it too.
Speaker 1: Can you supply more information Trudy?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Is the name on the house?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it looks like [unclear].  I couldn't read it.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It says Sherman House, so that must be the--
Speaker 1: No, no, Sherman House, that would have been taken in Evanston, Illinois when I was living in a graduate house.
Speaker 2: You were going to Northwestern [University] then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What year would that have been approximately, or what decade?
Speaker 1: That had to be in the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: It would have been shortly after I got out of college.
Speaker 2: Those are [U.S.] Army buddies again, so that would have been in the late '50s.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Camp--no this--that's somewhere in Texas.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: The bottom right.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Well I--that looks like that would have been sometime in the Army also.  Cause that--the person in the rear of that I think was in the Army with me, so--
Speaker 1: You got a plane there, were you in the Army Air Corps?
Speaker 2: No, I was involved in the--I was in the regular Army.
Speaker 1: So and once again anything from the Army would be in the '50s?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That had to be somewhere in, in Puerto Rico because I was on a place--we had a balcony like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the year if you can recall anything?
Speaker 2: Well it would have been--we were married in '60 [1960], so it had to be after that.  It had to be late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay that sounds good to me.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and the--
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: --of myself and the three other founders of ShoreBank Corporation.  And this would be--the corporation was founded in the early '70s, so '73 [1973].  So that had to be the early '70s or mid-'70s when this picture was taken.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of again the, the founders of ShoreBank.  We started a project in northern Michigan, in Marquette actually.  And the--there's a, a university there, Northern Michigan University.  Northern--no it's northern Michigan.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Northern Michigan University, and they gave the four founders honorary degrees that year.
Speaker 1: Can you name the founders?
Speaker 2: Ron Grzywinski, Mary Houghton, the late Jim Fletcher and myself.
Speaker 1: And Trudy said I think that was December 2nd of last year, 2001?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay very good.  Thank you everyone [unclear].
Speaker 2: Additional commentary.  This last photo was December 15th, 2001, the honor--awarding of the honorary doctorates to the four founders of ShoreBank, okay.
Story_ID: 54213
Speaker 1: I want to start out by slating it, and I'd like--and would you look at me.  And I'd like to have you--first of all I'm going to say my name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and Larry Crowe is an observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, and giving us your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You want me to start?  Milton Davis.  I was born January 10th, 1932.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name sir?
Speaker 2: I do not use it.  I have one.
Speaker 1: You don't wanna give it to us?
Speaker 2: No, unless you just want it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I would like it.
Speaker 2: It's Oliver, Milton Oliver Davis.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is--make sure I can get the--is May 15th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000]--
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have the address that we're at.
Speaker 2: We are at 7321 South, South Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a retired banker.
Story_ID: 54214
Speaker 1: Now I, I ask five questions of everyone, and they're a little "People Magazine"-ish, but I'd just like you to answer them.  And short answers, just short.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is pasta.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?  Favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is--saying is you can do it.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, and favorite--my goodness, I am rusty.  Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 54215
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, we're gonna get started and I'd like to sir, have you tell me your father's name and what you know about him and his growing up.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Layton H. Davis, the H was for Hugo.  He was a principal of a high school, and he died when he was fifty-five years old.  So I didn't get to know him as long as I would have liked.
Speaker 1: Now Layton, that's spelled L-E-I?
Speaker 2: L-A-Y-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, L-A-Y-T-O-N, and did he--what was--do you know where he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: You know where in Alabama?
Speaker 2: A little town called Carbon Hill.
Speaker 1: Did he talk at all about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not much.
Speaker 1: He was a quiet man?
Speaker 2: He was quiet, yes.
Speaker 1: Did he talk anything about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not much that I can remember.  He, he didn't say much about his, his upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said he was a teacher.
Speaker 2: He was a high school principal.
Speaker 1: High school principal, okay.  And what was--what, what school was he principal for?
Speaker 2: In those days it was, it was the local black high school, but it was called the training school.
Speaker 1: Now your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Ethel Lynn Davis.
Speaker 1: And did she talk at all about her growing up and her family?
Speaker 2: An awful lot.  In fact I knew my mother's family quite well.
Speaker 1: Can you talk a, a little bit about that and what she told you?
Speaker 2: Well my mother originally came from North Carolina.  And when--after they were married there, they moved to Alabama and he was--he worked for mines in Alabama and did a lot of traveling.  I think he was--initially he was used to recruit workers for the mining industry.  And that's about the biggest thing I remember about him.
Speaker 1: You know I don't even think of the south as having a mining industry as much.  That's sort of--you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, it--this is Birmingham, Alabama, which is next--outside of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania was the biggest mining town in this country I think.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met?  Yes because he had gone on vacation I think and in fact that--I know that's what he told me.  And he met my grandmother.
Speaker 1: You mean your mother, your grand--
Speaker 2: My mother's mother, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You said my grandfather, right?
Speaker 1: No I meant, I was talking about your parents at that point.
Speaker 2: My parents.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My, my father met my mother because I think he was interviewing teachers for a job at his school, and she was one of the teachers being interviewed.
Story_ID: 54216
Speaker 1: And do you--what about your siblings?  I don't--usually I have this information from you, but your siblings and do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have, yes I had two sisters and three brothers.
Speaker 1: Can you give their names and their birth order?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister was named Gwendolyn Davis.  She was married to Newt Banks, who was an undertaker in Atlanta, Georgia.  My oldest brother was named Layton Davis, Jr.  He is now deceased.  My second oldest brother was named Rufus Carl Davis, he is also deceased.  And my--the third oldest brother, or youngest brother I should say, was named Harold Leslie Davis, he is still alive.
Speaker 1: And now are you, are you the youngest?  Are you--where do you fit in that order?
Speaker 2: I am, I am in the middle.
Speaker 1: You're in the middle.
Speaker 2: In the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two older girls and two--and the, and two older boys, two younger boys.
Story_ID: 54217
Speaker 1: Now was--you were--you're from Jasper, Alabama, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: What kind of town is Jasper?  How, how large or small?
Speaker 2: It's a small town, had about 20,000 people.  It's the county seat for what--for Walker County, which is the county it's in.  Very small, but of course being in Alabama, a highly segregated community and I didn't like it very much, but I, I grew up there and got away as soon as I could.
Speaker 1: Tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up.
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is being--is traveling with my father [Layton Davis], who didn't appreciate the segregated environment.  We grew up in very much--and was very disappointed in having to raise us there so he would--in summers he would take us on long vacations, either to California or New York or some un-segregated town.  And that was when I first fell in love with California and decided that that was where I wanted to live, was on a trip that we had gone on vacation there.  But we did an awful lot of traveling.  I think he did it primarily to get his kids away from that segregated environment.
Speaker 1: Now when you would go on those trips, how long would you be gone when you go, go travel?
Speaker 2: It was mostly in the summers because in the, in the win--in the winter we did travel to Birmingham, Alabama to visit my grandparents.  But when we went away on these vacation trips, it was in the summer, so it was usually for two or three weeks at a time that we stayed.
Speaker 1: And can you describe what your family life was like?  You know in, in Jasper, in your household?
Speaker 2: Well it was a very I should say nurturing household because my, as I said my mother had three sisters, all of whom was school teachers.  And so I remembered all of them being very adamant about us getting our school lessons and doing very well in school.  And, and I enjoyed it very much.  I think it was my family that really gave me whatever motivation I had to go to school and to try to do well.  But I enjoyed my family very much growing up.
Speaker 1: Any memories you'd like to share of those, you know of those early years of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I--the only memories I have, the most fondest memories I have was that in the--at Christmas time we would all go visit my mother's [Ethel Davis] parents and spend the holidays with them.  And I think we all looked forward to that trip, and it was very, very pleasant.  And I remember my grandparents very well because they were strict disciplinarians, but we enjoyed them.
Story_ID: 54218
Speaker 1: So let me take you back.  If you could sort of close your eyes and think about, you know growing up, and I'm wondering what either sights, smells or sounds remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: The, the smells was my, was my grandmother's--she was an excellent cook.  So it would have been visiting their house in the summers and walking through the kitchen and smelling the breads and pies that she was baking.  And that was one of the most pleasant things in terms of growing up.  And it was--my brothers and sisters enjoyed that very much also, so I know it was a big, big thrill for them.
Speaker 1: How 'bout sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  Nothing special about any sounds that I remember.
Speaker 1: Any sights?
Speaker 2: Any sights, was the trips we took in the summers and getting out of the south at the time.  And seeing the rest of the country and what it looked like.  And I was particularly enthralled with the large cities that we went to visit.
Story_ID: 54219
Speaker 1: Now what was your block like?  I mean I don't know if there were blocks, but I mean you know what--your neighborhood.  Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well it was a very close-knit neighborhood.  My mother [Ethel Davis] and father [Layton Davis]--as the--as most of the communities in the South were at the time, you know I guess still are.  Mostly everybody on the block knows everybody else.  And they assist your parents in helping to raise you.  So you, you know when you--you may have left home, but you still had the people in the neighborhood looking after you.  So it was--and we knew everybody in the community by first names.  And most of the, the kids--
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the names of your neighbors?
Speaker 2: Walt Hardin who was my best friend.  I remember Walter.  He moved to Ohio.  That's where he was the last time I heard from him.  The Reeds who lived right across the street from us and had a large family.  And we played with them a lot growing up.  Mrs. Lou Ellen [ph.], who lived two blocks down from us, and was a very, very pleasant lady who much to our dismay, took it upon herself to help raise us and keep us in line.  And it got on our nerves at time, but now that I'm older, or as I grew older, I came to realize that she was really just helping to raise us in the right way.
Speaker 1: So what type of child do you think you were?  In other words, were you quiet, were you introspective, were you outgoing, were you mischievous, were you--
Speaker 2: I was a very quiet, introspective child.  I, I spent a lot of time with my books, and because I had--there was one of my mother's sisters lived with us and she was also a schoolteacher.  So I got a lot of help with my school work, and so I was constantly being reminded that I had to do well in school and that they were there to help me.  And it was a long, long time ago, but I remember I was an excellent student.  As a matter of fact, I would have been at the top of my class in high school.  And I went to Atlanta [Georgia]--we used to spend with our aunt who lived in Atlanta.  And because it has an infinitely better school system of course.  We enjoyed going there and I spent two years in school in Atlanta when I was growing up.  I think it was in the fifth and sixth grades at the time.
Story_ID: 54220
Speaker 1: Now you said you were introspective and quiet, and I always think that if people are introspective, they're thinking things.  And I was wondering you know, what things would you think about as that--you know as a young person or a young boy?
Speaker 2: Well I think it carried over in my life as I grew up, as I continued to grow and grew older, it was what could I do growing up, or what would I be able to do in the future to really break that segregated system.  Because I really felt it to be oppressive, evil system.  And I want--and there was not much we could do at the time that, you know, to try and change it.  And I think uppermost in my mind continuously was the thought that as I grew older, wherever I could make a strike against that system, I would do so.
Speaker 1: Now what [unclear] were you saying that were causing you to question things like that, and what discussions were occurring at home?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up in a high school for example, which had no foreign language department.  And I knew that the local high--white high school across town had, did have an English, did have a foreign language department.  But none of the black students were able to take any foreign langue in high school.  And so I was, you know a lot of things had rubbed me the wrong way about that.  It was the condition upon which the teachers who, who taught us had to do without.  That is, we knew that they didn't have the best facilities, but even though they did an enormous job I think of educating those of us who were in school at the time.  But just, just--I think that led to my involvement in the Civil Rights Movement as I grew older, which was again the thought that as soon as I could do something about changing all of that, I would.  And so that's--in my later years I did become very involved in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Do you think that because your, your parents were involved in the school system that you knew more about what was happening and maybe some of the inequities that others did not know about?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I knew more, but I--cause it, it was something that affected every kid who went to school there.  But, but it was something my parents talked about at great length, or in--with, with all of their kids.  So we were consciously being made aware of how bad things were and how much better they ought to be.
Speaker 1: And so when you would ask your parents why they were the way they were, what did they respond?
Speaker 2: It was always you could--it was some form of an answer that said we didn't--we don't really like this, but there's nothing we can do about it at the moment as long as we live in this environment.  And if the opportunity arose, they would take us out of it.  But always telling us that we were never to be satisfied with it, and to resign ourselves to accepting it and deciding that we weren't going to try to do much because of, you know, because it was a segregated school system for example that there was no need to learn.  They would continuously encouraging us to do, to do the best we could.
Story_ID: 54221
Speaker 1: And what things interested you as a young person?  Were you, you know I think you said you--well you were studious, you were a good student.  Did you like reading, were you attracted to math?  I mean what were the things that really sort of, you know, captivated your interest?
Speaker 2: Well reading I think was my favorite subject.  And I, I grew to like mathematics.  It was not one of my favorite subjects growing up, even though my father was a mathematician.  But I, I had to study very hard to get it and I did that.  But I think reading and literature would have been at the top of my list.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite books or authors or things like that then?
Speaker 2: Schoolbooks primarily were things that I read a great deal and at great length.  So I guess that would have really been then.
Speaker 1: You know that's amazing, people reading school--you mean cover-to-cover school books.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's a--you know how many kids can, can say that they read schoolbooks?
Speaker 2: Well I'd been--if you had grown up in my household, you know, you, you were expected to do that.  So you, you, you took your books and you read them.  When you were given an assignment, you know, to do you saw that it went way beyond that.  You read the whole book over and over.
Story_ID: 54222
Speaker 1: So there's one question I had forgot to ask you, but you've referred to them, but not by name.  Your grandmother and grandfather, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Her name was Minnie Lynn, and his name was Rufus Lynn.
Speaker 1: And they, they impacted you in many ways too, right, the closeness.  Were there things that they, you know our parents play a role and sometimes our grandparents or, you know, cousins or aunts play different role.
Speaker 2: Well my grandparents were a large influences on us, especially my grandmother and to a lesser extent my grandfather.  She was not a highly educated woman herself, but I think she understood the importance of getting education.  And so she was adamant about her own kids who were my, who was my mother and her three sisters, getting a good education.  And then she was determined that her grandkids would also follow on that same line.
Speaker 1: Did--do you have any favorite story around your grandparents?  Any favorite memory of them?  I know you've talked about your grandmother's cooking.  But is there any other sort of special event or something that happened that, you know, you've--
Speaker 2: Well the only special events would, would have been the--spending the holidays, Christmas holiday at their house.  And wrapping the pictures, wrapping presents for Christmas and putting them--and there was a huge living room.  And there was a big Christmas tree and so we would all wrap presents and put them under the Christmas tree.  That was something that we very much looked, very much looked forward to and enjoyed very much.
Speaker 1: And I was just wondering--I was trying to get any particular stories.  What other things--who else--was there anyone outside--you had a very strong family structure.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 54223
Speaker 1: Was there anyone else outside that family that was influencing you?
Speaker 2: Yes, the local librarian [Lueda Meadows Smith] who lived to be 102 years old.  Matter of fact she died two years ago.  She was an enormous influence on my life.  And who did a lot to encourage our reading habits.  Not only me, but the rest of the kids in our family.  And she was a huge influence on my life.  As a matter of fact, when I think about my--becoming involved in Civil Rights, I, I think about the things she's--she was the local librarian for the black community.  And--but she never accepted--I know my parents used to all--always worry about her, that she would do something or say something that would get us all in trouble.  But she never did and but even though she was a very independent and strong-willed woman.
Speaker 1: Anyone else who influenced you in any--was church a, a role, did it play a role or was it--
Speaker 2: Well my parents, my--grew up strong Methodists, but I was not that--I mean that was not that big an influ--an influence on my life because my father never accepted the segregated church.  He never accepted the fact that the church did not speak out more against a segregated environment.  As a matter of fact, it was a part of it.  And I Remember he used to talk to us at great length about how he wished the church would stand up and do what it should do.  So it, it--the church was not that big an influence in my life growing up.
Speaker 1: Now--and was there--so you--so what, what--you--I know you liked to read textbooks.  Did you have like through the local librarian, were there other types of books that she introduced you to?  And what was her name, by the way?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lueada Meadows Smith.  A very bright woman.  She went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and really tried to model that high school in the ways that she saw that college being run.  And so it was, it was high activity and a lot of lessons.  And she would--if there were--she would check books out of the--if she thought there was something that the black kids should really have, cause often the same books were not in the two high schools, or two libraries.  She would check them out of the white library herself and bring them over for us to read.
Speaker 1: She was determined.
Speaker 2: She was a determined lady.
Speaker 1: And your parent were determined also.
Speaker 2: Also, yes very much so.
Story_ID: 54224
Speaker 1: And he [Davis' father, Layton Davis] would, would do those sort of things for the people in the neighborhood who wanted something done.  And at much to the disgust of my--disgust is too strong a word, but to the disappointment of my mother [Ethel Lynn], he would volunteer his services to do that kind of work for them.
Speaker 2: Now how did you know that--I know that he was, he was a man of few words.  How did you find out that he really wanted to be an architect?  Did he talk about that?
Speaker 1: He told us that.  And I think he--and the--and he had really hoped that one of his kids would take up that, but was--none of us did.  And I, as I think back over it, he--I'm sure that was a great disappointment to him.  But he--that's the one thing he did talk about, was the fact that he had wanted to, to be an architect.
Speaker 2: Now you went to what elementary school?
Speaker 1: Where?  It--well in those schools it's high school--
Speaker 2: And it was all one in the same.
Speaker 1: It was all one in the same.
Speaker 2: So you fell in love with it, you went to school till you learned, you were going to the school that your father was principal of and your mother taught, your mother and aunt, right?
Speaker 1: Taught there, yes, right.
Speaker 2: Was there any sense that you were under a fishbowl?  I mean you had it--there was great, great exp--great things expected of you all the time.  But was there a sense that you couldn't sort of get away or that wasn't sort of an issue?
Speaker 1: Not really it wasn't an issue.  I, I, I think it--there may have been times when I would think of that, but you know leaving and going somewhere else, but that quickly left my mind because I think I came to the understanding that I was not going anywhere.
Speaker 2: Did you ever ask your father why can't we move to, to California, or why can't we move to New York and--
Speaker 1: Actually I did.  I had said let's--why don't we get out of here?  And he, he said where are we going?  And I said anyplace but here.  And he said well I'll have to get a job wherever I go and I don't have any other place where I can walk into a position like this and support this family.  And so he--we stayed obviously.
Story_ID: 54225
Speaker 1: Now when it was time for you to graduate, what were your thoughts about where you were gonna--it was assumed you were gonna go on to school, right, to college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where--what was--I, I know you attended Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what--how was that decision made?
Speaker 2: You know it was made in discussion with my father and my mother about where I should go you know, to school.  And it was my--I had an aunt who had gone to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and that was a big choice of hers.  But after much discuss--it was after much discussion that I ended up at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: And what, what--how did--how did that discussion--how did that sort of--what was the--so you're saying I want to go there, what were the reasons?  What, what was the nature of the discussion?
Speaker 2: Well the discussion--it--I remember he always--the final question came down, well where is the kid gonna get the best education?  And that's what we need to be concerned.  And my mother was really on the side of saying well where does he wanna go?  Because no matter what education he's gonna get, if he doesn't want to go there, there's not much that he's gonna, going to be able to do.  So her thought was that I think he should go where he wants to go to school.  And also because my--this aunt that I told you about that lived in Atlanta.  And so we had gone in and out of there quite frequently.  And so I, I had some back--a little knowledge about Morehouse College growing up in high school.  And I think that's what led me to, you know believe that that's where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: And so you graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty three [1953].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty three [1953] okay, okay. And these were--
Speaker 2: And also because--I remember this, I, I had--we had all become--Benjamin Mays walked on water at our house.  And so that was a big influence on my going there also.
Story_ID: 54226
Speaker 1: Now you know when you, when you get to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] after all this sort of discussion that happens in the household, and I assume that Morehouse is your choice also.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: How--what, what--describe your experience there.  Would you, first of all, you know even though you traveled, you know to other parts.  This is really your first time away from home.  No, you had spent that time in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: I had--in and out of there.
Speaker 1: In and out of there.  But so can you--you lived on campus?
Speaker 2: No, I did not live--
Speaker 1: You, you lived with your aunt.
Speaker 2: With my aunt.
Speaker 1: Your aunt, okay, okay, okay.  So can you describe, you know your experience there and what, you know what that whole experience was like?
Speaker 2: Well it was a very good experience.  I, I think I was scared to death initially.  Was scared that I wasn't gonna do well.  And I was just doubly motivated that I had to, to make it big time there.  And so I, I worked myself very hard to make sure that I would succeed.  And so other than being scared, you know, I was highly motivated to do well.  I had great encouragement coming again, from this aunt of mine who lived there.  And so it all worked out very well.
Story_ID: 54227
Speaker 1: From the moment that you entered Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], did you have a sense of the history of the place?
Speaker 2: Yes I did because well not so much the history of the place in terms of a school, but a history of Benjamin Mays.  And that sort of--the Mays was the school.  And I think that's how most people knew, knew about it, knew it through him.  And or through his activities.  And so you know one didn't separate the two.  Really Mays was the school.
Speaker 1: And what--do you know the first time that you saw him on campus, or had an encounter with him, came in contact with him?
Speaker 2: Yeah I remember that very well.  It was, it was one day and it was a pool hall on campus.  And that's where we would spend a lot of our free time.  And as we had heard, Mays popped through there periodically.  You know and would always say are you supposed to be in class somewhere?  Or where are you supposed to be?  Because he felt if it wasn't free time, that you were really goofing off somewhere.  And so that was my first--I had seen him before, but it was my first time seeing him on campus was when he walked in that pool hall and said he wanted to make sure that we were where we were supposed to be.  And I made the mistake of telling my parents about that.  And they, they were very happy.  Cause they said well that's why you--my mother [Ethel Davis] said that's why we wanted you to go there.  For that very reason, that we knew he would, you know would keep look after you or keep--make sure you were doing what you were supposed to be doing.  And so--but it was--I guess it's a continuation of my utter awe with him.  Cause I, you know he, he was a very imposing man.  And when he spoke, you know you could just sort of feel the ground was gonna shake and--
Speaker 1: How would you describe him, sir?
Speaker 2: I would describe him as a very intelligent guy. Very--
Story_ID: 54228
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were talking about Mr., you know about Benjamin Mays and I was asking what--well if you knew what type of person was he.
Speaker 2: Well I, as I say he was a very impressive guy.  And a very inspiring guy.  I mean he, he really drilled education into your head and really made you believe that that was the--I mean I think I really came to believe that this anti-segregation thing that I had been looking for, that education was really the answer to that question.  And he would--and that, that was a big part of what he's always been saying and always said.  And I think he really--I really came to believe that after spending time around him.
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Davis, what were--what was the Morehouse was like in that period, 1953 to 1957?  During your years, what was that--what was it like?  The campus and what were some of the other people that we might know who were on campus with you?
Speaker 2: Jim Webb who is now in Glencoe [Illinois] was a, was a classmate of mine.  I don't know if you know that name.  He used to work for Blue Cross/Blue Shield.  And you know I was, I was thinking the other day, I don't, I don't know where any of my college classmates are at the moment.  Except Webb who is here in Glencoe.  That's the only one that I knew, that I still know.
Story_ID: 54229
Speaker 1: Wasn't there growing activism on the campus at the time that you were there?
Speaker 2: It was in fact that, yes.  Cause we--you know I was arrested once in Richard's Department Store for drinking out of the white water fountain.  Because my brother--I always did what my brother told me, 'cause he went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] also and he had--one day we were downtown and going through Richards.  And he said let's try this white water.  So we went over to this water fountain, it was just the same water fountain, but on different sides of the elevator.  And one with a big white sign over it and the other with a big colored, colored sign over it.  And he said let's try this white water.  And no sooner than he said that, this big, burly guard in Richard's had his hand on our shoulders saying you can't drink out of there.  You can't drink that water.  And I said no, not again.  Cause I, I had thought Atlanta [Georgia] would be above that kind--I had really come to believe that--I was really liberated.  And even though, you know, it was a highly segregated town of course, but that brought it all back home to me.  That this job was still not done.  And that's when I--that's when I became very active, even more active I should say.
Speaker 1: Okay and can you talk about some of your activities?
Speaker 2: Well that was about the time that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was getting started.  And so--and there was a big discussion on campus about whether you wanted--whether we could be active or not.  And a lot of--a big split between those, the student body and those who were pushing for more strident activities, and then those who wanted to, to be quiet about it all.  But I think I, you know it was actually--that was where the whole thing became ingrained in me that I, I really would have to fight this thing for the rest of my life if necessary.  And of course in Atlanta, I had much more support, you know, for an anti, anti-segregation stance than I ever had when I was growing up in high school.  And so just a group of us became very, very active and began to--as we used to say stand Atlanta on its head.  And of course [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s legacy was a big thing down there at the time.  And so we just, you know we would put together different groups and go do our thing.
Speaker 1: Now what's the--were you part of the SNCC [unclear]?  You know SNCC did--
Speaker 2: I was not that involved in SNCC.  I was--I became active in CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].
Speaker 1: Okay I was wondering if you were involved in SNCC or CORE.
Speaker 2: No, I went directly into CORE.
Speaker 1: Now why, why did you choose CORE?
Speaker 2: I think that's because of some [unclear] that I knew who were involved in it.  And was saying that this is the way you should go.  And so it was just sort of started to do it.  And I mean I don't think we ever--that I ever sat and thought about it at any great length to try and decide what I should do.  In those days it was sort of whatever was happening, they just jumped into it.
Story_ID: 54230
Speaker 1: Now James Farmer, wasn't he the head of CORE?
Speaker 2: He was the head of CORE, right.  And actually that may have been one of the reasons why I had gotten in CORE.  Cause Farmer did come to Atlanta [Georgia] at one point and we had gone to some meetings with him.  And he was selling CORE of course.  And we'd all become [unclear] with that.
Speaker 1: And CORE, what was its purpose?  What was its mission and what was the sort of the philosophical underpinnings?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was to fight segregation and discrimination through direct action.  You know you, you really knew from the beginning that you know, sit-ins were the way you, was the way you would actually attack this problem.  And so you had to get over your fear of going to jail.  And actually that point, you know the real fear of getting beat up by racist cops and other law enforcement people in the South, and even in the North.  'Cause I found that when I came to Chicago [Illinois], while we were fighting against Ben Willis.  And [unclear] we found that the policemen here were every bit as bad as they had been in the south.  And it was a big struggle.
Speaker 1: Now was, what's your involvement in--what other things were you doing?  Did you get involved in CORE like what, in your sophomore or junior year?
Speaker 2: It would have been more like the junior year.
Story_ID: 54231
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now what were you, what were you studying?  What were you majoring in?
Speaker 1: Sociology.
Speaker 2: And what--why--what interested you, why would you choose that?
Speaker 1: Well because I think another part of my life had been deciding that if, you know to really attack this problem of segregation, that what blacks lacked was not being active enough and demanding more, and that we didn't have enough money.  And we spend an awful lot of money, but we didn't own it enough.  You know, hard cash.  And so I guess in my head at the time that I was much younger, I had said well if I really can understand this racism thing and can get blacks active and [unclear] and can deliver.  I think it's what really led me into banking.  And can really try to help deliver more money into our pockets so that we'll have to do something with, that maybe I would be on the right path.  So when an associate started talking to me about the bank, it sort of all came together and I figured if we could get control of this institution, we could really begin to do some things.  And I think that's been true over the course of the years.
Story_ID: 54232
Speaker 1: Now when you graduated from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], where did you go?  Where did you--
Speaker 2: I went to grad school at Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: And majored in what?
Speaker 2: I was getting a master's in sociology.
Speaker 1: In sociology.  Was your thought--you weren't thinking banking at the time.
Speaker 2: No, I was not.
Speaker 1: Were you thinking more social work?
Speaker 2: No, I was thinking teaching.
Speaker 1: Teaching, okay.
Speaker 2: Because I had come from this long line of teachers and that was what I thought I would be doing.
Speaker 1: And was there any--what, what was significant about the Washington University, you know, experience?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure there was anything--well what, what was significant, what was significant about it was that's how I ended up in Chicago [Illinois].  I was working for a professor there on campus who was coming to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] the following year.  And he asked me if I would be interested in coming with him and I said not really cause I can't afford it, it cost too much money.  And he said well maybe we can get you some help.  And so we began to--we started--continued talking and I ended up coming as his assistant to Northwestern.  Actually it was in the Transportation Center at the time, that's where he was coming.  And that's where I met Ron [Grzywinski] was in--had this idea about a development bank and what it could do.  And so he and I began--he was living at 4800 Chicago Beach Drive at the time.  And so he and I had discuss [unclear] over the next three or four months.  And this whole bank thing came to be.
Speaker 1: That's how it came to be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the beginning of it.
Speaker 1: So you come--okay, you come to Chicago because--
Speaker 2: I think to go to grad school.
Speaker 1: To go--no, no, you went to Washington University.
Speaker 2: But I left there.
Speaker 1: To come here.
Speaker 2: To continue that education in Chicago, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you're saying that the first--you got to know Ron, Ron--
Speaker 2: Grzywinski.
Speaker 1: Grzywinski.  And it was over what was that--that's what I'm just--what had he been doing?  Let me ask you that.
Speaker 2: Well he had been in banking.  In fact he was an experienced banker.  And so I mean he shared--his father had been a small, a small hardware store owner.  And when he needed--his father needed money for some things, of course none of the big banks would talk to him.  And so Ron be--that's how he became interested in this whole banking thing.  And so when we hooked up--his interest, his interest was in sort of helping to deliver financial resources to small business people like his father.  And then when I said well maybe, you know we can get minorities, small businessmen also some help with this thing, it all came together.  And that's what we began doing.
Speaker 1: So what year is this, sir, at that point?
Speaker 2: This was 19--what year would this have been?
Speaker 1: You graduated, you--would it've been '50 [1950] or '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: It was in the '60s [1960s], early '60s.
Speaker 1: In the early '60s, okay.
Story_ID: 54233
Speaker 1: And what is this Chicago [Illinois] that you've come to?  What is it like and where were you living here and--
Speaker 2: Well it was a highly segregated town of course at that point.  This was, this would have been in, in the late '50s [1950's] when I first came to the city.  And I was living in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  And that--and no different from--in fact it was worse than Atlanta [Georgia] because Atlanta had you know, over the years was supposed--had been--had the reputation of having the best-housed black population in the country.  And so I, I was--because of the expense here, I was forced to live in much less desirable housing than I, than I had been in Atlanta.  And so I had to move into a--in fact again with some people that I knew.  I moved with--previously lived next to my aunt in Atlanta.  I moved in with them when I came here and that was in Woodlawn on 65th Street.  And I stayed there for two years.
Speaker 1: Now you were going to school where at this point?
Speaker 2: At that point I had just come here.
Speaker 1: You had just come here.  But did you finish?  You said you came--I was just wondering.  You said you continued your school--
Speaker 2: No I hadn't--I did not, I didn't get my degree from Washington [University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nor did I get it--but I transferred to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I got here.
Speaker 1: Okay, I got you.
Speaker 2: But I didn't get the degree there either.
Speaker 1: Okay, I got you. I just want to get clear, be clear on that.  Now you--I remember earlier you said that Chicago you did not take to.  And I'm wondering, you know here this is a northern city, you know.  And you had liked New York, you liked California.  What about Chicago were you disappointed with?
Speaker 2: I was, I was disappointed that it was no different.  In fact as I said, I thought it was worse than Atlanta when I first got here.  You know and now this was again in the early '60s [1960s].  You can imagine--you know what Woodlawn looked like at that point.  And I said what the hell is all this, excuse me, but what the hell is all this?  You know, this is supposed to be Chicago and things are supposed to be much better and much different.  And I really came to feel it was much--they were much worse.  And a matter, matter of fact, much more oppressive.  Cause I mean, you know Richard [J.] Daley at that point had his iron grip on this town and unless he wanted something to happen, it just didn't, didn't go.  So I was very disappointed.  And so you know I got involved with the CORE, or at least the CORE chapter here in, in Chicago.  I eventually became chairman of it.  And arrested by the, by the cops a number of times and hauled off to jail.  And I--you know interestingly enough, I, I really came to be much more afraid when I was arrested by police in this town than I had been in the South because they were really nasty to you once they got you in the back of those paddy wagons or wherever they were gonna take you.  And so you know again, I was coming to see that there was more work to be done here than there probably was in the South.  And you had a much more lethargic population here.  I mean 'cause in the South you know, you could get people excited and really moving on this whole issue.  And it just seemed to be here we could get nothing, nothing at all going with the adult black population.  And that was because you know Daley's tentacles really had become so well ingrained in this town and he really had most all the black community under his control.
Story_ID: 54234
Speaker 1: [On the bank to approve this Urban Development Division that we were gonna start at the bank.]  Cause he and another friend had just bought Hyde Park [Bank].  And he said we want to start an Urban Development Division to try to do something about the inability of minorities to get money for financing their business and I need--I gotta go find somebody to run it.  And he said, he said to him well I got just the person.  And he said who is it?  He said Milton Davis.  And that was the beginning.  And so then she came back and told me I should go talk with Ron [Grzywinski] about this job because I needed a job at that point.  And so he and I over like six months, talked about what he saw being done with this division, and what I had in mind and that maybe the two of us could, could really work out something.  And so that discussion continued and we put together a group with Mary [Houghton] and Ron, with Mary and Jim Fletcher and bought the bank.  Well we bought South Shore because it was, it was the--[unclear] we're interested in moving it because the neighborhood had changed racially and they just said the, the--there was nothing for them to do.  And I think they, you know what they was saying was that the neighborhood had changed racially enough where they wanted to get out.  And so they put the bank up for sale and we bid on it and got it.
Speaker 2: Now the-I want to have everyone understand the, the circumstances and the environment when you--you know which you were operating.  In, in that point in the, in the early '60s [1960s].  Have there been much white flight?  Because this is--you're talking about before the riots here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right.  You mean flight from the South?
Speaker 2: Flight from the South, the South Shore area.  You know where the bank is.  You were saying that--
Speaker 1: Well that was the beginning, that, that flight from South Shore.  As a matter of fact, when we bought the bank, we had been--we were told several times that we were buying out a bank that was not gonna make it because that neighborhood had changed racially.  As a matter of fact, that was about the time that the South Shore Commission wrote this book on the transition of--from a white community to a really segregated, highly segregated one.  And they had said that--and most people thought that the neighborhood was really gonna go the way of Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  That it would really just become a big slum.  And that there was nothing we could do about that.  So that--the bank had lost about half its deposits when we bought it in--this would have been in '50 [1950]--
Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s] right?
Speaker 1: This was--yeah this was--well now when we bought it, but it began to change in the early '60s [1960s].  That process of change began to take place.  But by--we didn't get the bank, we bought the bank in 1973.  And so that racial change process had sort of run its course at that time.  And the neighborhood, it was essentially an all-black neighborhood, or 98 percent.
Story_ID: 54235
Speaker 1: And tell me what--now at the early stages was James Fletcher and Mary Houghton, did they come in later?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had all worked together.  I ran the Urban Development Division at the Hyde Park Bank.  And I hired both Fletcher and Mary Houghton to work for me, and so it was--in the division was me, Fletcher and, and Mary, and Ron [Grzywinski] was President of the bank, of the Hyde Park Bank.  And so we all put this proposal together for us, for Development Bank, and we didn't have any money of course.  So we had--we went to foundations and church bodies and some wealthy individuals to ask them if they'd be willing to put up the equity to help us buy this bank for the purpose that we wanted it for development.  And so we were able to raise the money to do that, and that's how it all started.
Speaker 1: And how much money did you raise for it?
Speaker 2: Well actually we--this is interesting.  We had set out to raise twenty-some million dollars.  But we only--we raised two million.  And at about that time, the, the feds had changed the rules about how much equity you had to have if you wanted to buy a bank.  And that figure had been lowered.  So when we raised about four million dollars, and with that we, we coupled that with a loan from American National Bank.  And so in August of 1973 we purchased the South Shore Bank and started this whole project.  It's now a 1.2 billion dollar bank and has by all accounts I think done more than any other bank in the city for the black community.
Story_ID: 54236
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to just go a little bit into more of the mechanics of you know, you gaining access to the bank [South Shore Bank].  Because there was a lot of resistance to that, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, there was, there was another bidder for the bank.  But we think his aim, his aim was to control--to get it and then move it downtown, not keep it in the neighborhood.  And we, we don't know the full story of it, but we highly suspected there was a-Ron [Grzywinski] had a friend downtown [Chicago, Illinois] at the American National Bank.  And we think that person was instrumental in having the other owner turned down in his bid for it and, and our bid accepted to run it as a development bank.  And so that--as I say we don't know that for sure, but that's as much as we can piece together.  That's how it all came together.
Speaker 1: And what bought this--this had to excite you, the possibilities like this, right?
Speaker 2: Well I, yeah.  I said well maybe after all these years it's all been worth it; that something is really going to happen that will give us this tool we need to really fight this, this battle, the bigger battle.  And so I was really very excited about that.
Speaker 1: So you really essentially approached banking from a sociological, a sociologist's standpoint.
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so with that, what, what is sort of the national--you, you--what do you think you've--you bought a great sense of mission.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To the position, both you and Ron.  Now do you think [unclear] decided that you were sort of ideologues?
Speaker 2: Well I think we both were, yes, for different reasons.  But nonetheless, a lot of ideology woven into all this.  But, but he had, as I said, he had--I hadn't had any banking experience.  Now I thought I was smart and that I could learn.  And so with his experience, that we would be able to, to pull all this off.
Speaker 1: And were there--so once you got the feds to approve you, right, was that a long drawn out process, longer than it needed to be?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't long--it was no longer than, than is ordinary when the feds approving an, an application to, to buy the charter of a bank.  It was much longer of course than any--than we had--than we would have wanted.  But you know in hindsight it was no longer than they take on any other deal.  And, and we would talk, Ray Kramer, we were talking about running this as a development bank, which they announced that development banks are being setup all over the country but this was a--we were the first ones to do that.  And I don't think it took them any longer to, to approve our application than they would ordinarily have on any other.
Story_ID: 54237
Speaker 1: Were there any other models for what you were attempting to do around the country?
Speaker 2: None, none at all, none at all.  So I say this was the first one.  And so we were moving into unchartered waters as the first ones to do this.  And so we had nothing to guide us except our strong belief that the black community needed an institution like this that would really say what it--do what it was going to say and that they would be successful.  And that--see the, the people who--the other bidders for South Shore were contending that there was no money in the black community in, in the--on the South Side and therefore a bank couldn't make it.  As I said we're now a 1.2 billion dollar bank.  So that fallacy went down the drain.  It has--the bank has survived very well.  As a matter of fact, we now have a bank in Detroit [Michigan], Cleveland [Ohio] and out in a, in a little town in Washington, the state of Washington.  So it's--it's pros--has prospered quite well.
Speaker 1: Now in those--did you do research and find other banks that you wanted to model yourself after who were doing what you sort of envisioned happening here with South Shore Bank?
Speaker 2: No, as I said, there were no models to go after, to look, to look to for this.  It was just trying to construct the model in our heads, and then putting together what we thought we knew about banking and how a bank should be run.  And that people would take advantage of the credit and the services we had to offer, and that they would pay the money back.  And that's--that was the--would be the final straw that would make the bank go or not go.  And so that all came to be.
Speaker 1: And during those early years, what do you think you did?  You know first of all, okay the feds approved you.  Now do you remember what, what you were doing at the time that you learned that to be the case and you know, the sense of excitement or you know--
Speaker 2: At the time that all happened I, I was working at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business [Chicago, Illinois].  And when I, when Ron [Grzywinski] called me and said he had gotten word that day, this was in early April, that, that the application to buy the bank had been approved.  And that--I'll never forget the day, was that the closing date had been set for the 21st of August, that we would [unclear] to purchase the bank and start to run it.  And that's, that's what happened.  But I must confess again I--a week after, three days after we were, you know had bought the bank and were in there, I did sort of say to myself, what have we done?  You know it, it looked like it was going to be on--and people were in--you know this bank were--had a high head of steam with people taking--whites leaving the neighborhood and then taking their money out of it.  And then so we had-how were we gonna prevent that withdrawals from continuing at the pace they were continuing.  And then on the other hand get the black community to start using it.  And so that really became a much bigger job I think than either of us had thought, cause we didn't--hadn't had the experience doing it.  And neither of us thought it would be, but after about the third year, it did come together.
Story_ID: 54238
Speaker 1: And what do you think were important building blocks that you put in place that, you know, that it started getting itself together in those three year periods.  Were there some critical things that you--
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that we say to date, we began to have a series of community meetings where we didn't send out, you know, anybody.  It was Ron [Grzywinski] and myself going to different block club meetings and to other meetings in the neighborhood saying, "This is what the bank intends to do."  And so it was the top two guys in the bank saying it's gonna happen.  And so it--people could believe it.  And I think that became crucial to, to the neighborhood really believing that we were going to, to do this and make it happen.  And then we got--of course getting the foundations and churches and individuals who had put up the equity for us to start the bank, I think was an important building block.  Because once the Ford Foundation and several others gave us their stamp of approval by saying, "We'll put a lot money into the equity end of this place," it began to build faith from a number of--among others that they we really knew what we were doing.
Speaker 1: And did you find--how long was this--well how long was the, the period of time before you saw some signs of things turning around?  Because the community had been--at the time that this, this--you've got the license or the approval to do it, did you--was the community was in a, in a position of sort of rapid change.
Speaker 2: Right, it was still in the process of change, right.  It was a year after we got approval on the charter before I say we really began to see that there was some firm evidence of a turnaround in the institution.  So it wouldn't have been until '72 [1972] that we began to see that.
Speaker 1: And what were your, what were your, your goals at that time besides you know generally increasing--improve the community?  You were almost serving--it was almost as if the work--let me just sort of look at this.  The work that you had done, you know, at the University of Chicago--I mean no, you were working there at the time.  But were you working--the work that you were doing at the University of Chicago, what area did you say you were working in?
Speaker 2: It was the stock market.
Speaker 1: Stock market.
Speaker 2: The stock market study at the university.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: So it had nothing to do with banking.
Speaker 1: It had nothing to do with banking.  But it almost seems as if you were using this bank and the community as one sort of one huge experiment, sort of.
Speaker 2: Well that's one way to look at it I guess.  Because--because they had failed.  Right, one would have said, would have said it was a failed experiment because nobody else had done it.  But we knew we couldn't fail and we didn't intend to.
Speaker 1: And so what were the things that you felt important building blocks, and how did you sort of prioritize, you know what to take on and what to do, you know with this?
Speaker 2: Well we set up from day one when we went in the bank that no, no--and (unclear) of the officers in that bank could turn down a loan.  If somebody came in, especially an African American came in for some credit and if those were, you know regular bankers and they had been doing this for a long time.  And we said, "If you feel it's a good credit, go ahead and do it.  But if you wanna say no, then you've gotta let Ron [Grzywinski] or I"--one would have to buy off on that.  And I think that prevent--that helped us to build confidence on the part of the community and the people who were coming in to us that we really were serious about what we want to do.  You know this bank has a reputation that it will do loans that the other banks turn awa- turn down.  And, so that confidence building on the part of the neighborhood I think was an important part of building, building up that confidence in the bank and getting people to believe that we really were going to--that we were there for the long haul and we're gonna do what we said we were going to do.
Story_ID: 54239
Speaker 1: Well what did--were there other people in the banking community who had views about your approach?
Speaker 2: Yes, they thought we were gonna fail.  They--nobody believed that, in fact other than the banking community in, in Chicago [Illinois] were saying that there's no way these guys are gonna make it out there at South Shore because they--because one is they had no faith in the neighborhood, or, or either as some bankers told me, that you know blacks would borrow money but they won't pay it back.  Or they'll take your money and you'll never see it.  Well that turned out not to be true. People borrow it and pay it back.  And paid it back on time, so you know the bank began to build.  And that, fortunately that reputation just began to grow.  And it got bigger and bigger.
Speaker 1: So the--the first, so the first priority was really trying to take this proclamation that had no, you know or was discriminated and had no ability to get loans and make sure that no one was turned away.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then what was the whole interest in sort of the community revitalization was that of equal standing at the beginning, or were you sort of--you saw this was sort of a need?
Speaker 2: Well I think the real turnaround had came when one day we were in the bank and we got a call from the guy who ran the Winthrop Rockefeller Foundation in Little Rock, Arkansas.  And he said you know we've been putting out tons of money here for these community groups in Arkansas to do community development.  And every time we ask a question about this, they keep--they come back saying you gotta go talk to the South Shore Bank, those guys know what they're doing up there.  And so they wondered if we would be interested in trying to help them set up a development bank in, in Arkansas if they would put up the money for it.  And we said--and that was our first expansion anywhere, and was in, was in Arkadelphia, Arkansas when we bought a bank and began to run it as a development institution for that, for that part of the community of the state of Arkansas.  And so that--I think people then began to see that it--that not only was it in this bank was--had begun to make profits.  And so not only was this one turned around, but we were getting a second, a second one in another state.  And at that point [President] Bill Clinton was the Governor of Arkansas.  And he became aware of what we were doing and really became--I think came to understand and believe in what we were saying about the influence of a bank could have on a neighborhood.  And so that's how this whole--all this legislation about community development banks came about, simply because Bill Clinton became interested and supportive of what we were doing at South Shore.  And then so he wrote this legislation that helped to get the federal government involved in helping to establish these banks over the country.  So I think those was an--a crucial step in giving us legitimacy on a much broader scale than we would have had normally.
Speaker 1: And, and what year is this, that he, you know he gets involved?
Speaker 2: This would--well--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970]--
Speaker 2: This would--we bought the bank in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so Clinton became aware of what we were doing, and we helped him to establish this bank in Arkansas in the late '70s [1970s].  And this, this legislation that he got behind for establishing development banks over the country, happened in the early '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 54240
Speaker 1: And what is happening, what is happening here in Chicago [Illinois] or around the country, but here in Chicago in terms of community activism, you know community--well community activism?  And what organization--what are you, what are you tying into, you know, to sort of make--
Speaker 2: Well it's, you know the [unclear] of Clinton becoming supportive of all this and passing, and getting this legislation passed, passed, you had the Community Redevelopment Act passed, and a part of that says that they now judge all banks on how well they are serving the needs of their communities.  And so all these banks--the big banks downtown and all the others know that when those examiners walk in there, that's one of the questions they're gonna ask.  How well are you servicing the needs of your community?  And none of them want to have the local neighborhood groups saying they aren't doing a thing to help us, help this neighborhood.  And so what you have is that the banks beginning to put out, put out much more money for community development.  And that includes all the banks in the city, the big ones and the small ones cause they know it's a part of their examination and they wanna look good on it.
Story_ID: 54241
Speaker 1: And do you--are there any time like between the '80s [1980s], you know the mid-'90s [1990s] or recently where you had a set--you know there was some problems, you hit some bumps along the road?
Speaker 2: Lots of them, lots of them.  I think it was throughout the '80s [1980s] we--you know bank--the regulators look at how well a bank is earning to decide how good it's doing.  And we, we really didn't feel that we were making the kind of money that we should be making until like the mid-'70s [1970s] so that we could make the regulators feeling good about what we were doing.  And at the same--and we had this two-tiered rule that we were using.  And that is that not only were we interested in making money, but we also--we also would have to do development in the neighborhood.  And I think everybody who looks at South Shore today, you know says that it's--that's--the bank has been the difference in, in what the neighborhood looks like today and what it would have if it hadn't had that resource [unclear] being put into it.
Speaker 1: And what other groups or organizations or groups or organizations were sort of critical, a critical part of your team?  You know of the, of the bank's team?  Was it--was the Urban League or was it, you know--
Speaker 2: Well we--Jim [James] Compton [HM] is a good friend and actually a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate.  And we spent a lot of time talking to Jim about this.  We, we couldn't get the [Chicago] Urban League interested in investing in the bank, but yeah, but they have been very supportive of, of the, of the community development work that we've doing and that we are saying is important for the renewal of urban neighborhoods, not only in Chicago [Illinois], but throughout the country.  So yeah they have been very supportive of what we're doing, what we have been doing.
Speaker 1: Now with anyone else though, besides the Urban League?  Any other groups that were sort of critical navigating the politics locally?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: The administration--
Speaker 2: Gale, Gale Cincotta, do you know that name?
Speaker 1: C-I-N--
Speaker 2: C, C-I-N-C-O-T-T-A.
Speaker 1: I think I've been--
Speaker 2: She passed about two years ago.  But she was head of something called the--it was a national group trying to get banks interested in, in re--in development in, in urban neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: What was, what was the name of the organization?
Speaker 2: I'm stumped on that.  Gale--
Speaker 1: Based out of Chicago?
Speaker 2: It was based here in Chicago, Gale Cincotta.
Speaker 1: I just--
Speaker 2: National Housing Coalition, maybe that's it, Chicago--well that's how it started.  It became a national group.  But that was, that, that had been--and now you have the--what is the name of that group that--so there's lots--there's several--
Speaker 1: This--there are things like I've heard Chicago Rehab Network.
Speaker 2: Chicago Rehab Network, right, is instrumental in helping and lobbying for developing neighborhoods.  And I can't think of the name of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.  But so--okay so Urban League was definitely critical.  Anything--what about, what about the politics of the situation?  You had--really you know when you talk about it, it's--you know some are--a governor of other state who, you know, sort of played an instrumental role.  But I'm just wondering about local politics here.
Speaker 2: Well we had a lot of support initially from Paul Simon when he was U.S. [United States] Senator.  And that was crucial, you know to getting us off and in good stead.  And actually the, the local Democratic party has been very supportive and John Stroger [HM].  And trying to think of some alderman's name, Bobby Rush [HM].  You know all people who are very familiar with what we're doing and have been very supportive of it.  And even the local--now the present Mayor [Richard M.] Daley is very supportive of our work and has been very helpful where he could be.
Story_ID: 54242
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to when you first were, you know, attracting depositors.  And I'd like you to tell your--tell the story about how you actually get through to--you know depositors.  Cause basically you--the typical scenario is that banks would, you know people would come to the bank, you know because there was a need.  And I'm just wondering how you went about--cause you had sort of a--
Speaker 2: Well we have, we had two--you're right, deposits are the lifeblood of any bank.  And in addition to the local depositors, we have what we call development deposits.  These are deposits from all over the, the country, and where people put their money in South Shore [Bank] because they have heard about what we do and we pay them competitive interest rates on their money and they--the money is insured like any other bank.  And so we ask them to just support our work by becoming a development depositors, depositor and opening an account with us.  And that, that has, that has grown the bank quite, quite nicely over these years.  So it's--and then the, the local community, you know we've done that marketing also.  And as I said, contrary to what we had been told, there were, there was, there's a--there's a lot of deposits from local residents in Chicago [Illinois].  And so we've made efforts to promote the growth in that area as well.  But our largest single growth has been in what we call the development deposits.  That, that, that's people from all over--literally from all--from every country in the union that has, that has come to South Side of Chicago to open an account to support what we're doing.
Speaker 1: You know I, I had read though also that you had really taken a community organizing approach to building your deposits.  Is that true?  Did the bank do it or did you work through another community group or organization?
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure when you say community organizing.
Speaker 1: That you were aggressively, you know, going to people's homes and having you know--did that, any of that--
Speaker 2: Well that was when we first started.  You know we went to a variety of local community groups and if there was a block club or something and they was having a meeting and they would put us on the agenda.  We showed up there to talk about what the bank was attempting to do.  That did not have the kind of impact we had hoped it would have.  So it--we don't do, we don't do very much of that anymore.
Speaker 1: So what had the impact on the--that's what I'm just--
Speaker 2: The development deposits.
Speaker 1: The development deposits.
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are people from all over the country, you know who had come to Chicago and opened accounts with the South Shore Bank because of our community development orientation.  As I said, we were the first community development bank in the country.  And so we have gotten--we have sold that message to people and they have been willing to open an account with us to support that work.
Speaker 1: And how did you, how did you make people aware of that?  That's what I'm wondering.  Why was that a better technique and how did that even idea come about?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you it's--it came about because at the time that we started it, Adlai Stevenson was the State Treasurer.  And I don't know how he had gotten in touch with us, but somehow he did.  And he opened several accounts with the bank.  And we said well if the State Treasurer is willing to do this, why wouldn't other people, why wouldn't other groups and other--and individuals as well?  And so that's how we named them development deposits and began marketing that concept nationally.  And it caught on and it has worked very well.
Speaker 1: And that's still a component today.
Speaker 2: That's still a component today, right.  There's a separate department in the bank called Development Deposits.  And that, that department runs different marketing programs designed to get people in other states, and actually the model of the world, cause there are accounts in that bank, in this bank who--that come from at least a dozen other countries throughout the world who've opened accounts with us to support because they've heard of what we do.  And so they put their money where their mouth is to support it.
Story_ID: 54243
Speaker 1: Now what other things do you think--you, you had started--when did the Neighborhood Institute begin--
Speaker 2: Well we bought--when we first started the bank in '73 [1973], we didn't have enough--we hadn't raised enough equity to really incorporate the, the other subsidiaries of the holding company.  And so it wasn't until 1976 about, that we started the institute.  And actually we have a profit housing development company.  These are all subsidiaries of the holding company.  And so it--we didn't set those up until about '76 [1976].  But the integral part of the whole [unclear] didn't--
Speaker 1: And what are the things that you're proud of that the Neighborhood Institute has been able to do?
Speaker 2: Well it has, it has a small division called Studio Air, where they're teaching young kids photography and video production and, and all those sort--and those are young high school kids who are really learning this industry quite well.  And that's one of the things that I'm proudest of, that you know the Institute has been able to do.  And it also started develop--developing housing for low and moderate income people.  And so the, the Institute does a lot of that at the moment, or has done a lot of that.  But we're--that's--we're cutting down on that now because it's sort of impossible to develop housing for low income people without big [unclear] subsidy.  And that subsidy is all sort of drying out.  And so we don't do as much of that as we once did.
Story_ID: 54244
Speaker 1: And if you look at between the '70s [1970s], let's go back over it.  From '73 [1973] to '80 [1980], what are the critical things that happened at the bank?  And then I wanna take it from '80 [1980] to '90 [1990] and then '90 [1990] to you know now.  What are, what are those--I just wanna know what the critical--some of the maybe other critical building parts we haven't touched upon.
Speaker 2: Well what were they--you know we had--I don't know if you know the name Robert Nash.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He used to work for [President] Bill Clinton.
Speaker 1: Yes, he's--
Speaker 2: He's now vice chairman of our holding company.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I think you know we've been able to attract people like that to come and join us in our work.  And I think that has made a big difference.  But that's a more recent phenomenon than, than a lot of the other things.  I think as I would see it, I'll go back to this staying in touch with the community and, and actually doing what you say you were gonna do.  I mean you know we have changed, we have funded all of this, this res--residential housing, for rent housing in, in South Shore that you see now.  Ninety percent of that housing is now owned by African Americans.  And it's been the bank that has financed those African Americans in transferring ownership to them on this housing.  And so I think that has made--so doing what we said we were going to do, which was another thing of--another part of what we were saying was a--goes back to what I was saying in the very beginning about trying to create this wealth among, in the African American community.  And so you know in the past, nobody was willing to finance those properties for them.  And so now that, you know, that we've, that we've started doing that, it has really taken off and that has become one of the most successful parts of what the bank has done, is doing.  So I'm very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Are there other things that you're proud of that people might not be aware of or know?
Speaker 2: Well I think I'm proud that, you know, we were really instrumental in starting this whole community development agenda throughout the country.  You don't hear much about that.  I mean you hear a lot about community development, but the fact that it all started right here on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] with the South Shore Bank, I think is--there's a lot of people just don't know it or they ignore it, one.  But I'm, I'm happiest that we have been able to start this community development movement where it's become a respected work throughout the country at the moment.  And so we've done a lot of that.
Story_ID: 54245
Speaker 1: Now with the Community Reinvestment Act, when was that passed?
Speaker 2: That was in the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: In the mid-'70s [1970s].  So it wasn't fought--it wasn't--you sort of--you preceded that, okay.
Speaker 2: Right the bank, right.  Well we had to demonstrate that this was all possible, you know to do.  And so once it, you know we demonstrated that, it became successful.  Then you could go out and talk about and have other people believe that it could be done.  And so that's what has happened.
Speaker 1: And who were the ones who have patterned themselves, you know, after you around the United States?
Speaker 2: Well there's a bank out in--this bank that we started out in Washington, in the state of Washington, has--is a development bank.  As I said, this bank we helped start in Arkansas.  And it's now--it has now expanded into the Delta.  And so they are doing, they are doing the same sort of thing.  There is a community development bank in, in Brooklyn, New York that patterned itself after South Shore.  And they have I think done a lot of this activity.
Speaker 1: And did they--when they were--when any of those other markets were rolling out, were there things that they could easily replicate, or did they find that there were different aspects based on the--
Speaker 2: Well now community development is a local phenomenon.  And so what people had to do was to get to know the economics of the community in which they were operating.  And that's gonna be different from community to community.  And so they had to do a lot of honing in on local conditions and what was needed.  But the big areas are housing.  The whole country needs housing.  Business development in inner cities, that's a big need.  And so we've identified for those--in most cases the broad areas where all this work is needed, needs to be done.  And then they had to look at local conditions to see--excuse me, how best to fashion their approach to make it work locally.
Story_ID: 54246
Speaker 1: Now I'd like you to talk, talk to you about the venture capital firm too, and when that started and what the impetus was behind that.
Speaker 2: Well that started in 1970--the mid-'70s [1970s] because as we looked around at the different companies we had under Shore Bank, we said to ourselves what's missing.  And our venture capital firm was one of the big--was the big missing piece.  And so we got busy and raised money--venture capital money.  And that's--at least we don't own it, but we invested in it.  And so we helped David Schwab [ph.] cause he used to be the president of the bank, now runs that company.  And we assisted David in, you know getting others to invest in it.  And that's now up and growing.  In fact it's celebrating its fifth year now this year.  And actually he and Leslie Davis, they used to run our Real Es--they used to run our Commercial Loan Department, and now the principals in that venture capital firm, and growing very well.
Story_ID: 54247
Speaker 1: And when you and Ron Grzywinski--what, now [unclear] Mary and James Fletcher were there also in 1973.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they started working with us when we were at the South Shore Bank.  This all started with what we call the Urban Development Division, which was housed inside this--the Hyde Park Bank.  And Mary [Houghton] and Jim [James] Fletcher came to work in that division at the time when it was at that bank and then came over with us when we moved to South Shore.
Speaker 1: And what were the various roles that you played amongst the four of you?  What--
Speaker 2: Well I was head of the div--this was the Urban Development Division, which was doing all this work.  And I was the director of that division.  Mary was an employee of the Urban Development Division, as was Jim Fletcher.  And so was--actually between the three of us we sort of--we did every--everything that was-anything that was needed, you know, either, either one of us would do it.  And Mary has taken the--a lot of the work that the bank does now is, is, is international in its scope.  And she has taken the lead on heading up that, that part of what, of that, of what we're doing.  Because it--it's just the whole world is discovering that poor people can use money.  That it's really what they needed to help them get out of their doldrums.  And so she has headed up that part of what ShoreBank is now doing.  And it's, it's literally all over the world that this is happening.  And of course Jim Fletcher passed in, in '98 [1998] and he's no longer with us.
Speaker 1: So you had four star people really that came together.
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And were able to--
Speaker 2: Who shared a common I think, outlook on doing all this work, and who were willing to devote their lives to it, right.
Story_ID: 54248
Speaker 1: Now the other--can you talk about the growth?  I mean just in terms of financial growth.  You started out--when, when you were part of South Shore Bank before you--
Speaker 2: We were never part of South Shore--we bought it in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: You bought it in '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were, what were the, what were the contributions, the deposits?  You know what level of deposits were there?
Speaker 2: They were at about 45 million when we bought the bank in '73 [1973].  And it has grown to now it's about a 1.2 billion dollar bank.  And that has come about through local deposit growth.  And I just saw last month's figure, it had another stellar month with local deposit growth.  And those development deposits that I described to you, continue to grow and fuel the growth of the institution.  So it's, it's been a combination of those two things.
Speaker 1: And have you found that when banks--cause at the time that you were getting started, you know, banks like Northern Trust and LaSalle [Bank], all of them were not even present.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now have you found--and they, they were made to be present because of the Community Reinvestment Act [1977], largely.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So have you found that, that their presence, even though forced or you know, has that impacted South Shore Bank, or just--
Speaker 2: Well I think it's given legitimacy to the whole concept because you know people figured well if it's a large bank and they're doing it, it must--there must be some good in it.  So the fact that the large banks even though I think it's for--was for the wrong reasons because it was only because of the legislation, or this is my view that they will, you know became--started to do this.  It's still fueled, or at least gave some legitimacy to the whole operation.  And so that has been a big help.
Story_ID: 54249
Speaker 1: Now was--I wanna talk a little bit about your work with ETA [Educational Theater Association], and, and--because that has been--civically and philanthropically, what other organizations you've been involved?  I know ETA very strongly.  Have there been--I know the--
Speaker 2: Well ETA is this theater company.  So I have made a--and there's a housing company called Chicago Dwellings Association, which builds low and moderate income housing in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  And I, I'm very much involved with them.  I, I was involved with Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] before it became--much more so than I am now.  Because I believe in what that college is doing in terms of trying to really make an education available to the masses of people, you know, without--at a cost that they can afford.  And so I've been doing that for a long, long time and I enjoyed it very much.  I used to do a lot of work with the Y[MCA].  In fact I was instrumental in helping to raise the money that built this new Y at 63rd and Stony Island.  And that has been I think a very good, a good thing in the neighborhood.  I'm really interested in, you know in, in organizations that build communities, that build infrastructure in neighborhoods in which they are located.  And that's what I've devoted most of my time to.  And--
Speaker 1: Now ETA, what attracted you to ETA?
Speaker 2: Well as I said I've, I became to view--this was years ago in the '70's [1970's].  When she said we, you know we, we're trying to get money.  They were--then it was just to expand the present theater.  And she said we're trying to get money to do this and no--and they didn't have a large endowment.  They didn't have any endowment.  And so she said you know we can only--it's--people who, who will loan us money are only those who have faith in what we can do.  And I got involved.  I said rather than running north to see a theater production now, why don't I just help to establish something right here in my neighborhood?  And so I got involved with ETA.  And then once I got involved, it just grew on me.  And I became to believe that it was a group of professional people who knew what the hell they were doing, and that they needed some fin--it's, it's back to the same story, that African Americans have money, they just--they don't, they don't have enough of it.  And so unless somebody can make them financing available to them, you know they--there's nothing they can do.  And so that, that became the story all over again.  And so I said rather than just talk about it needing to be done, I should get involved and help make it happen.  And we're now about to build a 12 million dollar new theater on South Chicago Avenue.  And nobody, nobody--there are people alive today who told us that would never happen.  And so--well the present theater we have, we were told that couldn't happen either because you know a two million dollar a year budget for a small theater like ETA is a big undertaking.  And that we couldn't pull that off.  Well we did.  And now we're about to build this new thing across the street.  So it's, it's all--has worked very well.
Story_ID: 54250
Speaker 1: Now when you look at your, your career and what you've done, you have--you know we've talked more about your--the successes, but sometimes they say in life you learn more from failures than your success.  And I'm wondering in this process, you know we talked about some of the bumpy roads in length.  But I'm just wondering what, what things did you learn, you know maybe from the bumpy roads or the failures, you know that have sort of--
Speaker 2: Well that you have to have commitment to what you wanna do.  And you know not just hitting it today and then phase out tomorrow.  But you have to make a commitment to stay with it in the long haul.  And that if you have a good message and work to sell that to people, they will eventually come to understand it and support it.  And so I think those are two of the things I learned in all of this.  We even looked--at ETA [Creative Arts], with the bank and the other--when we raised that money for that South Shore, South Side YMCA.  We were told that we were just crazy 'cause there was no way to raise that kind of money for a Y on the South Side.  And we did it.  And it's come along very well.
Speaker 1: You know yesterday this--it's--when I, when I listen to you, you've had, you've had a very direct and sort of simple approach to life and a very effective--you know, you have been able to take something on, see it to completion and see it thrive.  And I would like to--I, I wanna ask you some sort of philosophical questions.  I'd like to get to that.  When I--you know I'm struck by the fact that you, you know you are a sociologist, or studied sociology.  And you don't see that activated much beyond maybe sort of the community organizing.  You don't see it activated at that high level.
Speaker 2: Well I think in all of this you, you have to have a belief and a commitment to people.  And I think that's what sociology in part is all about.  And so that's been necessary in any of the things that I've, that I've done or that I've [unclear] so far today.  And so you're right, it's not--none of this is where I had started to go, but it's, it's where sort of my involvement in the different things led me.  And so you know I've never been a stickler for just doing something because that was what you started out to do.  But if conditions change and, and drive you another way, you have to follow that.
Speaker 1: Now when you look at the--I mean the other things that as a, you know as a child and you said from the beginning, you know, you wanted to change circumstances.  You know you believed in the--you know your parents' messaging was we can't do anything about this, but you know things can change.
Speaker 2: You can't do anything about it at the moment, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: At the moment, you know, but don't accept it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know and that there was an ability that things, and there was a belief that things could change.
Speaker 2: Or would change.
Speaker 1: Would change.  Would change.  And that education also played a critical role in that.  That education was sort of a path to that.
Story_ID: 54251
Speaker 1: And I--you know I want to ask you when you look at you know, coming out of this, sort of the segregated south and you know through the Civil Rights Movement and being active in that, and sort of playing the--well not sort of, but playing a very, a leading role in community development.  When you look at the black community today, and all its sort of various parts, I'm wondering what hopes and/or concerns you have for that community.
Speaker 2: Well my hope is that one day it will truly realize its full potential cause I don't think we've begun to scratch the surface of that yet.  And so you know that--the potential for what the black community can contribute to this country I think will one day be realized.  And I guess I hope that I'm around to see that when it, as it grows and continues to expand.
Speaker 1: Concerns, what about concerns?
Speaker 2: Concerns that time is running out for us.  That you know there's never enough time.  You know you sort of figure that these things should have gotten done last year or year before or something.  And that you know it's, it's getting close to the end of it and we still have so much, so much to do and you wonder are we gonna make it.  You know and I, I say that I, I won't--probably won't be here to see it, but I just--if I look back at my high school days and look at where we are now, I can only say that change does place, take place and that I've lived to see a lot of it.  And so I just, I have the belief that they will continue to do that and my concerns all run to how on earth--what is it that we can do to really get black Americans more motivated and more activated in terms of what they need to do about their own condition in this country.  I think there's too much reliance on somebody else to do the work, and that we aren't, we're unwilling to make the long-term commitment that's needed to get the job done.
Story_ID: 54252
Speaker 1: Okay if you were advising a young person today, would you tell them to go into banking or become a sociologist?
Speaker 2: Well I would say go into financial, financial market.  It doesn't necessarily have to be banking, but it could, it could be some form of money management or, or something like that.  Start your own money management firm or something like that.  But banking would be a choice, and but it wouldn't necessarily be that specific, depends on what people's interests are.
Speaker 1: Why do you feel so strongly about the financial arena as, as a career choice?
Speaker 2: Because I continue to feel that that's the big missing piece in our lives, in our lives being African Americans.  And that we need to do much, much more and become much more involved in that whole arena.  And I think we are--we're being shut out of it now.  I, I don't, I don't see --I used to do a lot of talking at high schools.  And now that, you know the--when you talk about money, it's like a foreign language to kids.  You know other than money to go to McDonald's to buy what they want.  But when you talk about investments and wealth creation, it's a whole different story to them and they just aren't getting enough of that or any of that at all.  And so somebody needs to do something to try to turn that around.
Speaker 1: And what do you think could turn it around?  Do you think it's that black people feel that in some respects that they don't --well you, you --do you think they don't --still don't understand the value of, of, of --
Speaker 2: Well it's not only the value, but they don't understand how money works in the society.  And so a lack of that understanding you know I think dictates that they don't get involved in deciding what should happen in their own interest.  Or they don't know how to get involved.  And I think more of that needs to happen.
Speaker 1: The other question I have is with you know the industry, the banking industry, you've been involved now for you know over thirty years.  And I'm wondering what, what things have --do you feel positive about in terms of changes, you know to the industry, and what things disturb you?
Speaker 2: I'm disturbed by the fact that young African American kids are not getting into this market soon enough.  I mean it's, it's still too late when they decide to --that maybe this is something they should look at I mean instead of looking at lawyers, doctors or teachers.  Look at things in this financial area and start that very early when kids are way down in grade school.  And that, that--there's not, there's not enough of that happening at the moment.  But the thing that gives me hope about it all is that these markets, these areas are truly opening up.  I mean think that--I just think about the--where I was in high school.  There are thoughts today to do things that, that never ran through my mind.  And I'm just worried that kids are not getting that knowledge today and having those doors open for them.  And we need to do that.
Story_ID: 54253
Speaker 1: And so what--how were you--you're--I know you were--your father [Layton Davis] relatively young.  You were--how old were you when you--he was 55, but how old were you when he passed away?
Speaker 2: I was in high school at the time.
Speaker 1: You were in high school, I see, okay.  So your mother [Ethel Davis]--how long did she live?
Speaker 2: She lived to be sixty-five.
Speaker 1: So you were--
Speaker 2: Or, or late seven, late sixties.
Speaker 1: So you were, you were in Chicago [Illinois] but early in your career.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you think your parents would, would have thought, or even your grandparents --was your--your grandma was named Minnie [Lynn]?
Speaker 2: Minnie.
Speaker 1: Minnie.  What do you think they would say if they--
Speaker 2: I think she would look at me and, and say I told you you could do it.  I mean that was one of her favorite expressions, that I told you you could do it and, and I think --it was my grandfather who I think tended to agree with her on most issues.  I think he would say yeah, she's right.  You can do it and you could do it, and you demonstrated that.  I just wish they had lived to see it.  The fact that they didn't is not good news.
Story_ID: 54254
Speaker 1: And sir, what, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as one who lived his life trying to open gates of opportunities for other African Americans, young kids, and give them more opportunity to do things that they--that were formally closed to them.  That somebody has told them they couldn't do.  But just to expand their horizons.  I hope.
Story_ID: 54255
Speaker 1: And the legacy you want to leave?
Speaker 2: Well my daughter is now working for the George Foundation.  I want her to run a large foundation in this country at some point, that's the legacy I want.
Speaker 1: And why do you think foundations are so important?
Speaker 2: Well only cause that, that's the work she's selected for her life.  And I want to see her do very well at it, and I want to see her make, make a big mark in it somewhere.  You know I've often had visions of why shouldn't she run the Ford Foundation one day, for example, or the Kellogg Foundation, one of those multi-million, billion dollar places.  And, and you know there are days when I say to myself I, I dare to believe that that could happen one day.  And I guess on my good days I really tend to say yes to that, that it is possible that that would come about.
Speaker 1: And so just one last observation or question if you have it.  So really you believe in the power of hope and dreams in many ways.
Speaker 2: Yes, because I think with --because with--that gives you a basis on which to act.  And unless you're willing to act, nothing happens, and so you've got to have dreams and hopes to do that.  But I also believe in, you know, I think it's my [unclear] to take things into your own hand at some point and, and you give help, you give hope a little help along the way.
Speaker 1: Thanks Mr. Davis.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  It's been a pleasure.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And my thanks for being patient too.
Speaker 2: I hope something good comes out of this.
Speaker 1: Me too.
