Story_ID: 26214
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my name is James Ashley Donaldson, J-A-M-E-S A-S-H-L-E-Y D-O-N-A-L-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Alright. And is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: None that I know of. It's none that I know of. I can't think of any stories.
Speaker 1: So you weren't named after any relatives or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born April the 17th, 1941 on a farm near Madison, Florida, which is near Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Right now, presently, my title is Professor of Mathematics and Dean Emeritus of the College of Arts and Sciences at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 28th, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay. 2013 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--2013. Sorry, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.
Story_ID: 26215
Speaker 1: So before we go into depth, we ask five lightweight questions that are sort of a warm-up. So the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like all foods. I like all foods so I'm not sure I could say any one I like more than I like any other. But I shouldn't really like as many as I do; I shouldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, do you have a favorite color? Color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Alright. Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well I guess I'm still kickin'.
Story_ID: 26216
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Audrey Brown Donaldson, A-U-D-R-E-Y B-R-O-W-N, that's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her place of birth and date of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth I am not sure, but I know she was born in 1907--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --April, I'm sorry I couldn't say it, April 15th, 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have any idea where she might be born? Was she born in Florida?
Speaker 2: She was born, you know, either in Madison County, Florida or Brooks County, Georgia. The two counties are adjacent.
Speaker 1: Okay, Brooks County, Georgia. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, first of all?
Speaker 2: I didn't know any of my mother's parents. I knew one of my mother's uncles and his name was Mann, and I believe he was my mother's father's youngest brother, so I knew him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You said his name was Mannan?
Speaker 2: Mann, M-A-N-N, Mann.
Speaker 1: Okay, M-A-N-N. Okay, and did he pass along any history about the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, he talked about a number of his brothers and sisters, including my grandfather. But my grandfather had died before I was born--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --He had died before I was born.
Speaker 1: Now what did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what he did, this grandfather; I'm not sure what he did but I suspect that he was a farm worker.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: His name was June.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it would have been June Brown?
Speaker 2: June Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was--her first name was Lucinda, L-U-C-I-N-D-A--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Now her maiden name--I never knew her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they lived in rural (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They lived in rural Madison County or Brooks County. See, Madison County--one of the borders of Madison County is the state line of Georgia, and Brooks County and Madison County are adjacent counties but one is in Georgia, the other one is in Florida--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so where they were born is someplace up near that--where those two counties meet, but I'm not sure which side they were on.
Speaker 1: Now was your grandfather a land owner?
Speaker 2: That I'm not sure of, that I'm not sure of.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So did your mother talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, she did; she did. She had one sister and two brothers who I knew--one sister and two brothers that I knew. My Uncle John, my Uncle Chandler, and my Aunt Kate.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother have a chance to finish school down there?
Speaker 2: No, my mother went, I believe, to the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Now did they have a school down there? I mean they went any further than--that's another question.
Speaker 2: That I don't know, but I doubt it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I doubt that there were (unclear) schools at that time when she was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I ask because there were so many schools that didn't go any further (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you had to either leave or--
Speaker 2: Right, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know the name of her school at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know the name of the school she went to.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So what did your mother do after school?
Speaker 2: I think she married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26217
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Oliver, O-L-I-V-E-R Donaldson.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I am not sure of my father's--the month, but he was born in 1990--1994.
Speaker 1: Is that 1894?
Speaker 2: 1894, 1894. Yes, 1894. Yes, 1894.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Madison County, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now again, what do you know about his side of the family and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I did not know his father but I knew his mother. But my father had two brothers, or had two sisters that I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Julia. Julia, J-U-L-I-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her maiden name was Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Julia Williams Donaldson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did know one of her brothers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and her brother, or one of her brothers'--name was Oliver, Oliver Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your father was named for his uncle?
Speaker 2: Yes, named for his uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your grandfather's name? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Cubit, C-U-B-I-T.
Speaker 1: That's interesting. Is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: That I do not know, but his youngest son was named for him and his name is also Cubit Donaldson, Jr.
Speaker 1: Now for the record, what is a cubit? Isn't it a mathematical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it's a measure; it's a measure. Now I'm not exactly sure whether it's a yard or it's close to a yard, but it's a measure.
Speaker 1: It's cited in the Bible (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Exactly--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--cubits make--you know, the Ark with so many cubits--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's right, precisely, precisely.
Speaker 1: --so it's a standard of measurement--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--measurement, right.
Speaker 1: --that's cited in the Bible but we really don't know what it means, right? Whether it's a foot or a half foot, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But they get all those animals in that vessel; it must have been a (laughter) pretty long yard (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--Cubit. Your grandfather has a name that's a unit of measurement--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --and you grew up to be a mathematician. So this is interesting (laughter). It makes sense on some level, but--okay. But you don't have any idea how he got that name.
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how that came about.
Speaker 1: There's a story in there somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I'm sure. Yes
Story_ID: 26218
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that take either one of these sides of the family all the way back to emancipation or reconstruction?
Speaker 2: You know, I never heard anyone talk, you know, about these stories but I know that my father [Oliver Donaldson] was born in 1994 so--
Speaker 1: 1894.
Speaker 2: --1894. I keep saying 19--1894, and so he--my grandfather must have been born right around the Civil War, or shortly after that. This is what I suspect--
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: --and his father certainly probably would have been born during the time of the enslavement.
Speaker 1: Yes, certainly your great-grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Great-grandfather, yes.
Speaker 1: That's right. Now did your father--was he able to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my father--I believe he finished the second grade, my father did.
Speaker 1: Did he have stories about what it was like when he was growing up in terms of the racial climate down there, or the way people made a living and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, he did not. I never heard him talk about this. I remember certain times he would come in and tell us that we all had to stay inside, and this was usually when there was some type of trouble. Now later on, you know, I learned that the trouble was involved with someone being run out of town or something else happening, you know, to them. This is when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: These were racial troubles?
Speaker 2: Yes, racial trouble, right. Racial.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know Florida was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that particular part of Florida was just like Georgia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --like South Georgia, I should say.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did your dad do? Did he get involved in farm labor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a farm worker and also I should say slash farmer because he worked my grandfather's farm--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he and my youngest brother--he and his youngest brother worked my grandfather's farm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was this the farm he was raised on?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is the family farm.
Speaker 2: Family farm, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's good that they owned it. How much land did they have?
Speaker 2: I think initially--originally, I believe it was 160 acres. But during the depression, I think they lost half of it but were able to maintain the other half.
Story_ID: 26219
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how he met your mother [Audrey Brown], or how they fell in love and got together?
Speaker 2: The only thing I knew is that my father [Oliver Donaldson] was several years older than my mother. I believe he may have been nearly nine to ten years older than my mother when they were married. I think my mother was seventeen [years old] and he was twenty-six or twenty-seven, but how they met, that I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did they attend the same church or anything? Because they're by the same area, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yes, yes. See, that I don't know, but I know that the Donaldsons attended the one church as long as I can remember and I heard one member of the church, an older member of the church, talking about my grandfather on my mother's side and he was talking about how skilled he was with figuring, you know. This was my grandfather June Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So he knew him, but I don't know whether or not he was a member of that church or not, but for some reason I don't think that he was.
Speaker 1: So they were married around 1924?
Speaker 2: Right. Right around there.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Story_ID: 26220
Speaker 1: So I take it you have other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Older brothers and sisters from--
Speaker 2: Older, most--I have so many older brothers and sisters that I'm happy, your know--I'm ambivalent about family planning--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause if they'd had family planning, you wouldn't be talking to me here, you know, now, 'cause I was down near the bottom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how many--
Speaker 2: Ten, ten brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Well can you name them from the beginning and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yes, oh yes. Oliver, Julia, Chandler, I'm sorry, I missed one. Oliver, Julia, Rufus, R-U-F-U-S, Chandler, Enoch, Theora, T-H-E-O-R-A, Albert, and there's a space there for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Clarence, Ollie,--
Speaker 1: Ollie--
Speaker 2: O-L-L-I-E, Ollie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Joseph.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's ten.
Story_ID: 26221
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they talk, how they walk, how they approach problems and what they were thinking about, their habits, hobbies, how they approach work, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well I guess sort of after both of them really, 'cause my father [Oliver Donaldson] was a hard worker. He worked really hard all the time, and I guess that's one of the things that I got, you know, from him. And I guess from my mother [Audrey Brown], although she only went to--she never got to high school, her love for education and her desire for me to continue on in school. I think I may very well have gotten that, you know, from her. Now from my uncle, my father's brother, my Uncle Enoch, he was the one who took an interest in me when I--before I even started elementary school, and so I guess what is now called kindergarten, you know, he more or less acquainted me with those ideas before I started elementary school. So I knew how to read and write before ever entering elementary school.
Speaker 1: Hmm. (Unclear). Okay, so you could read and write before you got to elementary school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's due to your Uncle Enoch.
Speaker 2: Uncle Enoch, right.
Speaker 1: Did Uncle Enoch work on the farm too, or did he--
Speaker 2: No he did not. He was a factory worker. He left the farm. See, the farm was small and could not really support that many people, so my father was running the farm--my father and my father's youngest brother. And so my Uncle Enoch worked--I'll say a factory, but he worked. Sometimes it was in a factory and other times it was other types of jobs. He went away to someplace called Clearwater, you know, in Florida, and he lived there for some time. And I think he lived a short period of time in New York--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but when I knew him that was near the end of his life, you know. This was near the end of life when I knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was finished with work, he was kind of retired?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right; that is correct.
Speaker 1: So he took the time with you to teach you.
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to read, and you know, so--
Speaker 1: Now was it your father or your grandfather that was good with figures?
Speaker 2: This was my grandfather on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Mother's side, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 26222
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I vaguely remember the end of World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I vaguely remember the end of World War II.
Speaker 1: You would have been about four, I guess.
Speaker 2: I was five, almost five. Yes, vaguely remember that.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about it? Do you remember the celebrations?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, folks were coming home. I remember when my brother came--my oldest brother came home from the Navy. He had been in the Navy, and I remember he came home and the great celebration that they had at my house when he came home, you know, safely, like a big feast. That was hell for him when he came home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that--I guess that's the thing (laughter) around the eating. I totally remember that. It was quite something; even though we didn't have much in the sense of--but that was something that was pulled out, you know, to welcome him back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26223
Speaker 1: What, Sir, are some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, for me, I can remember, you know, the rooster crowing as one of them, and generally that was not good because that meant I had to get up and I had chores to do. And living then, you know, in the country, there were a lot of sounds like the crickets and the like would be chirping, you know; the birds and all of these things are things that I remember very much. The rain hitting the tin roof on the house and I guess the--my mother's call to let us know that dinner was ready, you know, that is the sound that I remember very fondly (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: How would she do it? How would she call you?
Speaker 2: Well she would just come out and she would yell, not any particular one, but she would just yell "Your dinner is ready," and of course we would drop everything, you know, and come because usually it's--I would say it's probably the best food I ever ate, you know, although it was--given the standards that we've talked of today, it was not haute cuisine, but it was very, very good, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26224
Speaker 1: Alright, so we were talking about sights, and sounds, and smells growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, something--the sights--one of the sights I remember very vividly and I guess maybe this is closer to the experience, but there was a huge hurricane that came through my section of Florida sometime near the end of the '40s [1940s]; I've forgotten the name of it now, but it rained and rained, and when it was over, we had ponds all over the place, you know? And these ponds were in places where there had never been water--well, I never remembered there being water in these places. But the remarkable thing about this, at least remarkable to me at the time, there were fish in these ponds. And I remember asking my uncle "Where did these fish come from?" So he looked at me and he said "Son, they just rained down from the heavens." Now I must say that we were always taught not to question our elders; we were told not to do it; in fact, you could get into very serious trouble doing that because that was strictly against the rule that, you know, children are to be seen and not heard. So I sat there and, because he said it, I nodded but I just didn't quite really, you know, accept that. And I guess it was not until I got off to the university, to Lincoln University many years later, that I learned that actually, you know, that my uncle was right, which--because I just thought that he was just all off with that, you know, but yes because I then knew how the fish came to be there and he was not too far off.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was the reason? What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a river that ran near our home; there was a river that ran near our home and the river had all types of fish in it and the winds were so great they would swoop down, hit the river, pick up water, the water had fish in it, and carry it for, you know, many, many feet and deposit it, the wind would pick it up, and this is what was happening.
Speaker 1: So during the tornado, the suction would pull the fish out of the water?
Speaker 2: Out of the water, yeah. Not only the fish, but the water with the fish; the water--everything that was in the water came out too, and so that's how this was happening--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so the fish did rain down from the heavens, but what he did not tell me, and I don't know whether he knew this, was how the fish got in the air in the first place. And so that was the thing that I was--but that was very exciting for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other sight that I sort of remember was, you know, throwing rocks into the water and to watch the rings that would generate out from the water; throwing two rocks and to see how the rings would come and meet each other and then change slightly; you know, those kinds of things. I remember that when I was growing up as well in some of the sights. And later on in my own work, I sort of came back to one of those problems, you know; that was much later on.
Story_ID: 26225
Speaker 1: Now your brothers and sisters were in school ahead of you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in school ahead of me. In fact, all my brothers and sisters finished that--no, no, that is not the case. Starting with my sister Theora, all of us from that point on, you finished the high school system. Well, it wasn't a high school, it was called a training school.
Speaker 1: Right. This is Madison County Training School (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Training School; yeah, right.
Speaker 1: You say it with a kind of a scowl there (laughter). What is the story of a training school as opposed to a high school?
Speaker 2: Well, the only difference that I could see was one was for blacks and the other one was for whites. I think the education that we got there, when I look back upon it, you know, was just really outstanding. Although--as far as the resources made available to us were not what they should have been, but the attention and the care they got from--that we got from the people who taught us really made up a lot of what was missing materially.
Speaker 1: Now we hear that story a lot that people even find out that things like calculus was taught in some of these training schools by black teachers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that the white superintendent didn't know anything about. (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So you said you had good education, good teachers, but poor resources?
Speaker 2: Poor resources, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that would have been books and lab equipment and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right--well, yeah, the books and--we shared books, and the teachers tried to make up--compensate for what was missing. And I think they were largely successful in that; they were largely successful. And I remember some of them to this day. I remember then what they did.
Story_ID: 26226
Speaker 1: Now you started school at six, right?
Speaker 2: At six, started at six.
Speaker 1: And this is 1947, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was this Madison County Training School?
Speaker 2: No, no. In 1947 I started Jeslamb--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Jeslamb School.
Speaker 1: Just Lamb?
Speaker 2: Jes, J-E-S-L-A-M-B.
Speaker 1: Jes, okay.
Speaker 2: Jeslamb, right. And this was sort of like a building associated with the little church there in that community.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Jeslamb A.M.E. Church.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Jeslamb, was he a local hero or a minister or something?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know where that name came from. Don't know where that name came from but that was the name, Jeslamb AME Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that AME now that's African Methodist Episcopal Church, right.
Speaker 1: Right. Now was your family a member of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, they were members.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I'll have to look him up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and find out about that. So the church, like a lot of places, provided the space in the school.
Speaker 2: Right, right. That is correct.
Speaker 1: And Jeslamb was for--how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Through the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, through the eighth grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Through the eighth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and we didn't have a middle school as such. After the eighth grade, we went to the Madison County Training School which was, you know, down--
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so at Jeslamb was the school what you thought it would be? Because you wanted to go bad; were you pleased?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I was pleased; I was pleased.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember having a favorite subject there, you know; I was just interested in most of the things.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about some of the teachers.
Speaker 2: Well, as far as my first--from grade one through eighth grade, I only had two teachers. Miss Lennie L. Collins taught first, second and third grade, and then I had Miss Alma Jean McKinney who taught--well I'm sorry; now one taught four grades. Miss Collins, Lennie L. Collins, taught one through four and Miss McKinney taught fifth grade, sixth grade, seventh and eighth.
Speaker 1: Okay. Just two teachers the whole time?
Speaker 2: Just two teachers.
Speaker 1: And they were there the entire time you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first got there, it was only one teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was just Miss Collins. And then Miss McKinney came later. She became my teacher when I got to the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now that kind of indicates an expansion of the school's activities. Was the school very old at all? Was that the school that your parents had gone to?
Speaker 2: That I don't know. It was there for a long time, but I don't know whether they went to school there or not. But--now the school itself, it was just a couple of rooms; there was just a couple of rooms. And one room had first through the fourth grade, the other room had fifth through the eighth; that was the way it was.
Speaker 1: There were two rooms; were they fairly big rooms?
Speaker 2: Well I guess there must have been about thirty of us in each one of the rooms; about sixty people all together, sixty students all together.
Speaker 1: Were the rooms as big as this room here that we're in today?
Speaker 2: Maybe slightly, slightly larger than this room; slightly larger than this room. And like this, the first grade had a row, the second grade had a row, third grade and the fourth grade. And so that's why I was just saying, you know, that it must have been like thirty to forty in each one of the rooms.
Speaker 1: And the students came from--I guess that surrounding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Surrounding countryside. Some of them came as far away as from the--from Madison itself, which was about two and a-half miles. There were no school buses; we all walked to school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So it takes some of them maybe an hour and a-half maybe to get to school walking?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yes, about an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So how far away did you live?
Speaker 2: Now we were closer. Where we lived was about--it was about a couple of miles away from the school. We had a couple of miles so we didn't have to walk as far as people who came in from the city.
Speaker 1: It was about an hour you said?
Speaker 2: You're talking about to walk?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: It didn't seem like it was an hour.
Speaker 1: Less than an hour?
Speaker 2: Less than an hour, yeah. It was less than an hour.
Speaker 1: So you're walking maybe three or four miles an hour maybe?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If we took an hour, it meant that we were playing or something like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Of course you never did that.
Story_ID: 26227
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your-- were these teachers good teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah. Miss Collins was very well-trained. She had gotten her degree from FAMU, from Florida A&M University and she was really devoted to us. And she was just outstanding. And then when I got to the fifth grade, Miss McKinney, she had finished FAMU as well, and she was a mathematics major; I didn't know it at the time because she taught not only mathematics, but she taught the social sciences as well. And she was--they were all very good. Miss McKinney, I think that was her first job; that was her first job. I think that she was--she was there, and some of the people in the class, like my sister, were just a few years younger than she, you know. Because she was--Miss McKinney was very, very able; very able. She came from a large family as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she understood.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. And she is still alive; she's 82 years old now. And when I go home, I usually go by to see her, you know; usually go by to see her so she was just that type of a person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26228
Speaker 1: Now did you all have a radio growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Radio, radio; we had radio. Of course no T.V., but radio we did have, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you hear any of the Joe Louis fights on the radio when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any Joe Louis fights but I remember some of these shows like--for instance, what was this show--The Shadow Knows, these--you know--sort of like talk, you know, stories. And sometimes I listen to them now, or hear on the WAMU, that the American University public station. On Sunday nights, you know, they have some of these shows; the Johnny Dollar, I've forgotten this--Gun Smoke, Sam Spade, you know, and these things, so I remember a lot of those shows. And so we used to listen to those. And then of course the Grand Ole Opry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Grand Ole Opry.
Speaker 1: Alright. So that was popular then?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that was popular when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't care that much for that anymore, but that was (laughter)--it was then.
Story_ID: 26229
Speaker 1: Okay. Madison [County] Training School. Now this is a black school too? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yeah, oh yes. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--All the students were black and the students too, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who your principal was?
Speaker 2: His name was Wilkins; Wilkins--I can't--I'm trying to think of his name now, first name; but he was the principal of the school when I first started, and then Mr. Seabrooks became the principal; so there were two there.
Speaker 1: Okay. So Seabrooks came behind him?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay. How far could you go in math at Madison County?
Speaker 2: Madison County, we went through algebra; we went through algebra.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no trigonometry, no calculus?
Speaker 2: No, no trigonometry and calculus.
Speaker 1: What about geometry? Did you do any of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, geometry; we had some geometry.
Speaker 1: Alright. So did you get a chance to take science courses?
Speaker 2: Yes, science courses. There is a good science teacher, his name was Johnny Jones; he taught science, and he had gone to the university to become--he was a pre-med student but never had the money to go on to medical school so he was teaching biological sciences but he also taught general science as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now we didn't have a chemistry course or physics course by itself, we just had a general science course.
Speaker 1: Okay. No physics or chemistry. Alright. So I take it you were a good student.
Speaker 2: I finished first in my class in high school, yes, so it was okay; that was okay.
Speaker 1: That's the highest you could go then, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: I can't blame you for not getting any higher than the first (laughter). So did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Miss Lennie L. Collins.
Speaker 1: Now in high school now did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I said Lennie, I said Lennie L. Collins--Juanita Miller--
Speaker 1: Okay, Juanita (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Miss Juanita Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a graduate of Tuskegee Institute. Mathematics major; mathematics major, and she died around 2007 at the age of 94 and she was just as sharp as a whistle up until the time she passed, yeah. But 90--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so she lived a quite long life. And I used to see her every time I would go home; I would go by to see her as well.
Speaker 1: Now did your Uncle Enoch--was he still around when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: No, he died around 1953. He died while I was still in--let's see, I think it was--yeah, I think I was still in pre-high school when he passed.
Speaker 1: You were in Jeslamb, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, Jeslamb, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26230
Speaker 1: Now were you little compared to other students because of the age difference? Or had the other students been skipped too?
Speaker 2: No, I was about the same size as the rest of them.
Speaker 1: You're a pretty good sized person now, I was just wasn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So were you tall or--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm not--no, not so tall. Not as tall, Okay? I think I stopped growing when I was in graduate school.
Speaker 1: In graduate school? (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Oh, so you were kind of little in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. But not too.
Speaker 1: Alright. Were you able to participate in--or did they have any high school activities like, you know, sports and clubs and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, they had baseball, they had football. I didn't participate then because I lived on the farm and had to go home as soon as school was over to help out on the farm. Now what did happen, I guess my last two years, my mother made it possible for me to participate in the band and so I did that, but I didn't participate in any sports in high school.
Speaker 1: Now what did you play in the band?
Speaker 2: Drums.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was this a marching band or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Marching, it was a marching band; marching band.
Speaker 1: So this required some after-school time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes it did. It was a--my mother gained that concession for me, you know, to do that because I was certainly needed on the farm.
Speaker 1: So she had to--
Speaker 2: Intervene, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --plead your case with your father
Speaker 2: --right, with my father, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So you still probably had something to do when you got home because farm work was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Alright. Did you have any other jobs growing up?
Speaker 2: Any other jobs? That was what I did during the school year. In the summer, of course, I worked on the farm and we worked tobacco--not cigarettes but cigars. They grew a lot of that tobacco for cigars there during that time, so in the summers we would go there and work to make some extra money on these farms.
Story_ID: 26231
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation from high school [Madison County Training School], what kind of advice were you getting about college?
Speaker 2: Well again, I got good advice from my mathematics teacher, Miss Juanita Miller. She just said right away "You need to go on to college," and I thought that I would be going to FAMU [Florida A&M University] but then she suggested that "No, you probably need to leave the South; leave the South," and she was familiar with Lincoln University in [Chester County] Pennsylvania and through her intervention, I was admitted to Lincoln and was provided a scholarship at Lincoln, which really was very critical for my being able to attend Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Now when you were at graduation itself, you're the top student in the class, were you the Valedictorian?
Speaker 2: Valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Did you speak to the rest of the students that graduated?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And your parents were there and everything?
Speaker 2: Well my father [Oliver Donaldson] died during my senior year; he died in the fall before I graduated. He died at 62, yeah, died at--19--he was 62 when he passed.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, it seems--now I didn't know what was wrong; he just got sick, you know, and he went to the hospital and he didn't come home. But it turned out, later on I learned it was aneurysm; he had an aneurysm and he passed. So that was 1956, and I finished school, high school, the next spring.
Speaker 1: In '57 [1957], okay.
Story_ID: 26232
Speaker 1: Alright, so graduation is successful, so you--any other stories about high school or any other teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, there was Mr. Scott; Mr. Scott taught what was called then--see, in the training schools we did have something called agriculture, so he was the--we called him the Ag teacher but he taught basic things about farming, and I guess in some places you might really call that botany now--about about plants and the like, and we did all of that and of course, you know, I knew a lot about farming already because I grew up on farm, but he taught that. But there were some other things that he taught as well like skills you needed to know if you lived on a farm. For instance, basic carpentry, basic electrical work, some plumbing. Now the plumbing, I never got a hang of that but the electrical stuff, you know, even from the high school day, this wasn't a lot of that and I think if I hadn't gone into mathematics, I could have made a career at being an electrician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, could have done that; just from the little things that I learned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Could you fix some of the small appliances and things like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could do that but after I moved to Washington here, this is many, many years ago you know, I moved in one of these houses that--I could only afford it because it was not livable; that was the only way I could afford it, and so all the wiring had to be redone and I went down to the city, passed the little license thing that they gave, and I wired the house, you know, myself (laughter). They came and inspected it and it was just--said everything was fine. I did make one mistake they told me; and the mistake was I had read some instruction and the instruction stated that no appliance could be more than eight feet--electrical outlet could be more than eight feet away from any other outlet, you know, on the wall--around the perimeter of the wall. And of course I read it, you know--no, no, not eight feet, four feet--more than four feet. And the way I read it was that they had to be four feet apart, so I put in too many, so that was okay (laughter). Turned out to be okay anyway, but I just put in--
Speaker 1: An outlet every four feet (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, anyway, sorta that kinda thing, you know.
Speaker 1: But you learned the basic technique (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right. That's why I said it was a useful course. And the other course that I took that helped, which was not academic, was the business course. But the business course was just typing, learning how to type which of course was, back in those days, it turned out to be really just great, especially when I went off to school; I could earn money by typing other folks' papers and stuff like that because I learned that, you know, there in the school as well.
Story_ID: 26233
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so at Lincoln [University]--how did you get to Lincoln? Did you take the train or did you--how did your family have somebody drive you, or did they drive?
Speaker 2: Got Greyhound bus.
Speaker 1: Greyhound, okay.
Speaker 2: Greyhound bus.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did anybody go with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And you had never been there before, right?
Speaker 2: Never been, never been outside of the south--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --No, no, no, no, I take that back; take that back. I had been to Washington, DC but I guess that was not really outside of the south then.
Speaker 1: Now when was that? Were you a senior in high school, or--
Speaker 2: I was--yeah, I was a senior in high school (spontaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--special trip for students?
Speaker 2: No, I was a member of a farm organization called the National Farmers of America--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was the black counterpart of the Future Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: The National Farmers of America, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--no, not National--New Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: New.
Speaker 2: New Farmers of America was what it was; New Farmers of America.
Speaker 1: Instead of Future, it was New--
Speaker 2: Yeah, New, right.
Speaker 1: --and New as in National Medical Association and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--People said the N stood for Negro, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, right, NEW, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--but it would be NEW instead of (unclear). NEW Farmers of America.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Alright. So there's a group of African American students that went to DC to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as a field trip to--
Speaker 2: Well actually, it was one of the perks of being an officer in this organization that you got this trip to Washington, DC.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So how long did you get a chance to stay in DC?
Speaker 2: It was just about three or four days; we lived in some home down on U Street.
Speaker 1: So what was the agenda? Did you see (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, we were there--of course the Future Farmers of America at that time, I think they got in to see the President [Dwight D. Eisenhower]. So we were able to see the Secretary of Agriculture, and his name was Ezra Taft Benson. I think I remember that name, Ezra Taft Benson. And went into his office and he was a very gracious person and everything, I recall; as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this was in the Eisenhower Administration, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, oh yes; the Eisenhower Administration.
Speaker 1: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1957.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Story_ID: 26234
Speaker 1: Now '57 [1957], I believe--now this is when you graduated and enrolled in Lincoln [University]. Now this is the year of Sputnik, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you take note of that?
Speaker 2: Well, no--of course everyone knew about this and we knew what the changes were and that there was a greater emphasis, even in Lincoln you know, in the sciences, as a result of this but other than that, I had not--there was not that much talk about it, you know, at length. We hadn't really dwelled that much on that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So at Lincoln--you get to Lincoln on a Greyhound bus and--so what was it like? What was Lincoln like? Were you impressed?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't--I didn't like it when I first arrived because at that time, they hazed at Lincoln and when I stepped off the Greyhound bus, there were all of these students standing around there to meet, you know, the new students coming in from the bus, and the very first thing that I recall happening was that someone knocked my hat off my head; knocked the hat off my head and, you know, we were at--it was on; the battle was on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something that I don't--I would suppose would mean you'd fight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like that--those were fighting actions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Precisely, precisely. And so I guess I got a reputation before I even got fully on campus that there was this fellow that--from down at Florida, you know, don't mess with him (laughter); do not mess with him. And so that's how the thing started, you know, at Lincoln. But then after that, I made friends and everything was just great; it was just great, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: But the initial introduction was a shock because I just didn't know of somebody, you know, attacking someone you don't know and you've never seen before. But that was a part of the hazing, but I learned about it but I never liked it and I wouldn't participate; I would not ever participate in that because it was just--something was just wrong with that. It was supposed to have been fun but there was just something wrong with it, you know, so--
Speaker 1: And students are still debating that and dealing with it. They just suspended students from--they arrested students from Florida A&M [University] for killing a student (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yes, right, oh yes, yes, yes. And I know that was just last year. Yeah, I know it's--
Speaker 1: --so it pops up, you know, every now and then. So did you pledge any of those fraternities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did pledge a fraternity--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and went through hazing again and I'll just tell you this, I didn't like it but fortunately, the fraternity that I pledged, they have really abolished that hazing now. Yeah, I joined Alphas--Alpha Phi Alpha--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was the one I joined.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26235
Speaker 1: Now did you feel like when you got to Lincoln [University] and started taking classes, did you feel like you were adequately prepared at Madison County Trinity?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Now there were some students there--we had students from some of the lead-Boston [Massachusetts] schools; I think Boston Latin and a school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one of the Boys (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Boys' school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think Boys' High School. You know, Lincoln was all men, all male at the time that I went there. And they had been exposed to many, many more things than I had been exposed to but one of the things is that--now they had a pretty good library there at Lincoln, and I just sort of went to the library and tried to catch up as much as I could and it worked out alright. After about the first semester, we seemed to be even, you know, at the same level. But I think that first semester is sort of rocky for most students at the university because it's a question of adjustment.
Speaker 1: Did you get the grades you expected, or were your grades (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, my grades were enough for me to keep my scholarship; that was the main thing because otherwise, you know, I would have had to drop out because there weren't that much--there was not that much support. So my grades were up, my math and science grades were really quite good. I remember in the social sciences, they were lower than my science grades.
Story_ID: 26236
Speaker 1: Now what did you decide to major in when you first got to Lincoln [University]?
Speaker 2: Well when I first went to Lincoln, I was not sure; I thought that I was going to do pre-medicine because I'd heard people talk about pre-medicine but when I went to the biology class and they had--as part of the experiments you had to do was to dissect this frog that had been preserved in formaldehyde. I decided, you know, that there had to be something else, so I just sort of went--I went and changed that and so I looked at engineering for a while because they had this cooperative agreement with--I wanna say Lehigh University [Bethlehem, Pennsylvania]--no, Lafayette College in [Easton] Pennsylvania. Lincoln had a cooperative agreement so you do three years at Lincoln, two years at Lafayette, and you get a degree in engineering and a degree in liberal arts. And so I was interested in engineering so I did that for about a semester but that didn't work out well and again, it was the laboratory thing that just fell down.
Speaker 1: What was the problem with the laboratory?
Speaker 2: Well, you had to go out on these field trips; you had to go out on these field trips and one Saturday morning--and I think I probably will remember this until the day I die--we had to go out and it had rained a lot the week before. On a Saturday, we had to go out to look at some rock stratifications along the Chesapeake Bay Canal that connects the Chesapeake Bay to the Atlantic Ocean. It's up in Delaware; it's not too far from Lincoln, so just a bus trip; and we were supposed to go out and look at this and we went out there and--now my professor, Professor Rasmussen, really nice man, he was equipped; everything was equipped. He had on these rubber boots and all of this stuff and here I was out there, you know, with sneakers on and my classmates we were similarly equipped, and all of that mud and stuff we were sloshing around in. And so by the end of the day, everyone was tired and, you know, all wet and dirty, and I remember being so tired I saw this little small pool of water and ordinarily I would have tried to go around it or jump across it but I was just so tired I said I'm just gonna walk--I'm wet already, I might as well walk through this water. So I walked through this water and there was a hole, and I came up--water came up to my chest. So when they got me out of that, I knew then that my engineering days were over. So when I got back to the school, I went to see my advisor and told him "Well look, that's it with the engineering." And Professor Rasmussen tried to talk me out of it; he said "You know, you can do it, you can do it," but I just could not see that there was much of a career for me in that kind of area if that was what I had to do afterwards. Now of course if I had been dressed as he was, it probably wouldn't have been as bad. And so then Lincoln said "You've got to choose." They said "You've got to pick something." My better grades were in the sciences and mathematics and the chemistry again, I loved it. But the laboratory (laughter) just how I say it, the laboratory--did not know whether to put the water into the acid or the acid into the water. And the two--the operations do not commute. So one you get an explosion, you know. Thing say Pow!!! If you put the--
Speaker 1: So did you get it wrong, or did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, a couple of times I got it wrong (laughter). Put the water in the acid--Pow!! So I messed a couple of pair of pants; I only had about three or four pair, and that's all together so, you know, I just couldn't stay there, and I think the chemistry professor was a really good guy--Professor Rudd. I think he sort of agreed that I made the right decision (laughter). He agreed I made the right decision. So I went into mathematics which I say "Well this is what I choose as a major," but didn't know whether I was gonna work in it or not but I decided to choose that as a major because I had to choose something.
Story_ID: 26237
Speaker 1: Okay, now we have a note here that your professor--I guess the major professor was a Professor James Frankowsky?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was my math teacher. See, I was taking math all along; taking that all along.
Speaker 1: So did he teach every level of math?
Speaker 2: He taught every level at Lincoln [University]. He had one--there was one person who came in and he was able to--the size of the department grew, so he had one other full-time person working for him, working in that department--working with him but he taught most of the math courses and he was very good. In fact, he died just this past Monday, at the age of 91.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he died at the age of ninety-one, just this past Monday. But he was really a fantastic, expositive mathematics. He really was able to explain things well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just really amazing. And so I would say that he was probably one of the influences of my going on into mathematics, he was, because he seemed to enjoy it so much, you know, what he was doing, and he was so good at it that that was something that stuck in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, so while you were there, you were able to take trigonometry and did you take calculus?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well one, advance calculus, modern algebra, something else--theory of numbers, geometry, so it was just--he taught just a lot so that when I went to graduate school, you know, I was ready to start with the other students, with the other graduate students.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now before we get out of there, who were some of the other professors at Lincoln that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had mentioned Professor Rudd already, then there's Professor Farrell who taught English; Professor Foster taught sociology, Professor Coles who taught physics--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so these are the ones who come to mind right away.
Speaker 1: Were there any notable students there? Who were your good friends there? Were they also in math?
Speaker 2: A couple were, but they were not in my class, you know, they were in more advanced classes. John Arthur Jones finished there; John Arthur Jones worked for the National Science Foundation for quite some time. He's from Alabama and I think he got his doctorate from Pennsylvania State University but he didn't take any math; he did it in mathematics education. Then there's Orville Keen--Cane, K-E-A-N-E, K-E-A-N-E, Orville Keane. He finished Lincoln around 1959 and he took his doctorate in mathematics from University of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania is where he took his doctorate. And he taught mathematics at the University of the West Indies for many, many years, and then he went into administration becoming Vice President, and then later President of the University. Did I say the West Indies?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm, right.
Speaker 2: No--no, no. The University of the Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Virgin Islands.
Speaker 2: Yes, the University of the Virgin Islands.
Story_ID: 26238
Speaker 1: So now what were your prospects for graduate school? Were you graduating with honors from Lincoln [University]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I finished with honors, Cum Laude.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay? Cum Laude.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated Cum Laude and what were your ideas about--we know you went to University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] but did you have other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I thought that I wanted to be a pilot, and I wanted to go to the Air Force and went through the pilot recruiting process and the fellow that had been talking with me assured me that yes, I would get training, you know. In other words, I would get training to could become a pilot but--and I told him that that was really necessary although I knew I didn't want to do it if I couldn't get the training to be a pilot and I ran into, I guess, one of my cousins who was in the Air Force, and I told him what my plans were and he told me "No, I don't think that he's being upfront with you," he said "because of your height." He said The cockpits have a limitation on how tall you can be and you're too tall for that." So I went back to confront the recruiting officer who told me "Well, you could be an engineer, that's just like flying." I didn't really think so. And so that ended that part of it so I just wanted to go into the Air Force to learn how fly, and I was gonna come out after that. And so the Professor of Psychology at Lincoln had given us a series of tests while we were in school; I guess they must have been GRE, Graduate Record Examinations, but I don't know if they were called that or not. And so he called me and said "Look, you need to go on to graduate school" and Professor Frankowsky had told me the same thing, and so that's how I happened to go on to graduate school. I applied to the University of Illinois and got in--got in there, and thinking that the University of Illinois was gonna be in the north (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter). Tell us about Champaign-Urbana.
Speaker 2: (Laughter). Champaign-Urbana, right. Yeah, I thought that was the north but again, not the case. The same is where Lincoln University is located. I thought that was the north, but turned out it was just up south; just up south, that's where it turned out to be.
Story_ID: 26239
Speaker 1: Alright, so you said it was like up south from like Southern Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Right, yep, same, same--
Speaker 1: You were saying now you couldn't go to the show without having to sit in a special section or something?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's right, so we would not go; we would not go.
Speaker 1: So this is at Lincoln [University], right?
Speaker 2: At Lincoln, this was at Lincoln so we wouldn't go, yeah, yeah. It was really bad there.
Speaker 1: Now what about Champaign Urbana [Illinois]? Surely that must have been more enlightening.
Speaker 2: Well, Champaign Urbana was okay but my experience there was when I got there, I didn't have any housing so I went to the University Housing Authority and they gave me this list--well they didn't give me the list, they had the book out there and I went to the book and I saw all these places and I would go to these--and they were all with the friendly--the faces--by the time I got there they were all running. And then I sort of realized what was going on and I went back to them and said "Say, what is this? You got these books here and you say that these people have places for rent." And they start calling back in the back and said "No, we got a special book for you." Yeah, this was back, you know, '61 [1961], '62 [1962]. Said "We got the special book for you." And said "These people are willing to rent to your people." I tell you I was really upset, you know, over that; quite disappointed. But that was the way it was then. So I did find a place; I wouldn't use their book, you know, it was just I was so upset about that, I wouldn't use their book but I ran into some folks who knew this man and he let me have a room in his place.
Story_ID: 26240
Speaker 1: Now one of the famous graduates of the University of Illinois in Champaign Urbana was David Blackwell(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know anything about him when you--
Speaker 2: I heard his name mentioned while I was a student there but I only met David after I came to Howard [University] because David had been at Howard; he had been at Howard and he had worked with the people who were on the staff at Howard when I came to Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Blackwell is also an Alpha too.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right; that is right. I didn't know that until I met him, you know; didn't know that until I met him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's making a big splash in mathematics around the country; one of the first blacks to really make a presence known in the academic (unclear). Had you heard of Charles Bell?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Not when I was in graduate school; I heard of him later--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I hadn't heard of him while I was in grad school.
Speaker 1: So when you entered grad school, did you have any African American role models in math? I mean people that you knew were black that were successful mathematicians besides your teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, really the only person--of course, as I said, I'd heard of Blackwell, I'd heard of his record, you know, while I was at Illinois, but I did not meet many of the other ones until a couple of years after I had been in graduate school. And I met Rogers Newman who was--he had his doctorate from Michigan and he was at the Southern University; and through Rogers Newman, I heard of George Butcher who had gotten his doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania, and Elbert F. Cox. Now I met Elbert F. Cox when we were colleagues for one year at Howard--Elbert F. Cox; he was the first African American to get the doctorate in mathematics and I met him here at Howard. And this was just during my first full-time job, you know, in math. But I heard of these people through Rogers Newman; Rogers Newman.
Speaker 1: Okay. And Rogers Newman was--
Speaker 2: He was a Professor at Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: There was a summer program, and he was looking for someone to teach in the summer program and I went there to work with him, you know. In fact, the three summers--I worked with him for three summers in the summer program. It was some type of national institute; it was a national institute but it was training mathematics teachers.
Speaker 1: And this was done in Southern University?
Speaker 2: Southern University. So that would have been during the summers of 1964--it was the summers of 1963, '64 [1964], and '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so the head of your Math Department at University of Illinois at [Urbana] Champaign was a fellow named Mollen Day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mollen Day, right; that's correct, yeah, that's correct. Yeah, he was the Chair there.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how did the teachers treat you? Were there any other black students in the department?
Speaker 2: Yes, Illinois, it turned out, had a good record of producing African Americans in mathematics because before I was there, of course there had been [David] Blackwell; I believe he may have been first; There was a, Simmey Blakely was there, and there was a professor--he's now dead, but he was at the University of--he was at Morgan State University. Now I'm blocking on this name right now; blocking on this name, but he was at--he was there right before me but there were three there while I was there, but they were more advanced; two were more advanced, you know, I was the youngest of the three--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it was Simmey Blakely, this man--his name will come to me and I will tell you, you know, later but he was--so those two were there. And before that, it had been David Blackwell.
Story_ID: 26241
Speaker 1: Now did you do like a graduate thesis?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now my thesis advisor was Ray Langebartel and he--his area of specialization, which became my early specialization, was in differential equations.
Speaker 1: Now explain, what is a differential equation?
Speaker 2: Well, a differential equation isn't an equation where the unknown is a function, but the unknown--but in the equation there appears derivatives of the unknown--of the unknown function. So that's what a differential equation is. So it's an equation first of all where there's an unknown which happens to be a function
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -- and the function itself, you know--and in the equation, derivatives of the function appears. And let me just give you a classic example of a differential equation. Let's take Newton's Second Law which says that the force is equal to the mass times the acceleration. Now the acceleration itself, the acceleration itself can be viewed as the second derivative of a function called a distance function; the second derivative of the distance function. So the equation now is F equal to the mass times the second derivative of this distance function. Okay, now if you're given the force, if you're given the force and you're given the mass, now what you want find now, you want to find this unknown function. And this unknown function now say it's some function say of T. But now the unknown function doesn't appear there; if the unknown function was there, it's the derivative of the unknown function. And so since it's not only the first derivative but it's the second derivative. So that makes it a differential equation. Now Newton's Second Law is the equation that models any number of physical phenomena, so these equations appear all over the place. And so wherever you have Newton's Second Law, you have the differential equations.
Story_ID: 26242
Speaker 1: Now if you wanted me to tell you say--to give you an example say of a physical idea of a differential equation, I can give you a physical--I can sort of describe a physical example.
Speaker 2: Sure, okay.
Speaker 1: Let us say you have a cylinder; you have a cylinder and you have in that cylinder--at the bottom, you have an outlet there that you can control the water coming, you know, out. There's water in the cylinder, water coming out, okay? At the top of the cylinder you have another inlet where water can come in, and you've got a control that you can control how fast the water is coming in. And to the control at the bottom, you control how fast the water is coming out.
Speaker 2: Like in a water heater?
Speaker 1: Sorry?
Speaker 2: Almost like in a water heater. I mean you get your--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, right, right. But you want to be able to control these two things--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, now. You look at the height of the water in this cylinder now; now the height is gonna be a function of time; it's gonna be a function of time. Okay, now, you can control then with these two things how fast the water is coming in or going out by just manipulating these two controls. Okay, so that's gonna tell you the speed that is coming in. Okay, now of course when you increase the speed, what is gonna happen? More water is gonna build, it's--more water is coming in. If the water is coming in faster than it's going out, what's gonna happen? The amount of water in there is gonna get what? Get greater. So that means then that this H of T is going to what? Move up. Now, when the amount of water going out is greater than the amount of water coming in, what's gonna happen? The level is gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--drop to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--gonna drop.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There it is, an example of a differential equation; water moving up and down. Okay?
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: And so that's one, you know, that I use--I try to use this to--for the lay people and for young people to describe what the differential equation is like. So the H of T--and see the issue that's involved here is the velocity, which is the first derivative of H. So you have H Prime of T. A derivative of H is equal to how you are adjusting this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Alright? And that's--you adjust it--with time, it's gonna change. And so you solve the H to see how the water is behaving. And when you set this up, people can see right away and say "Yes, this is what has happened." When the derivative is positive, the thing is increasing, when it's negative, it's decreasing.
Story_ID: 26243
Speaker 1: So your dissertation is basically around differential equations?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well it was the integral representations of a special solution of a differential equation. In other words, it was a new representation for this function was a solution of a differential equation.
Speaker 1: Now what does a mathematician--what's your day like in graduate school? I know we've interviewed material scientists and engineers and chemists and physicists and physicists, to some degree--I mean a theoretical physicist has similar kinds of day as you, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: They're figuring problems out, you know, during the day. They're working on a long problem. But is that basically what your intense research is about?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, there are different kinds of problems, so this one of the nice things about mathematics. You can sort of, you know, find your own problems. Now the thing is this though, you need to try to find the problem that somebody else is interested in as well because certainly you need to do that if you hope to get a publication out of it. But some of the things that seem to be very simple, people will just take them for granted. And then you look into these things and you find out that no one has ever proved that this thing is actually the way it is; they have never proved it. And so you have to sort of decide, you know, say "Well, is this something that's true or not?" You know I mentioned earlier about throwing the rocks in the water and the little waves that were coming out. Now it was not until about ten years ago that I fully understood why this would happen. Because these waves coming out on the water like this--these rings, these are examples of waves moving out from a disturbance. And that seems to be--the equation that should model this is an equation that is of a certain type; it's called a hyperbolic partial differential equation, okay? So in other words, the air waves, sound waves, all governed by this wave equation. But now when you start dealing with hydrodynamics, you know, water and the like, there's still a differential equation but it's not a hyperbolic differential equation, it is an elliptic partial differential equation. And so you say "Well how can this be?" You got this elliptic partial differential equation and when you look at this particular solution, this solution behaves like a wave, so how can there be, you know, a wave type function as a solution of an elliptic partial differential equation? And so one of the things that I worked on, along with a colleague of mine, was to try to better understand that. And what it turns out is that it turns out that the elliptic equation is the correct formulation, but when you look at a certain asymptotic approximation near the boundary that this equation behaves like a hyperbolic equation, and so that gives you why you see the waves. So I was really happy to see that, so that was one of the kinds of problems we've looked at.
Story_ID: 26244
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you completed your PhD in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your advisor, Ray Langebartel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--as I say, his area was differential equations but he was also interested in astronomy. He worked for many, many years with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. He would come to Washington, DC--in fact, that's--I used to see him here in Washington, DC when he would come out to consult at NASA and he was very encouraging. Once I got my problem that I was to work on, he told me that he was open anytime, to come in to talk about the progress and the like, but he wanted to see me at least on a regular-type basis. And I found that really very, very helpful, you know. So he definitely meant a lot to me. But there were other professors there too that were very encouraging.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other ones?
Speaker 2: Well one of the key ones was Professor Dube--J.L. Dube; and I didn't know it at the time, but it turned out that he was Blackwell's teacher.
Story_ID: 26245
Speaker 1: And there was one point there at the university when I was not--this was during my first semester there, that I was not sure that I had made a good choice in going to graduate school because I was working as hard as I could and it seemed like it was just too much; really was just too much.
Speaker 2: Was there like a regular review of your work?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, not a regular review; it wasn't that I had taken any exams, it was just like I seem like I was having trouble keeping up with everyone else; that's what it was. And in fact, I was just saying "Well, I'll just get the Master's and I'll probably just leave after that" because this was not really what I wanted to do. I didn't know Dube at the time; didn't know him at the time. And he was me in the hall and he asked me, he said "What's wrong?" And I told him, you know, I wasn't sure that this was a good fit for me so he invited me into his office. Now I knew he was a professor there but who he was, I just didn't know that because I would see him around every day. And so I sat down and I told him so he asked me he said "Well what courses are you taking?" And so I was taking three courses and so I listed the courses that I was taking and when I did that, he got up and he started just pacing back and forth. He said "Are you sure that's your schedule?" I said "Yes, this is my schedule." He said "Well who advised you to take this?" And I gave him the name of the advisor. But see, the advisor was someone, you know, I guess this fellow was just assigned that role and he gave me these three courses. So he said "Look" He said "No wonder, you're supposed to be working like you're working. No one should be taking these three courses at the same time." He said "You should be taking, at most, one of these courses--at most, two of these courses together." He said "You shouldn't be doing that." And when he said that, that was just like I was just uplifted because then I realized that it was not, you know, it was just that I had been ill-advised on the courses to take that semester. And so I said "Well, okay, if that's the way it is, I certainly can get this thing straight this semester" and that was it. After that, course work was just a breeze because I learned, you know, to get another advisor and eventually I was assigned my thesis advisor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now this raises a question. Now mathematics is kind of a lonely study, isn't it? I mean in terms of it's not a lot of group work going on in mathematics.
Speaker 1: Well there is some, but not that much; not at the graduate level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because people are in different specializations, right.
Speaker 2: So people are working by themselves for the most part, and checking in with their advisors?
Speaker 1: Right. But he told me and so that was the thing. He didn't have to do that; he could have just gone on but he took the time, he advised me, and I was just-so I owe him a great debt because I wasn't sure, you know? I said "Hey, I'm working as hard as I can and it just seems to me like I'm treading water."
Speaker 2: It would seem to me that he was doing the decent thing to do that you would do for any student.
Speaker 1: Right, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: But the others wouldn't--I mean whoever let you do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, I think, I think--again, I don't think it was any malice involved with this guy, it's just--he was just busy and I handed him some stuff and he (HAND-MOVING DEMONSTRATION)(laughter), and he just signed off and gave it back to me, rather than to say "Oh, you got this, this, this, no, no, no, no." He just didn't do it, you know? (Laughter)
Story_ID: 26246
Speaker 1: Now there's another story about graduate school that you need to tell us, right?
Speaker 2: This is the one with the computer center?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yeah, now that was--in that case though, I think that there was some malice that was involved there; unfortunately there was, but I had this job working at night at the computer center--well no, I heard of this job at the computer center and--it was at night and everyone had told me that it was a very good job so I put in an application for it and I got a score back just based upon an application, and the score was a real low score and I decided to go and find out say "Well gee, what did I miss or how did you come up with the score?"
Speaker 1: And you didn't even take a test, right?
Speaker 2: No test. And so the person--when I went into the office to talk to the person, the person was very uneasy about the whole thing and said there were so many points for graduating for high school and so many points for years in college and on and on. Well, I forgot now what the score was, but it was low; it was really low, and from what he had told me already, you know, I seem like I should have gotten that by just graduating from high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was 71 or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --one point above the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, right, one point above graduating from high school. And so I asked them to explain this and there was just no explanation that was given but the thing was that I had been interviewed by the director of the computer center and he had already given me the job; he had already given me the job, you know. This was supposed to have been a formality but I got a 71.
Speaker 1: Okay so the score basically disqualified you for a job you already were doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, already doing. And the man had already--and so I did not press the thing after that; I did tell the director of the computer center what happened and he was just really--he was really appalled. But I knew I had to watch myself after that so once I started the job, the person who was in charge of the place was supposed to train me and he would not show me anything, so what I had to do was to come in to the shift before mine and watch what the guy was doing in order to be able to do the job. I didn't say anything, but then this man--the director, I mean my immediate supervisor, went to--the director at the computer center said that I was not working out and he called me in and asked, you know, what was going on and I told him. I said "Look," I said "I don't know," I said "He's never said anything to me about my work; this is the first time I'm hearing it." And then I went on to tell him that this man had not trained me as he said that--as the director had said that he would--that my immediate supervisor would train me, and how I had learned what to do by coming in early. He said "Okay," he said "That's alright, I'll handle this." And that was the end of that. That man who was my immediate supervisor became one of my strong supporters, you know, after that, so I don't know what this man, the director, told him but he really turned over a new leaf at least from what I could see.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So that was, yeah, that was this thing in graduate school. That was at computer center, but the director of the computer center--I'm trying to remember his name, Shaler Scoo--oh, I can't remember his name now, the director of the computer center, but he was a good man.
Story_ID: 26247
Speaker 1: So after graduation, you went right away to Howard [University], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, came to Howard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I was only at Howard for one year; I was only at Howard for one year.
Speaker 1: What happened? What happened?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--Nothing happened, it was just that it was a turbulent time at Howard then and there were a group of us who were trying to really bring some changes to Howard University, let us say. And so after one year, you know, I realized that if I--that we were not gonna be able to succeed in doing this.
Speaker 1: Now what were you trying to change at Howard? I know this was the time--this was right after the--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], anti-war demonstration is going on, Civil Rights going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, anti-war was going on, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--a lot of the Howard students were down with SNCC in Mississippi and Alabama. Stokely Carmichael was in Alabama, I think.
Speaker 2: Right, but the administration at Howard was very conservative at that time.
Speaker 1: Who was the president?
Speaker 2: The president of that was Nabrit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, James Nabrit of the law school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: He used to be at the law school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think he was just a good person, but at that time he was just, in a sense--a number of the young faculty members felt that he was moving too slowly.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was it just on the political issues or on other issues as well?
Speaker 2: It's just--well, I don't know whether you would call that political or not; I say political social issues, you know. And so it was--it was that; and I could see right away that if I stayed there that they were gonna probably fire--if I had stayed that they would have probably fired me and all the other folks that were involved.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other students that were involved? (Simultaneous)-- professors involved?
Speaker 2: Nathan Hare was one; he stayed on. In fact, he told me he said--when I left, he said "Man, we're gonna win this fight and you're leaving." He said "Why are you doing this?" And I told him, I said "Look, I don't think that we're gonna be successful in this round." And so two years later, they fired everybody that was associated with my group; all of them were let go.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the group?
Speaker 2: There was supposed to--I don't think--I guess it was just young faculty members. Snowden, I think there was a Snowden that was part of this as well.
Speaker 1: I know it wasn't Frank Snowden, was it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, not Frank. (Laughter) I think his name was Conrad Snowden but I'm sure of Snowden. He's a philosopher; this man was a philosopher.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was he related to Frank Snowden at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't think it was Frank Snowden.
Speaker 2: But let me just say this though. It turned out that--we thought that Frank Snowden was part, you know--was on the other side but later, in some papers, it was discovered that he really tried to defend the group, yeah; he tried to defend the group and this may have caused him to step down from the deanship of the college; may have been one of the factors.
Story_ID: 26248
Speaker 1: So you go back to the University of Illinois, right? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--University of Illinois in Chicago; in Chicago, in Chicago.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous(?)--Okay, alright. And that's what they used to call the Chicago Circle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Alright. So you were Professor of Mathematics there for--now what was it like being in Chicago in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was a relative--well, the Chicago Circle was not new but they--I guess the state had decided that this was going to become a major campus of the university system and when I got there, one of the things that cost me to go there, they had promised that the university's enrollment was going to reflect the demographics of Chicago and which--at that time I think it was about 30 to 40 percent Chicago African Americans. But after I got there, it became clear that that was not going to be.
Speaker 1: Now what courses did you teach there at UIC?
Speaker 2: At the University of Illinois, I taught mainly undergraduate courses, I taught the freshmen courses in mathematics, I taught calculus, and I taught differential equations. Yeah, I think that those are the courses I taught while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I have a note here that your paper--your dissertation was published in the Journal of Math and Physics in '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And that's the "Integral Representations of the Extended Airy Integral Type of the Modified Bessel Function."
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And you described that a little while ago, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yes, yes. Now I should say you know, there's a lag in publishing the papers coming out and being submitted. But I think it was probably submitted while I was here at Howard [University], so there was just a lag time--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --you know with the lag between submission and the actual publication.
Speaker 1: Okay. So between '66 [1966] and '71 [1971], who were some of your colleagues at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago]?
Speaker 2: At UIC, well there was Brayton Gray; he was a topologist; Melvin Heard who is African American. He was a colleague at the University of Illinois; now I think Melvin Heard did his work at Purdue, Purdue University. And there was one other man there--oh, I'm blocking on his name; he was one of the early--he was among the top ten, I think, to get a doctorate in mathematics; the top ten African Americans. He took his degree from the University of Michigan but I can't think of his name now but he was there doing actuarial mathematics.
Story_ID: 26249
Speaker 1: In 1969, you had a meeting of the American Mathematical Society and I don't know if you were--were you at that meeting when they formed (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that. This is a historic meeting?
Speaker 2: Right, yes it was, it was. That meeting was down in Louisiana, it was in New Orleans; it was in New Orleans. And a group of us had decided that there were certain issues that the professional societies were moving very slowly on, and these were issues really involving, you know, African Americans in mathematics--in the representation. And it was decided that we would start an organization that would address some of the issues that we felt were important to us and so it was decided that a newsletter would be published and officers would be elected and the like, you know, at this meeting. Now later, I became the editor of the newsletter; I became the editor of the newsletter later; not initially but later I became editor of the newsletter.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your newsletter?
Speaker 2: It was called the NAM Newsletter.
Speaker 1: Okay. Earlier this year, we interviewed Johnny Houston and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we know about Scott Williams, the two of the principals (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, that's right. Scott Williams was the editor up until about say two, three years ago. And now the editor is Talitha Washington and she's here at Howard University; she's at Howard.
Story_ID: 26250
Speaker 1: While you were in Chicago [Illinois], Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] was assassinated too--
Speaker 2: Yes, that is correct.
Speaker 1: --and the riots took place very close to where the University of Illinois' campus is.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I guess I was at home when I heard the news that he had been assassinated and I knew right away that there was gonna really be some reaction, you know, to that and so it was a very tense time, you know, in Chicago during that particular period. And it was clear that something had to change there in the city. One of the things in particular, we knew that--well I sort of suspected that the Democratic Convention which was to be held later that--
Speaker 1: --summer, right?
Speaker 2: --yeah, that summer in Chicago was not really going to be the same 'cause there was this going on and then there was the war, you know the war in Vietnam, you know, that was still going on. And what I know that--I was certainly opposed to the war in Vietnam, and at the Democratic National Convention a group of mathematicians were the only group that had a successful demonstration at that convention (laughter) and I was one, I was in that group of folks--mathematicians against the war. So this was 1968, so that turned out to be really, really the only successful one; other ones were aborted.
Story_ID: 26251
Speaker 1: How long were you at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was on the faculty there for five years, but the last two years I was on leave at the University of New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on--the first of those two years I was a Post-Doctor Research Associate at the University of New Mexico; I had a post-doctoral fellowship there. And the second year--because I--while I was there I had decided that I would not return to the University of Illinois, I would not, and so the University asked me to wait and decide for certain, you know, whether or not I didn't intend to return. And then, of course, I decided that I wouldn't even stay at New Mexico. I got the invitation to return to Howard [University].
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you considering--I mean what were your thoughts in the beginning of not--I mean why wouldn't you go back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, something had happened at the University of Illinois and so I--it had something to do with compensation. And again, you know, I think that what had happened was that I never really paid much attention to salaries and things of that nature and I was being paid a salary and I thought that this was a good size salary so I was very happy, but then I discovered through one of my colleagues who had had a falling out with the chair that I was one of the two lowest paid folks in my rank, you know, in the Mathematics Department at Illinois whereas I felt that in comparing the academic records, there was no reason for that and I made it known to the chair that I was unhappy with this and that I didn't think that I could work at a place where I was unhappy and so I went, you know, I went away and while I was away they tried to rectify the discrepancy; see, they couldn't do it all at one time but they were gonna try to rectify. And, you know, of course I appreciated that they were going to do that and they tried to do that, but once something like this has happened, you know, as it's said, the fly has landed in the soup (laughter). And even after you take the fly out, it's not the same, it's not the same (laughter). So I just didn't wanna go back.
Story_ID: 26252
Speaker 1: So what were you working on as a post-doc, at the University of New Mexico?
Speaker 2: As a post-doc, I was working on--well, there were actually a couple of problems I was working on but one of them involved a scattering theory. And this was a problem that I was working on with two colleagues there. My main mentor there during--because this was a post-doctoral fellowship I had, and my host was Reuben Hersh, H-E-R-S-H, Reuben Hersh. So he and another colleague Archie Gibson, we were working on a problem for mathematical physics involving a scattering theory.
Speaker 1: What is scattering theory? What is it?
Speaker 2: Well, the way I should describe it is that--let us say that you have say, out in front of you, say a ball, and you shoot rays of light from where you're sitting toward the ball. And so they're going to reflect and go sort of around the ball and then they scatter out. Okay, now. So now one question that you can ask is you can ask how these light rays are gonna scatter. Now you had a ball there, now you could have had some other type of geometric object, so what would this scattering be like? Now the inverse scattering, you know, you ask another question and the question that you as is that you know what the pattern is after the light has hit this source.
Story_ID: 26253
Speaker 1: So at Howard University--what was the offer at Howard like?
Speaker 2: Talking about to come back?
Speaker 1: Yes, what were they offering?
Speaker 2: Oh, the offer was--they gave me a good offer to come back. Well, I guess the people who made me the offer didn't know I was coming back but they offered a very competitive offer; it was very competitive.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in '69 [1969]--we're going backwards a little bit in time for a second. You also published another paper called Expansions for K(x) involving Airy's Function--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Mathematical Procedures of the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Now is that a hard journal get published in?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I couldn't tell you. I don't really know, but I would tell you how I came to publish there. I spent the summer at Cambridge University that summer; I think that was the summer of 1969.
Speaker 1: So this was Cambridge University in--
Speaker 2: England.
Speaker 1: --Britain.
Speaker 2: Right, right, Cambridge University--yeah, right. So I spent the summer there and--but I can't tell you how difficult it is, you know, to publish there or not. See, some of the journals they have lists how many they publish from--the percentage they publish from the submissions, but I don't really know; I couldn't tell you that by any of these journals that I have published in.
Story_ID: 26254
Speaker 1: Now in '71 [1971], the same year that you went back to Howard [University], it says here that you were a founding member of the Association for Women in Mathematics too, is that true?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right; for--for women in mathematics.
Speaker 1: For, for, yeah. Alright. Now this is far thinking in those days, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, well no, not really. The women were allies of African Americans in trying to help, you know, prove our ability to participate fully in the activities of the society, of the mathematical societies and professional organizations; so there were strong allies, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your teachers had been women too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. My early ones, you know, the three that I mentioned. I guess I'd mentioned five; the three out of the five of the early ones were women, no question about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26255
Speaker 1: So at Howard University--Professor of Mathematics at Howard. Had they planned--well, when you got to Howard, did they--how soon was it before a plan was developed to create a PhD in Mathematics at Howard?
Speaker 2: I guess I got it--I arrived at Howard in 1971. In 1972, I was appointed, you know, Chair of the Mathematics Department and it was around that time that the president of the University, James E. Cheek, talked about expanding, you know, the graduate offerings, you know, in mathematics here. And so it was shortly after 1972--around probably 1973, I have one of the earl proposals--draft proposal, you know, for the doctorate, and I think that's 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So you came back, or you were invited back to Howard basically by a new administration, right?
Speaker 2: By a new administration, right.
Speaker 1: James E. Cheek.
Speaker 2: James Cheek, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And he took over from James Nabrit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So some of the things that you did at Howard since you came here, you developed both short-range and long-range programs for the Math Department, right? Strengthened the Mathematics Department faculty, wrote a proposal to offer PhD program; that's in '73 [1973], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was around '73 [1973]; I'm not really sure. Seventy-three [1973], '72 [1972], '73 [1973], around there, but I think it was '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the university's thinking? That Howard was not really--had not really fulfilled its potential in mathematics before, or what?
Speaker 2: Well no, I think it was the vision of President Cheek, and he felt that, you know, that a first-rate university should have a strong mathematics program. I know that he was a visionary in that sense so I--but not only that, but in the other sciences as well. But physics and chemistry already had doctorates in mathematics, you know, at the time--physics and chemistry. In fact, chemistry was first and then I think shortly after that, there was physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was just the president--it was part of the president's vision.
Speaker 1: Alright, so what did establishing a PhD program entail? What did you have to do?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, as all new programs are concerned, there is a process that one has to go through involving getting the approvals at different levels. First, the graduate school; well, the graduate school has to approve the proposal, and then once that is done, getting the support from the different administrative offices, you know, at the university. But in our case, it was easier in the sense that the dean of the graduate school, this was Edward Hawthorne, the dean of the graduate school, was supportive of the program and of course the main support was from the president of the university.
Story_ID: 26256
Speaker 1: We got consultants from the outside to assist us; one of the consultants was David Blackwell, in fact the lead consultant, David Blackwell; another one was Lee Lorch; you've probably heard that name before; Reuben Hersh; these were three of the consultants that we had from outside.
Speaker 2: Now this is the same Reuben Hersh from the University of New Mexico.
Speaker 1: University of New Mexico that came.
Speaker 2: And Lee Lorch, L-O-R-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds like a pretty good team.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Alright. So--
Speaker 2: And we wrote around and got letters of support from other mathematicians who encouraged us and the American Mathematical Society talked about the need of having, you know, a good program at the university. Now, in building up, you know, so that one could see that we were ready for such a program was that series of seminars and (unclear) were established, you know, in the department where we had well-known mathematicians to come to visit us. We had past presidents of the American Mathematical Society, we had members of the National Academy of Sciences to come speak to us and the like. We had visitors from abroad; one person who would come on a regular basis came from Hungary and gee, now I'm blocking on his name, I'm talking a world-famous mathematician and I got to come up with his name. Just looking at his photograph of his being at Howard just before I came over here. I think--in his lifetime, I think he wrote over 700 papers in mathematics. Seven Hundred papers in mathematics.
Speaker 1: What was his name (laughter)? (Unclear). Matthew might know.
Speaker 2: Paul Edish.
Speaker 1: Paul Edish? Okay.
Speaker 2: Paul Edish, E-R-D-O-S is his name. And just an amazing--but he would come and he would spend a week, you know, ten days--so we had a lot of activity going on in the Mathematics Department and some people saw that; we were lively, you know, and this was an exciting time, you know. And so those kinds of things; and there were people--mathematicians from all over the area; they would come over to hear these people talk and this all led up to our submitting our proposal, and once it was accepted and we got started, this just continued, so the activity is still going on to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay. How long did it take to establish a PhD program?
Speaker 2: Talking about after the program?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I guess it was about five years before we turned out our first doctorate.
Speaker 1: And do you remember who it was?
Speaker 2: Yes, the first one was--I wanna say Zaka--Zekeria, Z-E-K-E-R-I-A, Abdul[Abdulkeni] Zekeria. But I'm gonna have to check this because it's either--
Speaker 1: Is this a Continental African student?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's from--at that time it was Ethiopia, now it's (unclear), but he's American now 'cause he stayed on.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.
Speaker 2: I think he was the first one.
Story_ID: 26257
Speaker 1: Now were you doing research too?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, right. Oh yes.
Speaker 1: How was your time managed in terms of research and teaching and administrative work?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't do as much teaching while I was chair. I think that at that time, the--well, when I first came the teaching load was three courses a semester and then as chair, I think I got a three and two--as chair, I got three and two. But after we got the PhD program, it went down to three and two for almost everyone in the department; people who were actually involved in the program. But now it's down to two and two for people who are involved in the PhD program; that's what the teaching time is. And you just had to make time for your research; had to make time, you know, for it initially. That was the way it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: You stayed later, or--
Speaker 2: But later, you know, there was reduction in teaching load to help one do the teaching.
Story_ID: 26258
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a mathematical teaching philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether I would say it's a philosophy or not but I certainly feel that mathematics should be taught in a way that it draws people towards the subject rather than repels them. I feel that many of the things that we do now in presenting mathematics has contributed a lot to people not liking mathematics, the way that we present the subject.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know earlier, I asked you a question about differential equations. You gave me an example, you gave me another example, you know, or another aspect in math.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is that what you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, it's that, but I think that whenever you teach a subject, the way that it was taught say 300 years ago, something is wrong there; something is really wrong because we, you know, there's evolution--people have evolved; and that sort of, you know, like for instance some of the college algebra courses that one sees today; they are deadly; they are deadly, the way that they--we have--what's presented is how it's presented; you know, just really deadly. It's taught as if the subject has nothing to do with human experience and I think that that is wrong, and I think it contributes a lot to people being, you know, really turned off.
Speaker 1: I've interviewed mathematicians who say that they are much more happier doing an applied problem--a problem as applied to a--I mean mathematical work as applied to a problem, rather than a theoretical--I mean just doing a problem without knowing its application or how it can be used.
Speaker 2: Well I don't think it's a matter of applied and pure--'cause I think that's a false dichotomy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think that's false because a lot of things that people don't have any idea they have--that these things have any use whatsoever but later, the applications come up where these things are absolutely necessary, you know. So it's just hard to, you know, really say the distinction between applied and pure; what is pure one day turns out later it's applied because people apply it for other things. But what I am saying is that the formulaic way of presenting things, whereas a formula--and you should remember this, remember that, remember this, and that kind of thing where the person doesn't seem like no thought, no thinking is involved at all, you just follow directions, you know. I think that that's the wrong way to present the subject.
Speaker 1: So does mathematical research, I mean the research that you're involved in, involve using mathematical tools in new ways?
Speaker 2: Well in some cases, yes. But in other cases is that you're using what there is and you may be applying it to something where it had nothing applied before. You know, you have that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 26259
Speaker 1: Now in '73 [1973], you published a paper about a Singular Cauchy Problem with a Small Parameter. What was that?
Speaker 2: Well, if I recall that particular paper, it was one of these cases where the parameter--when you're allowed a parameter to go to zero, the character of the equation changes from one type to another type and I think that the effort then was to understand better, you know, how these changes evolve.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And what is a Cauchy problem?
Speaker 2: Okay, I know you're saying "Couchy;" it's "Cauchy."
Speaker 1: "Cauchy," okay.
Speaker 2: What it is, it's a differential equation with an initial value; it's a differential equation with an initial value. In other words, in order to get say a single solution, you need initial conditions or boundary conditions, or both, you know--in order to have the property of the differential equation and then you have some auxiliary conditions. And so the differential equations with the initial conditions, those are called Cauchy problems.
Speaker 1: Named after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The French mathematician--
Speaker 1: --the French mathematician.
Speaker 2: --Cauchy, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26260
Speaker 1: You became a member of the Mathematic Section of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in '75 [1975], right?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure when that--but I believe that's about the right time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you do as a member of the Math Section of the American Association for the Advancement of Science?
Speaker 2: They have--when the AAA asked me--you know, they have scientists coming from all over so they have a section in mathematics, and sometimes they have sessions for mathematicians and so you attend the sessions; in fact, I'm sure I've given a talk at one of their sessions sometime back, I sort of recall. In fact, I think that talk had something to do with trying to get more young people into mathematics, you know, but this was back in the '70's [1970's] or the '80's [1980's] when I gave this talk.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you presented--you were a visiting member of the Courant Institute of the Mathematical Sciences in New York--at New York University in '76 [1976]. Also, you presented research at the First Pan African Conquest of Mathematicians--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --in Rabat, Morocco.
Speaker 2: Right, that's correct; that's right.
Speaker 1: Now who convened this group?
Speaker 2: Well, the--I guess it was the West African mathematicians that convened that conference but mathematicians from all over Africa were invited. It was President Cheek who made it possible for me to attend that conference and before that, I had met a number of West African mathematicians at a conference in Dakar--Dakar, Senegal, and I believe that was in 1970--either '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]; one of those years I attended this conference--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I had gotten an invitation but President [James E.] Cheek made it possible with the funds in order for me to attend.
Speaker 1: Now were you impressed by the--or did you--I guess what happens a lot of the mathematicians--the African and African American and Pan African mathematicians met each other for the first time, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, for the first time, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they had met in regionals. And some of the people I had met at the International Congress as a mathematician; I had met some of them at this International Congress. Some had come to Howard [University] for different periods of time, you know, we had invited them to come--to visit with us; some stayed one week, some stayed a semester, some stayed a year, and so a lot of the folks I knew, you know, already from having met them at other conferences and the like. I know in 1969, I met this mathematician from South Africa and he was just getting his doctorate from Cornel University and later on, he became the president of--I believe he held an office in the South African Mathematical Society, so over the years, I had met a number of the people and so I was invited to come and Cheek, President Cheek made it possible for me to go.
Story_ID: 26261
Speaker 1: In a gathering like this, how many mathematicians were in [Rabat] Morocco?
Speaker 2: I would say there were around 60; around 60. They came from Africa, I came from North America, there were several people from France at this particular conference, several French mathematicians. There were some African brothers, and certain African mathematicians who were teaching in French universities also were there. Most of the folks from the continent were from West Africa, but there were some from East Africa as well.
Speaker 1: You said at least one from South Africa?
Speaker 2: Yes, one from South Africa, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So were you able to network with them?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. For a long time, I corresponded with Professor Wooslonza (ph.) from Kumasi University in Ghana and there was a time there when the currency of Ghana was such that it was difficult to buy things from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. I helped him maintain his membership in the American Mathematical Society, you know; I helped him to that. This was during the times when there were troubles in Ghana and the cedi [currency of Ghana]; it had no exchange value outside of the country, you know.
Story_ID: 26262
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it says here in 1978, you were one of five African Americans on the Council of the American Mathematical Society.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, to have served on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, right (laughter), I was about to say I don't think (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think that that's--that was--that is correct. And unfortunately, I don't think there have been many more since that time. It's the math--American Math Society seems to be very difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay. Meanwhile, in '79 [1979], David Blackwell won the von Neumann Prize--the von Neumann Theory Prize. Now that's a big deal, isn't it? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yes, yes, yes. Oh yes; no question about that.
Speaker 1: It's like receiving an Oscar or something if you're an actor or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Higher than that; it's higher than that; that's a big prize.
Speaker 1: It's higher than that huh? (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright. Okay, now in 1982, you served on the Board of Directors of NAM [National Association of Mathematicians]. But I think you--weren't you already on the Board of Directors of NAM anyway?
Speaker 2: No, I was just a member but I think that was when I became an officer; to be on the Board of Directors, you have to be an officer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --see, I don't think I was a officer until then, and then I was editor of the newsletter.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were also--in '84 [1984], you served on the Board of Davis-Putter Scholarship Fund.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right. And I'm still on that Fund, you know. It's one of these memberships that go on and on, and on, and on. So--yeah, in '84 [1984], right.
Speaker 1: In '86 [1986], you were on the Board of Directors of DC TransAfrica.
Speaker 2: Right; yes, yes. Now I'm no longer on the board of that, as of three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. But I support--I support TransAfrica.
Speaker 1: Okay. Randall Robinson--is TransAfrica still in operation?
Speaker 2: It's in operation but it's the Forum now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the Forum now is what was the active part of TransAfrica--the Forum.
Story_ID: 26263
Speaker 1: Now you visited, as a visiting Professor of Mathematics, the University of Ferrara in Italy, right? In '86 [1986]. Were you there a year?
Speaker 2: No, it was just a semester; just a semester.
Speaker 1: Just a semester. Alright. Anything special about that experience that you need to share with us?
Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, the Italian people are really great; they're really great and I was treated well, you know, at that university. I was really treated well and I really liked the way that the Italians do mathematics and the life around mathematics in Italy. So it's just--it just seemed like everyone was excited about what they were doing, you know; really, they just seemed to be excited about what they were doing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I liked that and I got a chance, while I was there, to visit some other centers; I went to Catania [Italy], gave a talk down in Catania and it was really quite interesting, 'cause when I got off the train there, I looked at the people, and a lot of them look like a lot of people I knew from here and I was just puzzled for a while with the whole, you know, what was really going on, and evidently it was a lot of immigration from North Africa to that region of Italy, and a lot of inter-marrying over the years--over many, many years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my host, you know, he had spent some time at the University of Texas but he had also come to Howard; he had been to Howard [University] and he said he really enjoyed his time at Howard but he didn't like his experience in Texas. And I didn't know he, you know, would not have liked that but then I met his wife, and his wife looked really like a European or, you know, Italian. And I think that the people down there in Texas--I didn't want to tell him that, but I think that they thought that it was a case of, you know, inter-marriage and they did not--I guess they were not ready for that there 'cause he said he wasn't invited to anything while he was down there. And I told him "No, that doesn't really sound right." But I think that that's what had happened. He was there, I think, around--I think he said he was there in the late '70's [1970's]--he was in Texas. He said he hadn't been invited to anything.
Story_ID: 26264
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were also a visiting Professor of Math at the University of Victoria in British Columbia--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that was in '85 [1985], then you continued to do research. Now, all this time, are you still chairman of the department?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes; always, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I know we have a citation for a paper called The Linear Shallow Water Equation Mathematical Justification in the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Journal.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: Well that was some work that grew out of trying to explain the notion of the waves (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Or the ripples? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Laughter) Right; that's what this was about, yes. And again, it was a question, you know, you had this elliptic boundary value problem that was actually being approximated by a hyperbolic initial value problem. That was what the paper was about.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that has worried you since you were, as you said, a kid throwing rocks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, as I say, I came back to--long afterwards, yeah. And then I realized, you know, what was what, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. In '93 [1993], you were also the chairman of Howard's Joint Research Advisory Committee--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --okay; until 1997. And the Joint Research Advisory Committee administers internal research grants.
Speaker 2: Right; that's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 1: So about Three and a-half Million Dollars are given each year--
Speaker 2: Right--at that time; at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. What's it up to now? Where is it?
Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous)--(laughter)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Laughter)--don't know what it is now.
Speaker 1: Now in '93 [1993] now something kind of different, you served on the Board of Trustees of Lincoln University.
Speaker 2: Right, yes. So I was the Alumni Trustee; I was elected as an alumni, you know--Alumni Trustee to the Board.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you served for three years?
Speaker 2: Actually, I think eight years altogether.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay. So you were there until about 2001?
Speaker 2: Yes, around 2001.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 26265
Speaker 1: So in '94 [1994], you were elected Second Vice President of the Mathematical Association of America [MAA].
Speaker 2: Right, that is correct, that is correct.
Speaker 1: So this is the big mathematical association of the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Right--well, it's one of the two; the American Mathematical Society [AMS] is really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(inaudible response)
Speaker 2: --it's probably more--it's viewed as the--I don't wanna get them in trouble now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: --but there are two big ones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right; and that is one of the big ones.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you also served on their Board of Governors.
Speaker 2: Right; yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of African American mathematicians, which one is the friendliest, I guess? Or does it make any difference?
Speaker 2: Well, there's no question, MAA appears to be friendlier than the AMS, although historically, the MAA really--they cooperated with segregation, you know, in the south; they did this, you know, early on. There was the case of Abdulalim Shabazz, who was formerly Lonnie Cross; he tried to give a paper in South Carolina and he wrote to the Society asking them to--not to Society, to the Association, asking them to help him with his accommodations. And although they arranged accommodations, you know, for their members at these meetings, they were saying that they were not able to do so for him. This was Shabazz--Abdulalim Shabazz.
Story_ID: 26266
Speaker 1: Abdulalim Shabazz. Now tell us about him and his connection to Howard [University].
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, Abdulalim Shabazz graduated from Lincoln University in Pennsylvania in about 1949 and he took his doctorate in mathematics from Cornell University; now I'm not sure of the year, but it was in the 1950's--he took his degree from Cornell [University] and he is a tremendous mathematician; he is a tremendous mathematician.
Speaker 1: Now did he--seemed like he did something that--he some ground-breaking thing in math but I remember what it was.
Speaker 2: Well, he has taught a number of African American students who have gone on to get doctorates, you know, in mathematics or mathematics-related fields. I think it may be--well, I don't know what the number is but it's a tremendous number, so he has been--he's had great effect in this. One of his students, I'd mentioned him earlier, John Arthur Jones; he had taught John Arthur Jones and he was my school mate at Lincoln. In fact, he sent John Arthur Jones to Lincoln, but there have been many, many others that he taught. He received the prize a few years ago from the White House on mentoring.
Speaker 1: Right, right; the Presidential Award (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, for mentoring, I believe; and I think he's a recipient of that award. Currently, he has a name professorship at Grambling University in Louisiana. Now I don't know whether or not you've interviewed him, but he is certainly someone I would recommend that he be included in that list.
Speaker 1: Well you're not the first one, so we have to make sure we get him in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right; he definitely should be one of the persons.
Speaker 1: And thank you for mentioning his name because people do talk about him all the time.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 26267
Speaker 1: Well you were acting president of Lincoln [University] in '98 [1998] before you became the dean. How did that happen? I know you were on the Board, right?
Speaker 2: Yes; well I'll just tell you, that was something that had not been planned; it was just not in any of my plans but there had been some difficulty at the university; it was necessary for the president to stand down and they needed someone to direct the university into a new president. I guess the fact that I was on the Board already and had some administrative experience as a chair, I was asked to, you know, asked by the Board to do this until a new president was selected.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your term began in--
Speaker 2: It began, I believe, in October of 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay; and you were there for about a year?
Speaker 2: Less than a year--about ten months, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about ten months.
Speaker 1: So a new president was found.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Also during this period of time, I guess leading up to becoming Dean, you received a traveling award from the National Science Foundation to attend the International Mathematical Conference in Pretoria.
Speaker 2: Right, yes. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Well, that was very interesting indeed. A few years before, there had been a slight controversy in the American Mathematical Society involving South Africa's permission to have reciprocal membership in the American Mathematical Society. Members of the South African Mathematical Society had reciprocal membership at the American Mathematical Society and a number of mathematicians thought that this was not something that they should be asking because this was during the time of Apartheid--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I was one of those who strongly objected to the membership at that time, and so it was debated in the Society and it took a quite a while, but after about three or four years, we agreed no, they should not have recripro--there should be no reciprocity agreement between the two societies. And so after independence came to South Africa, then they were brought in as--a reciprocity agreement was approved between the two societies, and so I think it was because of all of this that I got the invitation and support from the American Mathematical Society to go to this meeting--this joint meeting in Pretoria. And that's my first and only meeting--first and only visit to South Africa; that was my first and only meeting--visit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you see the mathematician that you met in Morocco? Was he there?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, he was there; he was there; he had a prominent role there because he had some position in the South African Mathematical Society. I think he may have been the upcoming president of the Society--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I think he was the upcoming president of the South African Mathematical Society.
Speaker 1: Okay. So were black South African mathematicians--
Speaker 2: They could not be members before--during Apartheid--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: --and what they--and the argument for the American Mathematical Society becoming a member, the argument for the reciprocity agreement between the American Mathematical Society and the American Mathematical Society to the question of whether or not I could be a member of the South African Mathematical Society; the answer was that they would make me an honorary white person, and of course I stood up right away and said "Thank you, but no thank you," you know. I don't wanna be an honorary white person. I am who I am and can I be a member, you know, of the organization. So, as I say, it did not--the membership would not vote for that. And so that was really, really, really turned out to be great so they didn't vote for that. But I was glad, you know, to support them once they changed their position on that so that any member could be--any person could come--any mathematician could become a member in South Africa. So that was what that was about.
Story_ID: 26268
Speaker 1: Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences here at Howard [University] now. Who was the previous dean?
Speaker 2: The previous Dean was Clarence C. Lee; he was a biological scientist; a good, good, good person.
Speaker 1: And tell us about what happened; how you were offered the position.
Speaker 2: Well, after I had gone up to Lincoln [University]--and I should add here right away that the president of the--Howard University that really made that happen because it was necessary for me to get leads from the university to go up to the university--up to Lincoln for that period. But he did something that I don't think that it's done often, you know, in American universities; he did not give me leads; he gave me on loan to Lincoln University so while I was up at Lincoln University, my pay check came from Howard University and Lincoln billed Howard, you know, for--well Howard billed Lincoln for my salary, and so I had no break in my tenure here at Howard University, so the records will show that I was continuously at Howard since 1971.
Speaker 1: Now who was the president of Howard then? (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-[Patrick] Swygert
Speaker 1: Pat Swygert.
Speaker 2: Pat Swygert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking about he did that; he did that and I will--and I think the university--Lincoln University should ever be grateful to him, you know, for that because the way things were at the time, I could very well have gone up to Lincoln and would have gotten any salary because of the issues that were involved there, but things were sort of frozen.
Story_ID: 26269
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges when you became Dean of arts and Sciences here at Howard [University]? What did you plan to do, I mean what was your plan?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, let me just say this; it was never my plan to be Dean of the college or president or anything. The only thing I ever wanted to be at the university was professor; that's the only thing I ever wanted to be, but when I came back from Lincoln [University], Howard had been looking for a new Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences and President [Patrick] Swygert asked me what were my plans, and I told him I was going back, you know, to the classroom where I had been before going up to Lincoln. And he said "Well, no, I need you to serve as Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences." And so of course after what he had done, you know, for Lincoln University, it was just hard to just say "No, I can't do that." So that's how that came about, and so the Search Committee made it very clear that the president had wanted me to apply. So I went through the process and everything and I was recommended for the position. Now, what were my plans? Now, I'd been in the college since 1971 and I'd seen many, many things and of course I served on a number of committees in the college and knew many of the professors, you know, at the university and I always had thoughts on what I would like to see done, you know, differently. So this was just an opportunity to try to put some of these things, you know, into motion.
Story_ID: 26270
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, you know--so I knew some of the things that I wanted to see done. There's no question about, you know, the students in the College of Arts and Sciences. We had some of the brightest students that you would find anywhere; I know some of the brightest students that I've ever taught--I've taught right here at Howard University, and I've had experience at a number of universities teaching. And I just felt that, although we were doing a good job, there were certain things that we could do better and there could be other opportunities that we could provide for our students. So my short list at the time was to try to involve students--undergraduate students--in research. I wanted the students to have some research experience while they were here, not matter what they wanted to go into, so that was one of the things that was on my list. Another thing that was on my list was that I thought that we're too insular here; insular in the sense that the way our curriculum was set up, that it would be possible for people to leave not knowing much about--and having very low appreciation of other people's cultures and the like. So I wanted to see students have the chance to travel and study abroad, and I recall early on when I said that I wanted every student to be able to speak fluently, you know, another language other than their native language, the president jokingly pulled my coat, said "I hope you don't want the administrators to do likewise." (Laughter). But these are some of the things, you know, that I wanted to see done. So those were two of the things; the other thing was that I thought that even though we had such great students, that sometimes when they came, they weren't hazed like I was hazed when I went to Lincoln [University] but I didn't think that they ever had--many of them didn't have a chance because the orientation that they were getting to the university life--there was something that was just missing from that. And so I wanted the students in arts and sciences in the college to have say, some unifying experience. So the Freshman Seminar was something that we put into place, where every student coming in would have to go to the seminar, and they would learn about the university, learn about different things that we felt that all students should know about, and what they should expect during their four years at the university. And I can say that this was implemented; it took some time because a lot of people didn't see--say these folks are adults; they ought to know if you're coming to the university. But it seems like it's something that has continued and the students seem to find value, you know, in this.
Story_ID: 26271
Speaker 1: So as to the study abroad, we instituted a summer study abroad because it turns out that many of our students are not really able to take off an entire semester to go abroad, but they can go say for eight weeks or six weeks, you know, or for another period of time; we just wanted them to have that experience. And so we would have trips to South Africa, to Egypt before Egypt--before the troubles in Egypt. In fact, Carr has taken groups to Egypt.
Speaker 2: Dr. Greg Carr?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Greg Carr. West Africa, Ghana, Marley (ph.); of course you're going to Europe, France, England, Greece, Italy; but they were also going to South America, Mexico and to places like that. So those things were something that we worked on to try to broaden the number of experiences that are provided to the students. And--now the other thing is that we--I have worked on making sure that--we think our programs are good, but there's nothing like it to have outside people come in every so often to review these programs. So we set up a review process so that every program would be reviewed once every five years and that's still ongoing. And so groups of outside academics come in, but specialists in the areas, to look at the programs and make recommendations. We had the provost and people from the president's office involved, you know, in the review process. And so that's helped a lot in helping to enhance what we've done at the university. Now the other kinds of things--those were the interesting things; the other kinds of things were just the constant fight for resources. When resources are scarce, and there a whole lot of people who are fighting for the resources, you have to have broad shoulders and sharp elbows to make sure that you're up at the table to get what the college needs and what the college deserves because there are other folks who are fighting just as hard for their own units. And so that part I don't really relish; the memory of that part I don't relish very much. But then there have been some students who I sort of think that they probably would not have been able to stay at the university if the Office of the Dean had not intervened, and some if was financial and some of it was a case of misunderstanding and the like. So those things I find, you know, gratifying for that particular period. But I'm happy though that I'm moving on to another phase--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, you know, back to the classroom.
Speaker 2: Okay. So what are you moving on to?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm on leave right now, so July 1, yeah, I will be back full-time in the classroom. So I come in now, but I don't have any duties at the university this year.
Story_ID: 26272
Speaker 1: Now did--I knew Dr. Jeff Donaldson who was here at Howard [University](simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did people often confuse the two of you by name?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Jeff is a very good friend of mine; very good friend, yeah, yes. Well, the people from outside, you know. But Jeff was a really good guy; he was a really good guy. We came about the same time to Howard in '71 [1971]. Yeah, came about the same time. I came in '71 [1971]; I think he may have come '71 [1971] or a couple--few years later. But he was one of the persons that President [James E.] Cheek brought in and so I'm very close to that group that came in, yeah. Unfortunately, we lost him a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Right; that's right.
Speaker 2: We lost him.
Speaker 1: This would have been six or seven years ago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Now, I know Afro Studies seems very grateful to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh well, see that's the--you know, the thing is just I can't imagine a university such as Howard without the strongest Afro American studies program; I just can't imagine it. And I had the opportunity to have a little say in building such a program and I'm glad that I was in that position to do that because I really think that what is missing here is not enough understanding. I know the students are interested, but the understanding is not the way I want to see it right now. But they are making a difference and so I'm really pleased with that.
Story_ID: 26273
Speaker 1: Now you actually wrote a piece of African American history concerning the career of Elbert F. Cox, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--pioneer in mathematics.
Speaker 2: Right, with my colleague Fleming from Central Michigan University, yes. Yeah, I knew Cox. When I came to Howard [University] in '65 [1965], Cox had retired but he was still working because the pension was so bad at Howard at that time, that part of the pension plan was the ability to keep working after you retired; and that's the phase he was in. And his office was right across the hall from my office at the time. And we would come in and just talk with him and everything, and he was just a tremendous man.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the piece that you wrote was the American Mathematical Monthly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and with, did you say--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Fleming.
Speaker 1: Richard Fleming.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this was--Cox was the first black Ph.D. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, that's right, that's--first one.
Speaker 1: How important is it for the mathematicians to--and other scientists really, to know their history?
Speaker 2: I think it's very important; I think it's very important indeed. You would be amazed at the number of people that I run into when I tell them what my profession is; they are just amazed; just amazed. And I'm not talking about just African Americans but other folks as well; and that should not be, you know, that should not be. See, I don't think people would be amazed now to know what [President] Barack Obama--what his job is now; so they would not be amazed now; but before he was elected, they--folks would definitely be, you know, amazed if they heard that; in fact, they wouldn't believe that it was possible. So I think that this is of enormous importance.
Story_ID: 26274
Speaker 1: You're very busy and you have a lot of volunteer activities. And you're now Dean Emeritus of the College of Arts and Sciences and you're gonna go back to teaching.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Teaching and research; the little research that I--a few little problems that I have left.
Speaker 1: What are some of the problems that you wanna research?
Speaker 2: Well, back to some of the stuff that I worked on, you know, initially. I think that they may have some applications to some areas of medicine and I would mainly be interested in fluid flow through the kidneys, and see these equations are governed by differential equations; these are the equations that come up. And so I wanna just see whether or not I can use some of the things that I know to help to get some understandings of some of these issues that are involved. Now this is some stuff that was started while I was down at Duke University. While I was at Duke, I was working with a mathematician named Michael Reid and so I wanna just go back and revisit some of this work. I had started some work on that then, but it had been suspended; I wanted to see whether or not I can revise--resuscitate, I guess is the word, some of this.
Speaker 1: Can you sort of comment on the--I think most of the sciences now are becoming increasingly computational. They're talking about computational chemistry and biology now, and microbiology. What are your thoughts?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that this is a good trend because there are some problems, you know, right now they are so intractable that for the short term, the only approach that I know to try to get some information out would be computationally. Now of course that doesn't mean then that you're done once you get the computation results; it's gonna still be necessary to wrestle with some questions about why does this work, you know. You could say "I know it works," but I think that we really wouldn't be satisfied until we knew why it works. And so I think that in the short term, you know, the computation of methods is probably the best approach that we have at the time, but that doesn't mean that that's the end of it because the computations alone may not really give you the certainty that you desire.
Story_ID: 26275
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: The only thing I can remember is that when I first started teaching at the university--I think that I would be more understanding of the difficulty the students have with mathematics. I think that early on, you know, I just said "You're not working, you're not doing this, you're not doing that," and I was very dismissive; I would change that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would definitely change that.
Story_ID: 26276
Speaker 1: And likewise, as you look back at everything you've done at this point, again, what would you consider to be your legacy, professionally?
Speaker 2: Well, legacy--I don't know whether or not I have a legacy (laughter). My only answer to that would be that I can just tell you things that I've enjoyed seeing, and I've enjoyed seeing people--the light in the folks' faces--in the faces of young people when they say "I've got it; yeah, I understand this." Now that's the thing that just pleased me a whole lot, just to see that. And I hope to see this some more before I retire, in the faces of young people, you know; I just wanna see it at least one more time, you know? So that's just to say--but as far as legacy, only thing I can say--it's been providential that I was where I was at the time it was, and the like, and that--but surely someone else could have been at the same place and probably would have done more, and would have done it better. That is the way I see it.
Story_ID: 26277
Speaker 1: Now you also have some hopes about this research--your research being used in medical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right. Yes, but--yeah, I have hopes that this--you know, that something will come out of but see I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Are there any other aspects of research that you've been involved in where you've seen like some sort of advancement in, I guess, an applied field from your computational research?
Speaker 2: No, I can't really say this. I know that there was some applied type work that I did with colleagues in the (unclear); this was many, many years ago, may have turned up--turned out to be of some use, you know, with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] but I couldn't really tell you specifically what aspects.
Speaker 1: But isn't it true that research that's done--that's solid can have a life far beyond (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, sure; absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. But I--you know, I couldn't tell you exactly what these applications are.
Speaker 1: Is there any wasted research?
Speaker 2: Well, the way I define research, no. But if it's something--if it's a question that you have, you're interested in it, alright? And you are able to answer your question, I think that it is not wasteful for you. Now--but again now, my colleague over here or over there might say "Why is he working on that?" And see at one time, I used to be part of that over here and over there. "Why is he working on that?" But if your answer is "I'm working on it because this is something that I'm interested in," you know, hey, that's fine, as I see it.
Story_ID: 26278
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, one hope as it relates to my profession is that I hope that one day it will be the case that every person has the opportunity to participate fully, you know, in mathematics and mathematical-related fields. Now that's in my profession. Now in general, I would like to see this be the case in any field, that every person has the equal opportunity, you know, to do so; and when I say every person, I'm talking about women, African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans and all those who have been traditionally under-represented in society, be able to participate fully, you know, in society; that's what I would like to see.
Story_ID: 26279
Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your family. Do you have children?
Speaker 2: No, I've never married; I never was married so I don't have any children. I have a host of nieces and nephews, you know, having 10 siblings--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, I have a large number of nieces and nephews and I like them a lot and I can remember all of their names too, but please don't ask me to start naming them, alright?
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did your parents live to see you--
Speaker 2: No, my father [Oliver Donaldson] died in high school but my mother [Audrey Brown], she did live to--in fact, she visited me a couple of times since I've been at Howard University and she visited me when I was on the faculty of the University of Illinois, and so she got a lot out of saying "This is my son, the doctor, but he is not a medical doctor." She said "He's a doctor of the mind," you know (laughter). She really liked to, you know, to say that, you know.
Story_ID: 26280
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a good person; that's the way I'd like to be remembered; as a good person.
