Story_ID: 116309
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Gregory A. Davis, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, D-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what does the A stand for, do you mind telling us?
Speaker 2: Allen--Gregory Allen Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 2: E-N.
Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September the 24th, 1948, in Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm present--president and CEO of Davis Broadcasting Company.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: February the 20th, 19-2014 [February 20, 2014].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently at the studios of Davis Broadcasting in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 116310
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a, a warm-up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first on is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Barbeque.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmastime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I--rephrase that.  Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What you put in is what you get out.
Story_ID: 116311
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Rizetta Theola Davis, R-I-Z-E-T-T-A, Davis, DAVIS, Theola--I'm sorry--it's T-H-E-O-L-A.
Speaker 1: And what, what, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Gill, G-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 18, 1924, born in Bigelow, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is Bigelow near Fort Smith?
Speaker 2: No, it's near Conway--between Conway and Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace them, and what is known about them?  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: I, I can only go back--I know my grandfather and grandmother.  And they were--my grandfather was a schoolteacher at a very early age in Arkansas.  And he then moved from Bigelow to Fort Smith.  And he worked at the concrete factory.  My grandmother was Lillie Gill.  She was pretty much a domestic person who worked in the home, who did laundry for the Caucasian race.  And that's how she made the monies that she made.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now the--so the family--your grandfather taught school in Bigelow.  And do you know where he went to school?
Speaker 2: Don't know exactly where he went to school.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that I--we saw--we, we heard about it, but I don't know exactly the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay and you, you, you know what schools he taught at?
Speaker 2: The only--there was only one little school there in Bigelow, Arkansas, and he was the schoolteacher there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I'm fishing for the name 'cause some of those names are important 'cause they identify people that started those schools and built them--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And unfortunately I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so are there any stories in your family that go all the way back to Emancipation or Reconstruction or anything?
Speaker 2: I'm not as familiar with the real history back there.  I was told some of the things, but I just remember back in my grandfather's time.  I did know, on my other side, on my father's, my great grandmother, but I don't--I don't know anything about much more than where she lived and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your--as far as you know your grandfather's people--I mean your grandparents, the, the Gills, you know were from around Bigelow.
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Is, is, is there any other place that, that the family claims to have been from on that side?
Speaker 2: Morrolton, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's M-A--
Speaker 2: M-O-R-R-O-L-T-O-N, Morrolton.
Speaker 1: Okay, Morrolton, Arkansas, okay.  So they were there before they moved to Bigelow, and then Bigelow to Fort Smith?
Speaker 2: Well, they lived in Bigelow, but, but they lived--and they moved straight from Bigelow to Fort Smith, Arkansas.  But the family lived in and around Morrolton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --family and other relatives and members of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116312
Speaker 1: So your mother [Rizetta Theola Davis], she, she grew up in a fairly stable household, you know, father a schoolteacher and--I suppose, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Was she able to go to school herself and finish?
Speaker 2: Mother was--graduated from Arkansas AM&N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical & Normal College, later University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff].  First of all she went to Lincoln High School in Fort Smith, Arkansas, the only all-black high school.  She graduated from that, went to Arkansas AM& N College, where she graduated there with--top in her class, salutatorian.  She furthered her education and went to University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas]; was one of the first African-American students to graduate from University of Arkansas, where she received her master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she do that like after the Civil Rights Movement was over--I mean or after the initial agitation of the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Mother had to graduate sometime in the mid '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was right around the time when segregation was taking place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was--again, she was one of the very first--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --African Americans to graduate from University of Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a mother by that time, and had a family.
Speaker 2: Yes, that is correct.
Speaker 1: And--I'll, I'll ask about that later because I know the story about that, that she was one of the first.  She must have had some stories that she shared about going to school at the University of Ark--Arkansas.  So, let me--did she talk about what it was like to grow up in, in Bigelow?
Speaker 2: I don't think mother--a little bit.  She, mother, pretty much talked more about her childhood--again, it was just her and one other brother--and how they would ride horses, and how they would go in and, and help do the things around the house.  And, and at that time they were raising their own chickens and cows and things of that nature.  So--but she had--they, they came to Fort Smith so that mother could go to school.  That was part of the reason that my grandparents decided to move her--to move from Bigelow to Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were trying to make a better future for her.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And was, was she the only child?
Speaker 2: She was really--she had a brother, a stepbrother; he wasn't in the household, but my grandmother [Lillie Gill] raised him.  My grandmother and grandfather raised him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this, this is an older brother or--
Speaker 2: No, he was only to a few years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I mean a few years older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116313
Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Fred Davis, Jr., F-R-E-D, D-A-V-I-S, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 16, 1924, deceased in April 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Dad was born in Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, once again, like what can you tell us about his side?  How far back can you trace your father's side?
Speaker 2: I did know my great grandmother on his side.  She lived in England, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And is that close by Fort Smith?
Speaker 2: That's near down near Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story about your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: All I remember is that we would--they would--we would go out and cut sorghum.  You know, you had--we'd--I'd go out to the--there was kind of a thing of sorghum sticks.  And we'd go out there and pick cotton--pick cotton and eat sugarcane.  But it was--it was really pretty much domes--she was very old at the time when I remembered her.  But we would go down in the summer and spend some time.  But I don't remember a lot about her background.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was she born like--I guess she was born during Reconstruction I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Reconstruction, absolutely.
Speaker 1: She was maybe born about 1880 or so or--'cause I'm thinking your father was born in '24.  So his mother, say 1900.  I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yes, approximately--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in 1900.  And so she had to be born in 1880.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe 18--late 1870s, 1880s--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --around in that period, yep.  So she saw a lot of change in Ark--you know, a lot of change in (unclear) time or a lot of struggle in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what, what was your great grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Grandma Parker.  I'm sorry; I cannot think of her first name.  We just called her grandma Parker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Estella, E-S-T-E-L-L-A, Day--Davis.  She lived to be 101 years old.
Speaker 1: When did she pass?
Speaker 2: She passed on--in December of--I'm guessing at this--it's December of 2003 or 4.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born 1902 then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's around the turn of the century.  And so, so I take it everybody what--she was--was, was she born in Fort Smith or--
Speaker 2: In Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And your grandfather is Fred Davis, Sr.
Speaker 2: Senior, that is correct.
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't remember his exact date of birth.
Speaker 1: Was he older than, than, than his wife?
Speaker 2: Yes--no--yes, they were about the same age.  But he died at a much earlier age.  He died in the--his 87 or 88 years old.
Story_ID: 116314
Speaker 1: Now what did your, your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Fred Davis, Sr.] worked for the only glass company in Fort Smith [Arkansas] for--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --over forty-five years.
Speaker 1: And what, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was in charge of cutting glass.  They, they did the mirrors, the, the mirrors that--they would cut the mirrors that they would frame.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now that's interesting work.  I mean--so, so, so they made mirrors in this factory where he worked, and--
Speaker 2: And the mirrors--a lot of the mirrors that you see on the homes that you see in, in living rooms and places with different shapes.  That's what he would--they would shape 'em and cut 'em to fit those type of designs--over the bathroom just straight glass windows and that type of thing, the mirrors at that time
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's not easy.  That--this is a skill you have to learn--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, to do--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --I mean to do it right.  Did, did he talk about how he was trained to do it, or, or what it was like doing that job?
Speaker 2: You know, my grandfather was a very quiet man, but he, he never missed a day.  They said he never missed a day, and they, they said he--years and years he would never miss a day for work.  He was very rarely sick.  But he would walk to work and walk back home.  But he took that very seriously, and that's where he worked again for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Did, did he bring any--anybody else in the family into the--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just--it was just he.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now did--and, and your, your grandmother [Estella Davis], was she a housewife, or did she just do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Grandmother worked in the home.  No, she'd go to the, the occasional homes and work in the house.  She was really kind of a housekeeper, a helper that she had worked (unclear)--she'd cook and do, you know, cleaning.  And every morning she'd go to the houses and come back in the evenings.  That was her regular daily thing.  It was more of a housekeeper type position.
Speaker 1: Now, did they have a large family or?
Speaker 2: We had--they had four, four children.  She had four children, two girls and three--I'm sorry.  It was five, two girls and three boys, and my dad [Fred Davis, Jr.] was the third.
Speaker 1: That's--say wait a minute now (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--I thought about that.  I gotta--had a second generation--she had a second generation of children.  Yeah, it was five of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116315
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what did your dad [Fred Davis, Jr.] say about growing up in Fort Smith [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Dad--my dad started out--first of all, he graduated from high school only, did not go to college; went off to the service; worked in the [U.S.] Navy--went to the Navy for--during World War II.  After he got out of the Navy, he came back to Fort Smith.  And my dad started out working in hotels where he was pretty much a bellman.  And later on--and I'll say this 'cause it was proud of--my dad worked in these hotels for many, many years.  And, and later years in life he joined me at a company called the Colonial Baking Company.  And one of the proudest moments of my life is when I had worked there.  They didn't have any blacks working at the Colonial Baking Company in Fort Smith.  And I worked there for--I went there and asked for a job.  And I said I understand that you've never hired any blacks here.  I said but I don't believe that.  I just feel nobody's ever applied--and walked in and got a job and started from the groundwork, and learned how to pull racks and so forth.  But the story was is that my dad--after I worked there for two years, I asked them--I said would you hire my father?  My father needs a job.  And my dad came over and says if he'll hire, he says I'll come over.  He, he left the hotel and came over and worked for the Colonial Baking Company and worked there for twenty years thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's interesting.  There are not that many stories about a son getting a job for his father.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's why it was such a monumental moment in our lives, 'cause my dad was at a time as you know they were still--they were bootlegging--I'll say bootlegging--they were selling alcohol and doing whatever they could to make it through these hotels at that particular time.  This was a, a more secure job.  And my dad came in, and I was able to work with him and train him everything in the bakery.  He went on to become, again, almost the top--not almost, he became one of the leading bakers in the city after twenty years there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what you said--what you just said, I didn't--I didn't miss that, what you said about working in a hotel.  When you're working as a bellman in a hotel, people ask you to do all kinds of things--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --to bring 'em things and stuff and you--and you know, but you--a lot of things you may or may not agree with and don't--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But you--you're in that service economy and at the bottom rung of it almost.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, so this really helped him get--getting out of that environment, right?
Speaker 2: That did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it took a lot of--it took a lot of humbleness for him to even agree for his son to go over and say dad, come over and work with me.  And I trained him from scooping the bread and putting it on the racks to pulling racks to twisting the bread to working in the oven.  And he learned it all and became one of the senior most people there at the bakery after working for twenty years, and re--basically almost retired.  He started his own business thereafter, but--
Story_ID: 116316
Speaker 1: All right, so, now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rizetta Theola Davis] and dad [Fred Davis, Jr.] lived next door to each other.  This is the best I can remember.  They were both going to high school.  And dad had gone--daddy had gone off to [U.S. Navy] service later after high school.  But they were living there.  And my mother used to tell me, says daddy was liking--she thought daddy liked this other young lady in the high school class.  And she was sitting out on the porch one day, and she said Fred; she says I know somebody who like you.  And daddy responded--says I know someone who likes you.  She said who?  He says I do.  And that's how it all started.  He said that's how she--she call herself trying to give her best friend daddy's name--her name.  And Fred--and daddy told her that I like you, and that's how the whole relationship began.
Speaker 1: Now that's a great story.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: So, so how long did they court before they got married?
Speaker 2: Mother went off to college [Arkansas AM&N College, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and finished college.  And when she graduated from college, she came back and that's when he was getting out of the [U.S.] Army.  And that's how they came back and got back together in Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your mother--now does she--did--was she a schoolteacher.  Did she become a schoolteacher (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother became a schoolteacher at the all-black high school in Fort Smith, Arkansas called Lincoln High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the school she graduated from.
Speaker 2: That's the school she graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She taught Black History and social studies.
Speaker 1: So, so this evolved.  Now she wasn't talking--teaching Black History in the beginning, right?
Speaker 2: You know, she started out--
Speaker 1: Did she--
Speaker 2: --teaching Black History.
Speaker 1: Did she?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now this is--and I've heard in the black schools you would get Black History.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But I don't know if they taught it by name as such, but they taught history from a black perspective.
Speaker 2: Oh you had U.S. History and you had Black History.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had both as formal--
Speaker 2: They had Black History, yes.
Speaker 1: --courses of--okay, all right.  Okay, at Lincoln, so--let's see.  So, now when you think about your parents' personalities, how they walk, how they talk, their sense of humor, what they look like, their talents, their points of view, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father.  My father was a person who never met a stranger.  He, he was--he liked people; he enjoyed being around people; he was a survivor.  He had good common sense, good street sense.  He could go into pool halls and talk to people.  He could talk to people who came out of banks.  He was never a, a bashful person, very prideful, but my dad was a person who, in my opinion, was one of my best mentors in life by far, did not have a college education, but had good, good common sense and knew how to talk to people.
Speaker 1: So this must have served him well, you know, in a position in the hotel.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he--you meet all kinds of people, and you gotta relate to 'em, and you got to make a lot of decisions.
Speaker 2: Well, you have to remember then it was very few blacks coming through the hotels.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: These are mostly white--
Speaker 1: These are all white people.
Speaker 2: --people coming through there, so you had to relate to 'em and had to communicate.  And my dad was hustler.  I always daddy knew how to make--he knew how to make money, but he also knew how to--he took care of us.
Speaker 1: So I imagine--you can correct me if I'm wrong, but I imagine he probably made as much or more in the hotel than he did at the bakery.
Speaker 2: Probably, probably, but it was so many--it was much more.  He was away from home at night--overnight hotels, and so it was very seldom--we'd very seldom see him.  He'd sleep during the day.  So when we were home from school, we wouldn't see him 'cause he'd leave and go to work in the evenings.  So it was very little time spent at the house except for sometimes on Sundays when we'd go to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, as we said before, it's--it has its dangers too, work--working--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a--in a hotel.
Speaker 2: Hotels--it was a way for them to, to provide for their families.  And, and he--dad was always dressed neatly and clean, and carried himself just as prideful as anyone else.  But at that time, you only had mostly--and where I grew up in Arkansas--was preachers and teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So all the other professions was domestically involved.  You didn't have any lawyers.  You didn't have any doc--had one doctor in the city, and that's pretty much it.
Story_ID: 116317
Speaker 1: Okay, now well, tell me about your--well, what, what was your mother's [Rizetta Theola Davis's] personality like?
Speaker 2: Mother was very--mother, mother always believed in doing things systematically.  She was a very organized--mother always taught us to look at a person in their eye, and speak to them, be polite, very religious-based.  We went to church and Sunday school, and Bible study.  I mean we, we did it all.  But mother was a--was, was considered, and, and, and not by my definition but people who taught her, one of the most caring, and sharing, and forthright person that a lot of the students would come back and say that had it--had it not been for your mother, I would have dropped out of school.  Mother was a very articulate--she wanted just--she wanted you to do your best.  She wouldn't tolerate anything less than doing what you were capable of doing.  And she'd always say you don't have to make As, but you gotta do your best.  And that was her requirement of us.  She set the stage for us from a standpoint of going on to grad school, again, one of the first ones to ever go through that and went to grad school and graduated from University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], taught high school there for, again, all of thirty-eight years there in the systems.  But I know that's a little bit, but the personality is, is a person who was very, very mindful of you do it the right way.  And there's no excuse.  And we don't always agree with what was going on from a white-black perspective.  But she says you know, you don't dislike people because of the color of their skin.  You dislike 'em for the ways, for the things sometimes that they stand for.  And she was ver--such a role model for all of us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and still is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, tell us about your siblings.  Can you name them from the oldest to the youngest and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and tell us a little bit about each one.
Speaker 2: The oldest is Ladonna Houston--Davis Houston.  She is the oldest.  She went to--she graduated from high school, (unclear)--St. Scholastica--and by the way, we all went to parochial schools in Fort Smith [Arkansas]--went on to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], graduated from Fisk University, went back to grad school and got her master's from the University of Arkansas, moved--married and moved with her husband to New York--Upstate New York--where she completed her degree.  And she was a speech pathologist for one of the New York school systems in Upstate New York, in Kingston, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, who's next--the next one?
Speaker 2: Then I was the second, and my brother was the third; it was three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother is Fred Davis, III.  He graduated from Northeastern Oklahoma University [sic, Northeastern State University, Tahlequah, Oklahoma].  He went back to grad school and got his master's.  He is now a principal in Dallas [Texas] school system at a high school there.
Story_ID: 116318
Speaker 1: You were telling us about [brother] Fred Davis, III and so who's next?
Speaker 2: That's it.  That's the only--
Speaker 1: That's it, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so this, this is your household growing up basically--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --was the five of you, your, your mother [Rizetta Theola Davis], fa-father [Fred Davis, Jr.], you and your brother and sister [Ladonna Davis Houston]?
Speaker 2: My brother and sister, that is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you describe the house you grew up in and you know, what were some of the sights, and the sounds, and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: We, we grew up in a very, very poor neighborhood.  Our neighborhood we were--people said we were poor, but I--we didn't think we were poor.  I mean everybody else around us was living the same way.  But our home was a two-bedroom home.  We had outdoor toilets.  We had running water we'd have to go out and bring from the outside and to warm water for cooking and bathing and things of that nature.  I tell people that all the time.  It's, it's amazing where you've come from when you--and I--that's not something I've heard about; it's something that we lived.
Speaker 1: So you had a water tap, but it was outside of the house?
Speaker 2: Outside the house.  And the toilet was outside, and we'd have to go out and get water and heat water to take baths and things of that nature.  But we lived across the street from a project.  The project was (unclear) in the same neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the projects?
Speaker 2: Elm Grove, E-L-M, Grove Housing Project [Fort Smith, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: And was there a name for your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Any--anybody have a--or for, for that side--was the town divided up to a white side of town and a black side of town?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, but we didn't--just on one side of the tracks versus the other side of the tracks.
Speaker 1: Was one the north or east or west or something or, or--
Speaker 2: We were on north--we're the north side.  Yes, the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --north side of Fort Smith, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, on the north side, all right.  Oth--other sights, sounds, and smells?
Speaker 2: Our neighborhood was--again, we all knew everybody.  We, we played together; we played ball together; we went to church.  Most of the people went to two--it's either two or three churches in the whole city.
Speaker 1: Black, black churches?
Speaker 2: Black churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what, what, what denomination was your, your family?
Speaker 2: My mother was a Baptist; my dad was a Methodist.
Speaker 1: And was, was, was your dad in a CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church?
Speaker 2: He was in--
Speaker 1: Or just a Methodist--
Speaker 2: Just, just Methodist.
Speaker 1: --church.
Speaker 2: Wasn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --AME [African Methodist Episcopal] or CME.  He was just a--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --a Methodist Church that my grandparents were a part of.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause the reason why I ask is 'cause you know if you're going to Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] later on--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that being the CME school, I thought maybe it was--
Speaker 2: No relation.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, none, none at all, okay, all right.  Oth--other sights, sounds, and smells?
Speaker 2: Pretty much the neighborhood--again, we, we grew up where we, we primarily spent time together at the ballpark--at the field.  We had one public park that everybody would meet at.  Our families interchanged at--on Sundays at church and in school.  That's kind of the focal points of our community.  We were very small community, probably about eight thousand people in the whole city that were black.
Speaker 1: Now were, were black people almost equal in number of whites, or were they in a significant minority or, or were there more?
Speaker 2: Signica--significantly a minority.  The city was about a hundred thousand.  We represented about eight percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, was there a--what was the major artery running through the black community--I mean major street?  Or, or was there--let me put it this way: was there a business strip in the black community?
Speaker 2: There really wasn't.  Ninth Street was the street which most blacks would know because that's where the place you go get your hair cut and hair fixed, and barbershops and, and that type of thing.  But--and that's where the joints--they had little nightclubs and things of that nature.  So Ninth Street would be kind of the primary street where--was the thread of the community which all the activity was around, other than the churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Now were the streets paved in the black community?
Speaker 2: Majority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Majority.
Speaker 1: I know some of--I, I noticed when I went down South as a kid that when you went to the black side of town, except for a couple of main roads in and out, everybody's street was gravel.
Speaker 2: No, ours were paved.  We did--we didn't have unpaved streets in the city.  There's some, but not--but very, very few.
Story_ID: 116319
Speaker 1: Now did you have sense growing up--now you grew up, like I did, during the--about the same age, during the time of the Western movies and everything.  And Fort Smith [Arkansas] is mentioned so many times in the Westerns.  It is the home of Judge [Isaac] Parker, the hanging judge and all that.  I mean what did--what, what did you hear about that kind of history?
Speaker 2: You know, we knew about the court.  The hanging court was right downtown on 5th Avenue and Garrison Avenue.  We knew that that's where the hanging judge resided.  But you know, as young blacks we didn't really go down there as much.  All of our---was down on the north side of the city, but we knew that it existed.  We knew it was big tourist--tourism attraction from down around the southwest part of the state that people would come up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But we didn't--we really didn't elaborate a lot on that at that--I said we didn't--we wouldn't get involved with a lot of--and what you shared with me today I never knew about that.  So that's--that was tremendous.
Speaker 1: Though--listen to this.  I, I was talking about the presence of Bass Reeves, a black marshal who rode for Judge Parker, the famous hanging judge, and that he never lost a man and--I mean that (unclear)--he's legendary (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's right
Speaker 1: --for--yeah, Bass Reeves.  The movie 'Hang 'Em High' has been suppo--has been reportedly about--basically about him, even though Clint Eastwood played the role.  And it was mentioned--I mean Fort Smith is mentioned in so many Western movies, 'Lonesome Dove' and you know, just so many of them.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so, well, tell me about--now was--did you spend a lot of time in church growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  We--you know, that was our regular routine.  Sundays was pretty much in church all day, from Sunday school to church service, back to---back at six o' clock from Baptist Training Union.  Then during the week, you had choir rehearsal or usher hers--practice.  But the church was kind of the nucleus of all of our activities, that and the high school.
Speaker 1: Was that the Baptist church or the Methodist?
Speaker 2: The Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, with (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you have any special responsibilities in the church as a youth?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I was the--I was on the usher board.  I was always the greeter on Sunday mornings to welcome the guests.  That was my claim to fame and reading announcements.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are kind of--now I know in a lot of churches they recognize capable young men and women by giving them those kinds of responsibilities and encouraging them, you know.
Story_ID: 116320
Speaker 1: Your--in your neighborhood, now you went to an all, all-black school, right, in Fort Smith [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: I (unclear) I went to St. John's Elementary School [Fort Smith, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And St. John's was a very small elementary school where in our class we had ten people.  In fact, we were in a one-room classroom that twenty--that both the sixth, seventh, and eighth grade.  It was all in one room at the same time.  So we, we had one-room classrooms, a teacher at the Catholic school.  So when the teachers would be teaching the eighth grade, the sixth grade would have projects to do.
Speaker 1: Now did you start school there?
Speaker 2: That's where I started.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had, had first--did they have kindergarten--
Speaker 2: Kindergarten
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: How, how many students was there in your kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Maybe seven to ten people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's like that all the way--all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All the way through--
Speaker 1: ---seven to ten--
Speaker 2: --never small classes.
Speaker 1: For one teacher with seven to ten children could probably do a lot of good.
Speaker 2: Well, it was only--remember now, it was seventh- and the sixth-grade class.  I'm just gonna give you sixth, seventh, and eighth.  It was probably eleven of us in my sixth-grade class.  But in the same room we had the seventh grade that had another ten to thirteen people.  And then on the far right you had the eighth-grade students all in just one room from eight, eight o' clock in the morning to three o' clock, and they had another eight to twelve people.  So I--the classes were only--was small, but you were being taught about everything the seventh grade was teaching.  You had some work to do on the sixth grade, and the eighth grade to do other things, but she would be teaching each class all in one classroom.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so three classes are going at the same time.  So the teachers, their attention was divided so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was divided amongst the classes.  It's a very, very unique situation--I mean unique, unique circumstances--unique circumstances--knowing that that's how it was taught.  So remember we were hearing what the eighth graders--when they were take--taking algebra in the eighth grade, we could hear what they were talking about.  But we had our own work to be doing while she was teaching the 8th grade.  Then there were some common classes that we would all have together, like religious catechism.  What else would we do?  Catechism comes to my mind.  But English was separately; math was separately; science was separately, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any special teachers or mentors at that--at this level at St. Joseph's?
Speaker 2: Yes, at St. John's we had--
Speaker 1: St. John's.
Speaker 2: --a teacher by the name of Sister Pierre--Sister Pierre, who still lives in the convent and in Saint--in Fort Smith in St. Scholastica.  She was our teacher for three years and still lives, and was very instrumental in a lot of our progression, and growth, and development.  We went from St. John's to St. Anne's High School [Fort Smith, Arkansas].  I went to St. Anne's Academy, which was a Catholic school, for my last four years--
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this though.  At, at the grade school level, now what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that, that pretty much it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no, you know we--we all had to do the same thing.  We--it was English, math, science.  We did all the things.  But at that time, my interest was--loved to play basketball, I mean just sports in general.  And we had a little, little sports team that, that--that's all I can tell you that I remember about high school--elementary school, other than spelling; spelling was always a--it was a challenge to me.  It was almost like competition.  If you didn't spell, you got--we got licks.  I mean this is corporal punishment.  I mean it was like we would get licks in our hands if you didn't--if you didn't--you miss a spelling word.  You practice on Wednesday, but Friday you, you have to know 'em.  If you didn't you got licks in your hand--
Speaker 1: Now that's the difference--
Speaker 2: --for every time you--
Speaker 1: --difference between the Catholic school and a public school.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause public schools would give you licks for--when I was growing up anyway--for misbehaving.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But if you missed all your questions, I mean you would just flunk--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you wouldn't get licks.
Speaker 2: No, no, that's right.
Speaker 1: But--so in the Catholic schools they took the--they--
Speaker 2: They believed in discipline and corporal punishment from a standpoint you study and you put forth the effort.  If you don't, this is what--this is what took place.  Now, don't get me wrong.  That wasn't the only thing that we did.  There, there was a lot--they didn't do this on all the thing--missing spots.  It was just--we just remember the fun times of different ones missing spelling words.  And you know, there's always someone in the class and they would move the hands--when the hand out there and you just take and someone say--you know, they could--they would switch the hand to keep from--rub this one and they rub back here.  You know, all those things making me remember.  Those were the good times; those are the memories that were--there were good; there were--they were rich and strict, but they was very effective.  And we learned to take reading, math, science very seriously.  And that was just the Catholic way of instilling knowledge, and trying to make sure we learn what we should be learning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116321
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were growing up, did you--considering what you're doing today, did, did your family spend or did you spend a considerable amount of time, or any time like watching television and listening to the radio?
Speaker 2: Radio was not--that's not true.  I was gonna say wasn't--we, we listened to radio.  I remember listening to the Joe Louis's fights and the Floyd Patterson's flights--fights I should say.  Floyd Patterson and Sugar Ray Robinson was the people then that we heard on the radio.  So we would listen to radio, but I knew nothing about broadcasting at that time, didn't even have any inkling idea.  It didn't have any impact on me at that time.
Speaker 1: What, what about television?
Speaker 2: Television was--never had any impact on me at that time.  It was just a means of entertainment.
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, did you ever get a chance to go into a TV studio--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or a radio station?
Speaker 2: No.  There wasn't--in fact there wasn't even a black radio station in Fort Smith [Arkansas].  The only one we had was a station out of WLAC.  I think it was called Randy at nighttime out of Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: You could hear all--
Speaker 1: --Ra--Randy's Record Shop
Speaker 2: Randy's Record Shop.
Speaker 1: Gallatin, Te--
Speaker 2: Gallatin, Tennessee, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Tennessee.  (Unclear) station (unclear) yeah, Nashville and state--I mean--
Speaker 2: I remember--(unclear)--they would play black music late at nighttime, had a station out of Jackson, Mississippi.  It's funny is when I remember that now.  I wanna say they always had to call that "the swingingest station in all the nation."  And I can't think of it now, but it came out of Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Randy's was on WLAC.
Speaker 2: WLAC.  That's WLAC, correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, but that was--you could get that all over the South and the Midwest too.
Speaker 2: That's right, at nighttime.
Speaker 1: At night, yeah, yeah, big, big wattage antenna.  So, yeah, people--I'm surprised, though, 'cause we used to lis--listen to it.  And the people I've interviewed a lot of everybody used to listen to that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, used to listen to it in those days.  Yeah, so, in terms of television, did, did you have a television early on, or did it take awhile for y'all to get one?
Speaker 2: We had one television over to my grandparents' house.  And we didn't have one up until I think real late in life.  I'mma say my tenth-, eleventh-grade year.
Speaker 1: So that is--oh, that's right about 1967 or so.
Speaker 2: I was--'65 [1965], '66 [1966] is when we began to--if I remember correctly, is when we finally got our first television, but our grandparents had one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what, what about the movies?  Did you go downtown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What show?
Speaker 2: That was our main entertainment.  We had one movie theater that we would all have a chance to parti--go to on Saturdays and weekends.  We would meet, then we'd go upstairs, and we in our movies.  And blacks sit up at the top, and whites sit down below.
Story_ID: 116322
Speaker 1: So was downtown Fort Smith [Arkansas] largely segregated then?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Was there white restrooms and black restrooms, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact it--at the time, we would only have--we would have restaurants where we couldn't--there really wasn't any restaurants we could go to except for one downtown, but you'd have to go through the back door.  In my day there was still the black and white water fountains at Woolworth's [Department Store].  You couldn't sit at the counter.  You could get things to go, but you couldn't sit at the counters back at that time.  And it was only later in life, I think my junior or senior year, is when things began to progress toward that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you would have been maybe eight--eight or nine years old when the Little Rock [Arkansas] crisis happened.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]--'64 [1964].
Speaker 1: No, it was a big more than that.  It was in the fif--fifty--
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Yeah, fif--fifty-seven [1957]--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: I'm got--you were right.  No, you're absolutely right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956], Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I'd been about eight to nine years old.
Speaker 1: And did, did you--though you were a child, did, did your parents discuss it, or did the community discuss that?
Speaker 2: That was--that was always top of conversa--top of my conversation back at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is national--you know made the national news, national crisis, National Guard is--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --deputized.  Dwight Eisenhower--well, Orville Faubus was governor.
Speaker 2: Orville Faubus was our governor; that is correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so this is--so what, what were pe--people saying about it?  Did they--were they hopeful that--were they excited about change?  Or did they think it was gonna be worth it or what?
Speaker 2: I think, we being a small city in Arkansas, we had a--we had a lot of people who believed that change was coming.  I mean they, they taught us--my parents did--they, they taught us that--again, that you didn't--you didn't dislike people because of the color of their skin, that they were still all God's people, however we didn't like the ways and what they stood for, and that was one of the things.  But they've always encouraged us that if you get your education, if you're educated, they can't take it away from you.  And you'll always be able to improve your quality of life by, again, getting an education.  So education was foremost in our household of importance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you know your grandfather or did he pass before you--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I knew my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he lived up until later on in life.
Speaker 1: And that, that--that's the schoolteacher (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was a schoolteacher there.  He was superintendent of the school of the church that which we were, First Baptist Church [Fort Smith, Arkansas].  He'd always be the first there and always--we laugh about this is that when we get to open up Sunday school, it may not be but he and I.  But we'd open up that Sunday school every morning at 9:15, and he wouldn't be a minute late.  And we'd--he'd sing, and I'd pray, and I'd read the scripture until somebody else came in, but we opened up.  I don't care who started, we started on time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was--he was a wonderful, wonderful man with strong character.  And at that time it when it was--he'd gone through all of this, the slavery and all at that time he had been through those years, but tremendous mentor and--man in my life.
Story_ID: 116323
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So your family emphasized education.  And so in high school, now you go to St. Anne's Academy high school [Fort Smith, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And so I was curious (unclear)--now did you have any black history in school yourself?
Speaker 2: We had it in elementary school, 'cause it was really a black elementary Catholic school.  It was not integrated at that time.
Speaker 1: What, St. John's Academy was integrated?
Speaker 2: St. James Elementary School was, was not integrated at that time.  It was an all-black Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, I'm sorry.  Is it St. James or St. John's.
Speaker 2: St. John--St. John's [Elementary School, Fort Smith, Arkansas].  St. John's--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --is the elementary.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then St. Anne's was the high school.
Speaker 1: Right, right, St. Anne's Academy, okay.  So, St. Anne's was that all--that wasn't all black, was it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I went up and played--the first black to play football for them.
Speaker 1: And now was that--so it's the first--were you, you in the first group--you were in the first group of black students.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, so what was it like integrating Catholic school?
Speaker 2: It was--it was pretty much the same.  I--because I was in athletics, I was able to experience some things that I think opened the doors for people to begin to accept blacks in a way--very fortunate to have had a good upbringing at St. John's.  When I got there, it was kind of easy to transition to--'cause we were--educationally we were equal to--we knew what the other students had.  So we, we were prepared to go to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now St. Anne's, unlike the public schools, and--wa--wa--were the public schools in Fort Smith in--integrated at this point?  Were they trying to integrate?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this would have been 1962, right?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]; that's correct.
Speaker 1: So the Catholic school, did they--they were voluntarily doing this.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So that, that would have been the difference I guess in that--I'm sure not all of them were in favor of it, but the school administration had decided to do this--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --to integrate.  So you did have the support of the administrative staff.
Speaker 2: The administrative (unclear)--Catholics, Catholics were much more receptive to the integration before the public schools were.
Story_ID: 116324
Speaker 1: So were you able to integrate without, you know, incident, nobody calling you names and--
Speaker 2: Oh no--oh no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, Larry.  It's--those are--those are moments that I think back and our first--my first experience in real racial prejudice is when I first went out to play football.  I called up the coach and asked him if my mother [Rizetta Theola Davis]--they decided we're gonna go--we were gonna go to St. Anne's, and I wanted to play football.  And I called up the coach on my own, unbeknownst to my mother and father [Fred Davis, Jr.]--that I just wanna make sure I can play football, 'cause I always wanted to play football for the Lincoln High School Pirates.  And I called him up and I said Coach--I says my name is Greg Davis.  I said I'm at St. John's.  I says I'm, I'm planning to come to St. Anne's next week--next year--and I'd like to play football, and I wanted to talk to someone about that.  He said if you make the team, you can play, goodbye.
Speaker 1: Wow, he was really in--interested in you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I went out, and the very first time my mother dropped me off.  She went out to the school and when I first came out there I got out of the car.  I looked back and I could see tears in my mom's eyes.  And, and I didn't--I didn't want her to be worried.  I said mother, I'm fine.  I walked out--you didn't know a soul.  You walked out there, and I knew the colors were blue and white.  And they said you wear blue and white shorts and pants.  Well, Lincoln High School's [Fort Smith, Arkansas] colors was blue and white too.  Black--at the black high school, they wore blue pants and white shirts.  And I went up to St. Anne's, I thought that--I came out there with my blue pants and white shirt, what I always knew.  And they had just the opposite; they had white shorts and blue shirts.  So I came out of the very first time, and introduced myself.  No one said a word.
Speaker 1: Now this is before formal school starts, right, football practice?
Speaker 2: This is--this is in August before school even--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --starts so you didn't know anyone.
Speaker 1: All right, so this your first exposure to this school.
Speaker 2: Remind me so much of watching the movie '42.'  I mean it was almost a peril of my life, when I walked in, how they just stopped and got quiet; nobody talked; and you walked--you didn't know what to say, what to go--where to go.  And finally I introduced myself, and they didn't--no one said hello or nothing.  And one guy says--I said my name is Greg Davis.  He says my name is Greg Avelos (ph.).  I said well, Greg, we gotta--got the same name.  So I'm trying to think about what my dad would do, 'cause my dad could talk to anybody.  And we got to talking, and that's how after that we got to be close.  And other people began to talk.  But it was very, very difficult.  And, and I got out there, and they would run sprints.  And I'd take off running, and I'd be ahead of everybody, and then I would slow because I thought they was looking at you--why you running so fast, you know, that type of thing, but very good experience.  Life went on to show me that--we went on and played football, and be honest with you, we had one of the best careers that I could have ever asked for in high school.  We never lost a football game in high school.
Speaker 1: Now what position did you play?
Speaker 2: We played both ways.  We played--I played offensive left halfback, and defensive safety, and I did kickoffs and kickoff returns.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we, we kind of went both ways.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so didn't lose a game.  Were, were there any other black players in your league?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.  Later on my brother and them came through two years later, but there was nobody else other--on--well, we played schools around the state.  And just--not just in Fort Smith.  We would go to Alma, Arkansas, Charleston, Arkansas, and different once, cause we were a Catholic parochial school, and we had to play schools from there.  But we--
Speaker 1: So did your team embrace you--I mean--you know?
Speaker 2: Didn't embrace me initially, but after the--after we kind of established ourselves and you know played sports, and began to catch, and run, and play, and they began to open up.  But they were very reluctant initially, 'cause they not--never been around blacks.  But it's, it's amazing how four years make a difference.  My--after my fourth year, I was elected senior captain of the team, and that was elected by your peers.  So it kind of shows you how transition took place, and really made it better for my brother [Fred Davis, III] who played on the football team two years later--he was two years younger--and others after that.
Story_ID: 116847
Speaker 1: When--so--well, say that--will you tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that very--after August--you know it's very hot in Arkansas--we got ready to play our very first game.  It was in Alma, Arkansas.  And Alma had never had any blacks to play there in Fort--in Alma Arkansas.  So all the coaches--we got read to load the bus to go to the game.  All the other guys got on the bus, and the coach says Greg, you need to ride with us.  We gonna--we're gonna drive.  I says okay.  I get in the backseat of the car, and I drive over there with the coach. And I get to Alma, Arkansas' football stadium, and they had signs and saying no "N" words allowed here.  We got out on the football field.  My mother [Rizetta Theola Davis] and dad [Fred Davis, Jr.] were sittin' up in the stands.  And they went with me everyplace.  They never missed a game.  And I remember--and I remember on the football field, the very first time, all the other team got off the bus and ran out on the field.  I got out the car and went out in the field with everybody else, didn't think too much about it, but I knew they had told me that they had not been having blacks in the--on--in, in the city.  And we may have some issues, but we should fine.  The very first play of the game I kicked off.  We were on defense.  I was playing defensive safety.  And I remember seeing on the left side their colors.  They had one colored uniform was--seemed very outstanding.  She wasn't even the same color as their uniforms.  It was kind of yellowish, and everybody--their colors was orange, and he was on the field.  The very first play they threw a pass to one of the ends, this guy with this off-colored jersey, and I was playing defense.  I went back to try to stop him.  And just as soon as they threw the ball, he took his helmet off, started hitting me on the back of my shoulder pads and helmet.  And I turned around and said what you doing?  The referee walked up to me and says number 42, you're out of the game.  And I, I didn't--I forgot my number.  I, I looked down to see my number, and it was me.  I said sir, I didn't do nothing.  He said get out of here.  And my first thing was--my mother and daddy said watch your temper, conduct yourself in a--in a positive way.  And I remember I wasn't concerned about getting thrown out of the game, but I was concerned that mother and dad would be disappointed that I got thrown out of the game.  And they say what exactly what happened.  But that was my first game, first experience; never got a chance to play for two more game 'cause the other team didn't want blacks to play in Charleston, Arkansas, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they stage the same kind of a fiasco--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where some--somebody would act like there was a--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --problem.
Speaker 2: --they would--they would do--or they would say we just can't--if he--if he plays, they'd have to much problems, so we couldn't play.  So it was the third game of the year until I got a chance to play.
Speaker 1: Now where--what--where were you in, in--on the third game?  Do you remember the town you were in?
Speaker 2: I, I don't remember the team.  Oh, it was Greenwood; Greenwood, Arkansas was the third team I believe.  And that was the first time I ever got a chance to play.  And the very first time I touched the ball, I was so excited about touch the--I ran a touchdown right off the back 'cause I kind of reminded of that is that I had not had a chance to play, to run a real football on a real football game.  So the first play I think I touched the ball and ran for a touchdown.  We on--we had good years.  We were--we were very, very fortunate.  We, we were state champions for three consecutive years, had one of the longest high school winning streaks in the nation behind a city that you probably know, Moeller High School in Cinci--
Speaker 1: Oh, Moeller, yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Cincinnati [Ohio] High--out of Cincinnati area, but that--we had--we had a forty-six-game winning streak, and state champions, never lost a football game throughout our high school year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, now did St. Anne's [High School, Fort Smith, Arkansas] play in a Catholic league, or did they play everybody?
Speaker 2: No, we played everybody.  We played cities, and played Oklahoma, we played anyone in our divi--that was our caliber league.  We competed against Oklahoma.  I always said Spiro, Oklahoma, which was the Class A championship team out of Oklahoma.  And that time they had the Selmon [ph.] brothers.  (Unclear) I remember Selmon just years ago, but that nights they had All-American University of Oklahoma came out of Spiro, Oklahoma.  So we played good competition.
Story_ID: 116848
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we beat them.  We would beat teams of that magnitude.
Speaker 1: Well, how was--so, did your athletic activities help you--your popularity as a student?
Speaker 2: My parents [Fred and Rizetta Davis] demanded that we would always get our grades.  Without grades we couldn't play.  That was the criteria.  And I don't care how good you were, if you didn't produce your grades, you couldn't play.  So it was an incentive for us to, to do well.  Athletics helped me tremendously because it opened a lot of doors; it, it, it allowed me to, in most cases, become friendship--develop friendships--with other people within the class; and it just--it, it was very--it was kind of--it was a very humbling experience to be able to, to keep your grades up and play.  And, and so we--you know, we, we, we competed. It, It was just the way how--just the way we learned how to compete both--in both academically, as well as was--and at--in physical education, sports and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now were you taking a college preparatory course in--at St. Anne's [High School, Fort Smith, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the, the top group in, in school I guess or?
Speaker 2: I wasn't--I wasn't the smart--I was a, a B student.  I mean I was a--maybe a B-plus--maybe A student.  But I, I, I was not an A student like my sister were.  They were honor roll students.  I mean that wasn't--that wasn't me.
Speaker 1: Now did your sister [LaDonna Houston]--now she went to regular high--I mean the-Lincoln [High School, Fort Smith, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No, no, she went to St. Scholastica [High School, Fort Smith, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: St. Scholastica.
Speaker 2: That was another high school--Catholic high school for those blacks that could go and be (unclear) could afford to go to that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there was tuition that we had to all pay in order to go to schools at that time.
Speaker 1: So I guess--I guess by the time you were a sophomore, she was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: She was a senior.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She was two years apart--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --at St. Scholastica.
Speaker 1: All right, so she was still there.  And she would go on to Fisk later.
Speaker 2: She went on to Fisk after she graduated; that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a sibling in college when you were in high school.  And so how were you treated in class?  Was, was, was there any discrimination against you in class?
Speaker 2: Very little, very little.  We, we had equal opportunities to produce.  We took all the classes that we wanted to take, and we had--and, and we were required to perform.  It was not exception to the rule.  Classes were not--it was not a challenge.  The teachers were very demanding.  And athletics meant nothing to them.  If you didn't produce, you couldn't play.
Speaker 1: Now, were, were there any special teachers, or coaches, or mentors at St. Anne's?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had two coaches.  One was Coach George Loss (ph.); he was a football coach.  And my basketball coach was Coach Billy Bock, B-O-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you do as well in basketball as you did in football?
Speaker 2: I was very fortunate.  I made all-state in basketball, all-state football.
Speaker 1: So this is--this is pretty good, all-state in both (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: In fact, it's better than pre--pretty good.  It's the best in the state, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I enjoyed it; that is--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --correct, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is--and you're--you, you were gettin' good grades.  There not great, (unclear) said, but they're good.  They're good grades.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So were you--did you--were you involved in student government or anything like that, or any of the other activities on the campus?
Speaker 2: I was student council--I mean student government representative for our class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I interject this because my brother [Fred Davis, III] was always whatever I did he always wanted to do better.  Where I was student representative for the class, he was president of the class.  When I made "Who's Who" in junior college, he made "Who's Who" junior college, and two years in a row.  I mean everything I did he did better.  But there was always that brotherly comp--competition that he had.  And he was--he was a good athlete, and proved to be just an outstanding student, and played basketball, did the same thing so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116849
Speaker 1: So now when you were in [St. Anne's] High School [Fort Smith, Arkansas], what was your--did, did you--had you started thinking about what you wanted to do, you know, for a career?
Speaker 2: Did not.  I--only thing I knew as teachers and preachers.  Those were the only role models that we saw coming up in Fort Smith, Arkansas.  I knew that I'd probably wanna go in education, and coach, and play ball, and--'cause those were the role models that we saw--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --especially in my city.
Speaker 1: Now, let's see, you were in--you were in high school when I guess--yeah, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] made the speech, the, the [1963] March on Washington.  Did you--were, were you able to see that on television?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I think later on that year that John F. Kennedy is assassinated.  And that was the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--John F. Kennedy was assassinated on our Homecoming day.  We were having Homecoming.  I never will forget that day.  And as athletes we were on the float coming down the Avenue, and we got the word.  And our float was a big tomb, a big casket.  And we were saying bury the bulldogs or whoever they were.  And we got halfway down the thing, and, and the announcement came.  And we were trying to figure out how we could get the casket back up to the school because President Kennedy has just gotten killed.  And that--that's, that's always a memorable moment in my life, 'cause I was in charge.  And we said we gonna just move down as quick as we possibly--we had some--I had a--got a policeman to escort us as quickly back down to the campus as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was really a sense--I know a lot of pe--pe--people talk about that time period and what a sense of sadness the black community had about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you--so were, were, were your parents Democrats or Republicans, or did they--
Speaker 2: We were always Democrats.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  'Cause I know it wasn't--is--wasn't anything you could take for granted in those days.  I mean even, even now you can't take, take it completely for granted.  But you know, in those days there were more Republicans, you know, around.  So, in--so, you graduated in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And by this time, they had--you had any counseling about college?
Speaker 2: Oh, we always knew we were going to college.  We just didn't know which one.  In fact, I was planning at that time to go to the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].  I would have been the very first black to play for the University of Arkansas.  And in 1966, the coach at University of Arkansas came down to the high school, and it was--everybody was rumored who--who's going where.  One was going to [University of] Nebraska [Lincoln, Nebraska]; one was going to [University of] Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma]; one was going to univer--and they had no blacks in the Southwest Conference at that time.  And Frank Broyles, who was a coach at the University of Arkansas, came down to our high school, which we were state champions, and we had other athletes who had come from St. Anne's, like Martine Bercher.  They called him Bambi at the time.  He came to me and said I can't--but he says--didn't say I can't.  He says we're gonna offer you a scholarship if you can make the team.  I thought about that a minute.  They had just announced two days before this young man named Dickie Scribner, who was from Paris, Arkansas.  I had led the conference that year, averaging 6.8 yards a carry.  This young boy was averaging 4.9 yards a carry.  We played against 'em; we'd beat them twice, and I had my records so I says you gave him a full scholarship.  You're telling me I have to make it?
Speaker 1: Yours was conditional.
Speaker 2: And I said coach, thank you for the offer, but no thank you; I'll pass.  And the coach looked at me, turned beat red.  No one has ever spoke to him like that.  No one had.  And I didn't do it disrespectfully.  I was so hurt and so disappointed.  Then I had led the conference for all those years, made all-state, undefeated--but I had to prove myself.  And I said no thank you.  I felt I could have made the team.  It wasn't a question I could have made the team.  I knew the people on the team.  But it went on and the records would show that back that year was the first year that they had a black to integrate the Southwest Conference.  And I always tell that story 'cause it's SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas].  Jerry Levias was the first African American to play for the Southwest Conference.
Speaker 1: He--he's from Beaumont, right?
Speaker 2: I think down--
Speaker 1: Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--right on Texas, right.  So I didn't play, and I told him that if I couldn't make the team, I'll just go someplace else.
Story_ID: 116850
Speaker 1: And I went on and played basketball instead of football.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, now where did you go?  What did you--
Speaker 1: I--at that time, it was all about trying to get where I could get the most money to go to school 'cause my parents didn't have the money to pay.  And I went to a junior college right there at home, at Westark Junior College [Fort Smith, Arkansas] for the first two years; played basket ball there; worked and went to school; and the after my two years, graduated from there.  And Lane College offered me a scholarship to come play basketball in Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so this is a big jump athletically from the Southeast Con--Conference, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Which, you know, athletic schools basically, they're, they're big--they're the ones that are on TV.
Speaker 1: [University of] Texas [Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: [University of] Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas] and--
Speaker 1: Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas]--
Speaker 2: --you know the--
Speaker 1: Arkansas; all the big schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Arkansas Razorbacks is a big time college, even though they didn't have any black players in those days.  And they were--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --probably really considering trying to get some 'cause they were playing other teams that did.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: But you made it.
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't have any at the time when I came through.  My senior year--my freshman year--was the first year that they integrated the, the Southwest Conference.  They had 'em on--in the other conferences.  [University of] Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] had 'em and other schools, but not Southwest Conference.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so going to--you, you went Westark Junior--
Speaker 1: Westark Junior College.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So nobody else--none of the other big time schools thought well, let's give him a scholarship and--
Speaker 1: I had scholars to three or four different colleges.  But I got to thinking about it.  I said you know what, I says I--if I can get a scholarship and play without having to play out there in the cold weather and the rain and stuff, and take the risk of getting hurt, I said why not play basketball.  So I had scholarships for basketball, so I chose basketball.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so--but Like Lane's a small black college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: --of all of the black colleges, so you're, you're still not on a big stage as an athlete (unclear) this.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: But you were--so were you thinking more about academics than the athletics.
Speaker 1: That was my purpose then.  My, my goal was to go to school, complete my four years of education, and get my degree.  And at that particular point it wasn't about trying to play for the biggest schools.  I just want where I was getting paid 'cause we didn't have the money to go to school, and I didn't want my parents to have to pay for that.
Speaker 2: Did your--did your--what, what did your parents think about your, your decisions I mean?
Speaker 1: You know, my, my mom and dad both-mother [Rizetta Theola Davis] said to me--she said you make your decision.  She says you, you--you're thinking the way that I think that you'll be happy with later.  And I, I didn't regret my conversation with the presi--with, with the coach at University of Arkansas.  I felt very good about who I was.  I had no question that I could compete.  But at that particular point academics was more important to me at that time. So they always told me, said you, you do what you think is best, and, and we'll support you.  And they gave me the freedom to pick that choice, and I passed up several other high school--several other college football scholarships there in the state and chose to play basketball.
Story_ID: 116851
Speaker 1: Okay, so at Westark Junior College [Fort Smith, Arkansas]--now you were--were you there two, two years?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, then did you earn, earn an associate's degree?
Speaker 2: That is correct, a, a degree.
Speaker 1: Now was it--was it in biology?
Speaker 2: It was in biology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that raises--considering what you're doing now and all, were, were you thinking then that you were gonna be a doctor of something or what?  What, what--why did you major in biology?
Speaker 2: I was thinking about physical therapy.  That was one of the things in my mind that I thought that I wanted to get involved with.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what inspired you to think about physical therapy?
Speaker 2: I was--Memphis--University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] had a, a physical therapy facilities there.  And I was thinking just a--just in the back of my mind that I had majored in biology.  What could I do in the field of athletics?  And that was one of the fields that kind of inspired me to be a part of that.  It was just a--it was just a lingering thought.  It wasn't something real high.  I did not know what I wanted to do when I came out of school--when I was going through school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so when you transferred over to Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee]--now Lane's a Christian Methodist Episcopal school.  And so you may--you majored in biology and la--wa--wa--now were, were, were there any special teachers at Westark that you had or, or at Lane?
Speaker 2: Not really.  There, there were teachers and close associates that I felt very strong, but not at Westark.  Lane College there was--I think was first time I had a chance to go to really an all predominantly black school, 'cause all of my life had been predominantly white schools.  So Lane was that opportunity, and I felt so at home, and so relieved in going to an all-black--historical black college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Lane is in Jackson, Tennessee, right, not too far from Memphis (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Jackson about eighty-sixty-five miles from Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--were you involved in campus activities like the fraternities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I did.  I joined the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.
Speaker 1: Okay, any--anything else?
Speaker 2: Most of the organizations that I--that I was pretty much having to do with, with the athletic--with the Lane College and athletic programs.  And I'm trying to--I can't remember the name of the program, but it was--Omegas was the only social organization that I got involved with.
Speaker 1: Okay, any academic associations or clubs or anything?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) was make the dean's list, and I made the dean's list my junior and senior year.  And that was my reason to try to get out.  I was pretty much working, working at the bakery and playing basketball during the year.
Story_ID: 116852
Speaker 1: And you were working in a bakery in, in Jackson [Tennessee] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd--you know, I was trying to make sure that my parents did not--could not afford--that they didn't have to pay any money for my education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was able to go to school on scholarship, but there was other monies that were needed during the course of the year and stuff.  And I would work for--in the Colonial Baking Company in the afternoons three nights a week while I was going to--while I was playing basketball.
Speaker 1: Is, is this at Westark [Junior College, Fort Smith, Arkansas] or at Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: This is at Lane.
Speaker 1: At Lane, okay.  All right, so, now was Colonial Bakery--I mean--and you told the story of gettin' your father
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a job at Colonial Ba--Ba--Bakery, but this is in--
Speaker 2: Fort Smith.
Speaker 1: Fort Smith, right.
Speaker 2: That, that was in Fort Smith.
Speaker 1: So that was just another--
Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to tell them that when I was leaving Fort Smith, and I was moving to Jackson, Tennessee, and asked them if they had a, a bakery there in Tennessee, and would you give me a refer--reference and referral, if I could work down there.  And they immediately called down in Jackson, Tennessee, got me an interview; I got a job.  So in college while I was playing basketball, I was still working three nights a week at the Colonial Baking Company.  And I did that for about two years while there in Lane College.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty full schedule, 'cause I know basketball practice takes a lot of time, right?
Speaker 2: I'd leave class, go to work at 2:30, get off.  I tell them I have to be out by six.  Basketball practice start at 6:30--go to basketball practice, sometimes miss dinner, go to basketball practice (unclear)--practice, study from 12:00 until 2:00 in the morning or whenever you could, and do the same thing three nights a week so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so how did you do academically?
Speaker 2: I made the dean's list.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then athletically, what, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Athletics was a--was a big transition.  I played.  I did not play nearly as much as I had been accustomed to playing.  When coming from a black school, it was--it was a little different environment.  It wasn't that they weren't any better.  It was just that, you know, you--coaches had preference at that particular time.  I was a kind of a newcomer.  Most of these people had been there for two, and three, and four years.  I came in in my junior year, so you had to earn your keep.  I played some, not a lot, but I learned how to sit on the bench.  I had never sat on a bench in my life or anything, but I--that was a great learning experience for me.  I took that in stride in most cases.  But it wasn't--it wasn't the most highlight--it wasn't a highlighted part of my career in college as far as athletics.  But that's when I knew that my focus was truly on trying to graduate and be prepared to go out into the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so who is the--well, your--I guess advisor in biology?
Speaker 2: Boy, I'm pulling a blank right now. Oh--I cannot tell you his name, and I'm embarrassed to tell you.  It start with an H, but I cannot remember.  It'll come to me shortly.  I'm gonna say Mr. Hawthorne, but it wasn't Hawthorne.  I'm, I'm pulling a blank.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he--well, that was--was, was he significant in terms of your grad--graduating?
Speaker 2: Well, he was--he was--because he was--he was a very good instructor, and he--and we were always able to talk.  And again, back in those days, you had biology partners.  And he always said I was the first one everybody would partner up with a biology partner.  And guys would get another guy to work with them.  And I decided I wanted to have a female partner.  I didn't want a guy.  I wanted a female biology partner.  He said you're the first one that ever asked for a female biology partner.  That's what I--if I wanna know about the human body, who else better than ask than the young lady I'm talking to.  So that was--that, that was my remembrance of the--of my college days in his class.
Story_ID: 116853
Speaker 1: All right, so did he have any advice about a career?  Did, did you--did you figure you were gonna have some career in, in science?
Speaker 2: My, my interest honestly was, was between physical therapy, if I was gonna go that route, or I wanted to go in education.  I did not know what I wanted to do always--almost throughout the college years.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: What got me interested, if I may--I'm (unclear)--what got me interested is when I got ready to graduate, there's--this. This guy came down from the board of education from Flint, Michigan.  And his name was Jim Watkins--never forget him.  And he was going around interview--interviewing students to come to Michigan--to Flint, Michigan for the board.  And I said to him--I said you know what, Mr. Watkins, I'd like to do what you're doing.  He says what?  I said you, you around interviewing people for college.  I said that, that sound like a good job.  I'd like to do that.  He smiled, and he said--he says I got something else you may be interested in.  He says we have what we call community school directors.  And what we do is we have school openings, and we open up the school at night.  We have--we deal with recreational schools with a lot of things that we do.  He said this may be something you're interested in.  And I--then I said that may be something I wanna do.  And that's how I got to Flint.  I said I wanna go around and recruit and bring teachers to your education.  And he says well, let's, let's talk about that.  And that's how I got to Flint as far as edu--in the educational field.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me check on dates now.  Graduation from Lane was in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay, so is 1970 you go to Flint?
Speaker 2: I go to Flint--got out of school in May and went to Flint in June.
Speaker 1: So in June 1970 when you're a community school director, okay.  So now Flint--wa--what was Flint like?  Now Flint's been made famous by Michael Moore now for the loss of the jobs and everything.  But it was--it was doing okay then, right?
Speaker 2: Flint was a very prosperous city, vibrant.  General Motors--big city for General Motors, had a lot of good athletes.  Flint was very--it was really thriving back in those days.  But Flint had--Flint had a good reputation of, of athletes came out of that city, one.  But it, it, it was really a, a city that business was very, very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Flint--that was, was a lot colder than you're probably--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter)--never been to--never been in Michigan in my life, and just left school, got in my car, drove straight to Michigan sight unseen, didn't know a soul, but went up there with a fork, spoon, a plate, and, and a skillet.  And that's what we had in the back of my car, and my clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I got a job there, and that's--and the rest of it was kind of history where we started with the educational part.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you like working with youth and--
Speaker 2: Loved that, one of the most gratifying positions I've ever had.  It's where you were working with students after school.  As you know, a lot of parents were still working.  We would open up the school after, after 3:00 in the afternoon and would have enrichment classes.  There would be typing classes; we would--we would have cooking classes and all those type enrichment classes for the community.  In fact, Flint, Michigan is where the community school concept originated, the Mott Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when you hear this--
Speaker 1: Thank you for saying that 'cause yeah, Mott Foundation.
Speaker 2: The community colleges--when you heard toward back years ago and you--and you hear all this about the community colleges, that was the origination of the community school concept.
Story_ID: 116854
Speaker 1: All right, so, so, so you actually lived in Flint [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I lived in Flint.
Speaker 1: And you--you're there for how long--from 1970 'til?
Speaker 2: Until I got drafted.  I got drafted in the [U.S.] Military after I got there January of that year.  I only got about the first seven--from out--from, from June until December I worked, and I got drafted in January of that year.  And I spent two years in the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is Vietnam era.  And did you think about how to avoid the draft at, at a certain point.  Or did you--did it make you--not make any difference?
Speaker 2: I didn't wanna go.  I did not wanna go.  I--in fact I tried to find ways through education to stay out of it.  But after I found out that it was--if I went, then my brother didn't have to go.  I thought I was more equipped and more prepared to handle the military.  If I had to go to Vietnamese--Vietnam--I would do that at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116333
Speaker 1: And that's what it should be.  I mean I tell people--I mean I--we, we doing this for life--for business, but I tell people all the time when you--even in sales and marketing, what we're doing is you're, you're basically trying to develop a dialogue.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: If you're doing all the monologue, it's--you don't get what you need.  You--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can't get the back and forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you got to have that interchange.  And you do--you do an excellent job.  And it's very easy--
Speaker 2: Just like your dad [Fred Davis, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: --to communicate with you.
Speaker 2: --was doing when--the way you describe your dad, I know exactly the kind of person--
Speaker 1: My dad was.  He was--I always--and I love him to death.  Dad--daddy was a person that I (unclear) when I think about it.  I go down there on the pool hall and would play pool.  And you'd think that you--he's talking to the president.  I mean he ain't got--he don't change.  I mean it's the same way, but people would always says your dad--I love to talk to him.  But he made people feel--but he's a good--and he was a good man for us so.
Story_ID: 116334
Speaker 1: All right, so, so you're in Flint Community--so you, you were there from, from '70 [1970] to 1972 you say?
Speaker 2: I was in the [Flint, Michigan] Board of Education to '72 [1972]--well, in '70 [1970], I left and got drafted in '71 [1971]--
Speaker 1: Oh, drafted, right (unclear).
Speaker 2: --and spent two years--eighteen months--in the [U.S.] Army, then came back to Flint and the board of education--well, not--that's not true.  I--after I left the army, I went and worked in London, England for a year.
Speaker 1: Now let's not gallop too fast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the Army is a--is dramatic for anybody.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now what was that like?  You go into the Army and this is Vietnam era.  Did, did they send you to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I was on the way to Vietnam, but I was situated--I was--I was based over Augusta at Fort Gordon, Georgia.  And I worked in the personnel office.  And we were all in one platoon going together.  And what happened there, and this is important, and I think to share it with you is that the night before the, the announcement came out--the assignments came out.  They were gonna tell 'em who was going to where.  My--our platoon there was twenty-seven people in there--in the platoon approximately; twenty-two of 'em were black.  When they called out the assignments to go to Vietnam, they took twenty-one people to go to Vietnam, all with the exception of one or two people were black.  All the other, non-black, went to other assignments, Korea, Germany, all these other assignments.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute.  What you're saying is--well, we can generalize it.  Most did not want to go to Vietnam, right?
Speaker 2: Nobody wanted to go to Vietnam--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: But the people were all the black people.
Speaker 2: The people that they took from our platoon were black.  They did not take the whites.  They--it wasn't a mixture of whites, a proportioning of--again, twenty-one--I'mma say a proportion--95 percent of all the people that was assigned--the other assignments went to various other places.  So that night the blacks were very upset, and they just started fighting every white person that they could find.  I was in the platoon.  I was twenty-two years old.  I told the guys--I said listen, don't do this; I said what's gonna happen, we all gonna go to stockade today.  I said let's wait until the last night.  If you wanna fight, I'll help you fight, but let's don't do this tonight.  These guys kind of looked up to me.  I was kind of one of the older persons there.  And they listened to me, and they stopped fightin'--stopped fightin' all the whites inside of the platoon--inside of the barracks.  The next morning, I go to the office where I work, which is the first sergeant's office.  And the first sergeant called me in and says I heard you stopped the fight last night, stopped them from tearing up and beating up people last night.  I refused to answer.  I said let me tell you something.  I says I am--I used some un-nice words--said this is absolutely an injustice, when you would take all of the blacks and send them to Vietnam and none of the whites shared in this one.  And I was--I was very outspoken.  They ended up flagging my orders.  I hadn't seen my orders yet.  They kept my orders intact; they wouldn't let me see them.  I don't know if I was going to Vietnam, if I was going to some--but they flagged 'em.  They said I want you to stay here and keep peace with these people--with, with the--with these other young guys in the--in the platoon.  I resented that.  I let 'em know that I resented it, but I couldn't do nothing.  That was what the orders were, so I was--my orders were flagged.  I never saw my orders because mine didn't come up at that time 'cause I was in personnel, and they were gonna do mine after that.  I don't think I was gonna be assigned to be at--in Vietnam at that time.  Bottom line is they kept me there.  And I told the first sergeant at that time--I said this is the most racially prejudiced situation I've ever been encountered with, and I said it's wrong.  They kept me there; they flagged my orders; and I stayed there.  And then after that, they sent me to SHAPE, Supreme Headla--Headquarters and Allied forces in Europe [Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe].
Story_ID: 116335
Speaker 1: Now this was in Augusta, GA, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what base is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: Fort Gordon.
Speaker 1: Fort Gordon, okay.  What a story.  I'm glad I asked and followed up on that one.  So, so, so this is when you--now you're in Britain, right, in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm--now I'm, I'm over in Belgium.
Speaker 1: Belgium, okay.
Speaker 2: They sent me to Belgium.  I didn't like Belgium.  All the guys says you don't wanna be--you wanna be in the Netherlands.  So 'cause I was in first sergeant and I had access to my personnel records, I could on and (unclear)--and find out where there are openings.  I found there was an opening up the road into the Netherlands, and that's called AFCENT, Allied Forces of Central Europe.  Those are the two.  I don't know if you're familiar with--those are the two largest military bases.  So I got transferred to AFCENT, and spent the remainder of my career in the military at AFCENT.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're basically--were you doing a--doing--
Speaker 2: Milita--I was--in fact my MOS was a military policeman.  But I got a secondary of 71-Hotel, which was office specialist.  And I was--I could type fairly well.  And I was able to work in the office and the military base.  So I was really work--I worked my secondary MOS in the military for the remainder of my eighteen months there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were discharge in, in--from the Netherlands.
Speaker 2: I was discharged from the Netherlands after spending eighteen months in the Army.  I did not wanna relocated back into Michigan in the mid winter, which would have been in November.  And I applied for a position with the United States Army Dependent Schools in London, England, and got military opportun--I got transferred and got a position there as a high school counselor at London Central High School in London, England for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, now what was the name of the base?  Did they call--was it on a base or?
Speaker 2: Where, in, in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in London.
Speaker 2: In London it's called the High Wickham, but the school--there was high school for United States Army Dependent Schools children.  And there was--and London Central High School is what--was the school that I worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful, wonderful experience--worked two weeks and off a week.  I remember that, best job I think I've ever had.  You, you--then you could get on a manifest.  And I'd get on a manifest, and wherever there was a military plane going, I'd go.  I'd go to Italy; I'd go to Milan; I'd go to just wherever they would go, and I'd travel all over the country.  It was a wonderful, wonderful job, but you stay there; you work with the high school students; and you counsel to 'em; stayed in the dormitories; and you were the high school counselor, that which was a wonderful experience.  And I did that for a year and enjoyed it tremendously.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1970--
Speaker 2: Two [1972].
Speaker 1: Two, okay.
Story_ID: 116336
Speaker 1: All right, so you came back to Flint [Michigan] in warmer weather I guess?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Came back in the (unclear)--springtime and went back to the board of education in the fall of 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, it was hard keeping--now 1973 back in Flint, okay.  Now what was your goal when you came back to Flint?  Was it to go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was my goal, wanted to go to grad school.  I'd pretty much planned my life.  I--I'll be honest with you, Larry.  I was--pretty much thought what I wanted to do.  I knew I was--I was gonna get out of college at the age of twenty-one.  I figured I'd get drafted.  I'd give the [U.S.] Army two years of my life.  I'd be twenty-three.  I wanted to come back, and go to grad school, and be through at the age of twenty-four.  I wanted to travel to twenty-five, and I'd get married when I was twenty-seven or twenty-eight years old.  It almost worked out to the tee.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, oh--now this when you go--you go to Central Michigan--I mean Eastern Michigan [University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], right, and--
Speaker 2: I went to--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Eastern Michigan--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --while working as a community school director.  I was going to Eastern Michigan Grad School at the same time.
Speaker 1: All right and did it take a year to finish?
Speaker 2: Took me a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're out in 1975?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974]
Speaker 1: Four, okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, in May of--
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: --in May of '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think it was.
Speaker 1: Now was--now Ypsilanti, it's like between Ann Arbor [Michigan] and Detroit [Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Right.  And is that--how far is it from Flint?
Speaker 2: It tooks about an hour and a half, an hour and forty-five minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--and, and your degree was in--
Speaker 2: Educational leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were really gonna make education a career, right?
Speaker 2: That was my intention, correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any special teachers or experiences during this period of time that--
Speaker 2: The, the community school directorships that were available in Flint was a tremendous program.  It was a lot of young men very similar to my background.  A lot of 'em were athletics--athletes--and had spent some time in athletics, and, and just a good group of young men that were working in the school system who had these var--we all had various schools in which we were community school directors for.  And we had camaraderie; we had--some of 'em went on (unclear) assistant principals and principals.  But that was--that was we started together.  So it was just a great fraternity of, of young men that we came in contact with that was--just served--fit the, the bill for me at that stage of my life.
Story_ID: 116337
Speaker 1: Okay, but--so when you finished your degree at Eastern [Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], then what did you--what, what--what did you do?  What was your next--
Speaker 2: Well, I was going to school and working as a community school director, and this is where the transition took place pretty much in my life.  I was a principal--assistant principal--at Cook Elementary School [Flint, Michigan].  And when I was the principal, I--my office originally was back in the back of the gymnasium.  But once you became assistant, the principal wanted you closer to his office.  And, and this office was where a nurse of the school was.  And the nurse of the school was Jan Walls.  And she had--she was gonna be moved out of her office down to the gymnasium so I could be closer to the principal's office.  And she was very distraught.  She just, just couldn't imagine.  She had a nice office next to the windows up front, next to the office--the whole thing (unclear).  And she said I just hate to have to go down to that office--down there.  I said I'll tell what, Jan, let me go to Bud Big--Bigelow.  He was the principal.  And I said I'm gonna tell him that if you don't mind, I'm gonna get a smaller desk.  I'm gonna turn my office--my desk--catty-corner; you turn your catty-corner.  If I have to talk to the students about their discipline problems, talk to parents, you get up and leave.  If you have to bring 'em in and talk about health problems, I'll get up and leave.  We'll just stay here together, if you'll like to do that? She said Greg, I would really appreciate that. I went to Bud Bigelow and told 'em--I says I wanna keep her in the office with me, and we're gonna work together.  We got to be very close.  And she said to me one day--she said you do well--you should do well in sales.  I said sales?  I'd never heard anything about sales other than when I was growing up there was Electrolux vacuum cleaner guys who used to come to my house selling vacuum cleaners.  And I didn't know any--she says, Greg--she says I've been telling my husband about you--says--and I told him he should talk to you.  I said Jan, I just graduated from--just got my degree, my M.A.  I'm--I'mma make some money.  I says I don't know anything about sales.  She said just go talk to him.  He works at a TV station.  I went to--I said okay.  I agreed to do that.  At first I called my brother-in-law up--brother-in-law--he's my sister's husband.  I said Billy, what do you know about sales?  He works for IBM.  He says Greg, let me tell you, he says they drive sports cars; they were black suits with white shirts and red ties; they have big expense accounts.  He says that's where you need to be.  He said they live--they live high.  I said ah, Billy, I don't wanna think about this.  He says trust me.  Went to meet her husband; went over to the YMCA to play basketball, which I normally go during the week.  I was playing basketball where these guys just pick up games during lunch hour.  I was playing basketball, and there was this one little freckled-face, red-headed guy.  He played basketball out there every day.  I didn't know his name, but we play.  So we played him that day.  I had just got through playing and had been pushing him all day long, and talking to him.  He said we gotta play one more game.  He said you can't leave until--I said no, I gotta go.  I gotta--I gotta an appointment I gotta go to.  He said you can't play one more game?  I said no, I gotta go.  I said we'll--I'll pick you up tomorrow.  He said I got one too.  He said well, you can't--we'll play to ten.  I said no, we gotta go.  I go get dressed.  I go back down to the little restaurant within the YMCA building, and that's where I'm supposed to meet her husband.  I'm sitting in this restaurant, and who walks in but this little freckled-face, red-headed guy.  He looked at me.  I didn't know his name, and he didn't know my name.  He looked at me.  He says, are you Greg Davis?  I said are Tom Walls?  I said well, this interview is over with.  I said I know I ain't gonna get this job.  And he laughed.
Story_ID: 116338
Speaker 1: (Unclear)-he [Tom Walls] says I want you on my team.  He said, would you consider coming over to television and--he said we don't have any blacks in television at this time in Flint, Michigan, he says, but we think that you would do well.  I think that you'd do well.  And I told him, I says Tom, I don't really know anything about sales.  He asked me what I was making.  I told him.  I said I just got a raise.  He says if you come work over here, he says, within a year, he says, you'll double your salary.  Well, he got my attention.  And I said, can you guarantee me that?  Would you put that in writing?  He said I can't put it in writing.  He says but I can guarantee you if you do what I think you're capable of doing, he said you can double your salary.  I was making $8,500 dollars a year.  The reason I remember is my mother was teaching school for twenty years, had been teaching for twenty years in Arkansas, with a master's degree, and her salary was less than mine.  She was making $6,800 a year.  And I didn't wanna tell her.  That's how embarrassed I was to tell her about what I was making.  She didn't care.  She wanted me to do well.  But that's the--Arkansas was so low on the totem pole as far as paying the salaries for the teachers.  They were just the lowest in the nation in fact.  If not the lowest, it was the second to the lowest in the nation.  But I went on--long story short is is that he offered me the job; I accepted it.  That was my entry into ed--to television broadcasting.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you come in as a salesman selling advertising for television.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So what were the, the, the major points that you had to learn to--in order to do that?
Speaker 1: You know sales was--first of all, you sold yourself.  And think (unclear) think people see you first before you sold anything else.  And Tom was telling me that if you came in, and if you know your product, you could tell people why they should buy televisions, the pros and, and so forth of television.  And he says I think you'll do well in it.  Well, it was nothing but talking to people, just giving them the facts and information.  I always said the reason people say no is because you haven't given them enough reasons to say yes.  And to me it was like the same thing I was doing in community education all the time, talking to parents, but just telling people about the product.  And I found out that there was such an incentive because the more I sold, I was counting the money.  Every time I'd make a sale, I'd count 15 percent and then I'd, I'd--I always knew what 15 percent was worth.  But it was really about selling products of something that people wanted.  You just have to show them how they could produce commercials--right commercials and things of that nature.  And that's how it started.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Flint was as you said--as you said was a thriving community--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in 1974, '75 [1975], hadn't started other--the decline yet.  So, so, did you bring in new clients that had not advertised before?
Speaker 1: Larry, I brought it--I'm sorry--I brought in class and I brought in people, new clients that they had not had on the air.  But it was really like communicating with people.  And then again, it was a very--it, it was an industry that did not have any blacks in broadcast sales at all at that time, not in Flint, very few was in the industry.  So I had a chance to go out and talk about the television.  Bottom line was is the first year I doubled my salary as he antic--he said thought it would happen the second year.  I had doubled my salary the first year, and doubled my salary the third year--the second year.  So I went from making eight thousand, to at that time it was forty thousand dollars a year.  It was a lot of money.  And I didn't know.  I thought if this is what sales is, this is the industry that I wanna be in.  I share those dollars just because I won't--I share 'cause people need to know that it was--it was economics that drove you to, to try to generate dollars at that time.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the station?
Speaker 1: WJRT-TV.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And was it--was it affiliated with a network?
Speaker 1: It was ABC station.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was Pool Broadcasting, later sold to Knight Ridder Publishing Company.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 116339
Speaker 1: All right, so, so, so you were the only African American at the station [WJRT-TV]--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --in Flint [Michigan], okay.  And so how, how long did you stay?
Speaker 2: In sales.
Speaker 1: In sales, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now they had the one--they had people in production that they would use on, on the news, but never in sales.
Speaker 1: Did they have anybody on the air?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had--we had a, a black person there at the station named Freddie Davis, now that I remember it.  That just--
Speaker 1: Same as your father [Fred Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Same as my father, except we called him Freddie, Freddie Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so how, how long did you stay at, at WJRT?
Speaker 2: Stayed there for four years.  On my almost forth year anniversary, I received a phone call, and Field Communications--if you remember in Chicago [Illinois], Field Communications had stations in Chicago and, and Detroit [Michigan]--called me and offered me a position to come work at a TV station there in Detroit, WKBD.  They were a sister station of WFLD in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's channel 32 in Chicago, yeah.  So da-WKBD, all right.  So you go there, and were they affiliated with a network?
Speaker 2: They were independent.  They were UHF stations.
Speaker 1: All right, so did--now, at this time were you still living in Flint when you were--
Speaker 2: Well, I left Flint.  My wife and I had gotten married in '76 [1976], and we moved to Detroit in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Now you, you were on schedule there too.  You met--now, how did you meet your wife?  Tell, tell us that story.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had a--a very good friend of mine lived in the same complex that we both lived.  And one day we said let's, let's go on a date.  Let's double date and let's call some--call a couple girls, and let's go see this movie.  I said okay.  So I said I'mma call Linda.  Linda's a young lady I just met two or three weeks ago.  I said I'mma call her.  He said well, I'mma call Cheryl.  So he had not taken Cheryl out before.  I had not taken out Linda.  We called up both of these young ladies, and we took 'em to a party--oh no, we picked 'em up.  We were gonna take 'em to the movie.  And so we went to the movie, went to see a movie called 'Walking Tall,' filmed down--funny that was down on Lane College campus by the way.
Speaker 1: Well, was it?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you know--
Speaker 2: In Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it starred Joe Don Baker, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: As, as Buford Pusser.
Speaker 2: Buford--you remember--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You got a good memory.  We, we had--we took 'em to the movie.  I invited them back over to the house.  We had pizza and drinks, and, and sit and talk.  And, and I said to Merv--I said Merv, I said Cheryl wouldn't look at me.  She kept looking off.  I know she--'cause I, I could tell she's cute.  I said that's a cute young lady there.  I said--and Linda said--and I--he said Linda's cute too.  I said well that's--so we were talking.  Come to find out later that I thought Cheryl liked me.  And I said I'd go to church where she went to church, and I'd always sit in the back of the church.  And we'd go around and put collections, I would put my money in and walk on out of the church.  I would never wait 'til the whole sermon was over.  She was up in the choir.  And finally one day I said Merv, I says I wanna talk to Cheryl.  He said that's okay.  He says I--no big deal.  Well, long story, I began to date Cheryl.  He began to date Linda.  I married Cheryl, and he married Linda.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Best of friends to this day, thirty-eight years ago.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: That's how we met.
Story_ID: 116340
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that put you at, at--your marriage on schedule at twenty-seven--
Speaker 2: Twenty-six, twenty-seven years old.
Speaker 1: Twenty-seven years old.  So now you're married.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the--now were you living in Detroit [Michigan] now?
Speaker 2: Living in Flint [Michigan]--still in Flint--
Speaker 1: In Flint, okay.
Speaker 2: --at twenty-seven; moved to Detroit in 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Detroit in '78 [1978].  So did you live on the west side of Detroit or?
Speaker 2: I lived on--in Southfield, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Southfield.
Speaker 2: Southfield.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what--how do things go in De--Detroit?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Worked for KBD, started there in on--in, in '78 [1978].  When I got there, I began to think you know I really wanted to work for one of the network affiliates.  So I put a plan together and said if I'm out here selling against WXYZ-TV, I knew the best way to get recognized is to beat your competition.  I went back to the athletics that competing against them, and they'd go in.  I didn't go after CBS's money; I didn't go after NBC's money.  I always say why are you spending all this money on, on ABC, when you can do this on the stations?  And I try to take their money.  So I wanted to get recognized by these people over at ABC, and I figured they would hire me rather than compete against me.  One year to the day, ABC--I got a phone call.  ABC says I'd like to speak to you.  And I went over and had an interview with them.  And one year to the day I switched from KBD over to A--ABC.
Speaker 1: It's WXYZ.
Speaker 2: WXYZ-TV.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They offered me a job in sales.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I told 'em my plan.
Story_ID: 116341
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1979 you go over to--
Speaker 2: Ninetee--
Speaker 1: XYZ?
Speaker 2: yeah, 1979.
Speaker 1: WXYZ in Detroit [Michigan], okay.  And--all right.  So, so you're--so I'm taking you do--you do fine here too.
Speaker 2: We were very blessed.  We had--we had wonderful years at WXYZ--XYZ, again, was ABC back in the days of 'Happy Days' and 'Laverne and Shirley' and all those shows.  And so the network was very, very powerful.  I spent three and a half--three years on the local sales staff.  And that's when I was--we were trying to get promoted to the national staff.  And then so we go--we were promoted to ABC spot sales, which we represented all of the owned and operated ABC stations in the country, which consisted of WLS in Chicago [Illinois], Detroit--Chicago, San Francisco [California], LA [Los Angeles, California], and I'm missing one--New York--and New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I started working for the ABC spot sales at that time.
Speaker 1: So you're doing na--nat--national ads for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I go--
Speaker 1: --you had to go to all these--
Speaker 2: I had all these stations we would go to, and we represent 'em all around the country so I was in all of those stations for almost two years.
Speaker 1: So you were traveling around the country then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And had offices in Philly--you know, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Boston [Massachusetts], all around the country.  So that was my stint with the ABC national spot sales.  It got to the point that they said in order to move, we want you to move to New York, in order to grow within the company.  I had just gotten married in 1976, and I had two--one small daughter, and I didn't wanna move to New York.  So I had told them that I--if I could stay in Detroit or Chicago, I would stay with the company.  But if you ask--if you force me to move to New York, then I would have to look at some place else.  And that's when the opportunity availed itself.  And they said if you don't move--basically they said if you don't move, we can't promote you.  You have to be movable, and I understood that, but I didn't wanna move to New York City.  And a very good friend of mine, who I competed against up in Flint [Michigan], worked at Multimedia in Cincinnati, Ohio.  And he called me and asked me if I was interested in the national sales manager's job in Cincinnati, WLWT.  And not a lot a consideration, I thought that was more of the lifestyle for me and my young family, that that's where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: So this is--where you would be doing national sales for NBC at this point?
Speaker 2: That was an NBC station.  It was an NBC affiliated station.  And we had office, again, all around the country that I still had to do a lot of traveling.  But we represented them nationally.  We also had the Cincinnati Reds and the Cincinnati Bengals, so we had to sell the advertising for those sports franchises.
Speaker 1: Now did the WLW network--did you sell ads for that--I mean for, for the WLW network too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's--okay.  Was that like Crosley Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Crosley Broad--was the original, then it's Multimedia Broadcasting was the new company.
Speaker 1: Okay, that you joined.
Speaker 2: That I joined.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  That's old Crosley Broadcasting Network.
Speaker 2: Building--yeah, and there was a building down there still at--used to have--still have Crosley Network at the top--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on the top of the building.
Speaker 1: Right, Crosley made refrigerators so they could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: And they--the, the field--I think the Reds field--Cro--Crosley Field, is the only field named for a company in those days.  Now it's popular to name it after companies, but--
Speaker 2: I, I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Crosley Field in--they, they might have owned the Reds too.  I don't know in those days, but.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure who owns them now.  Then Marge, Marge--
Speaker 1: Schott.
Speaker 2: Schott.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Marge Schott.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 116342
Speaker 1: Now--yeah, Cincinnati [Ohio] was a place where, with a lot of colorful figures.  As you mentioned Marge Schott, the owner of the Reds, the, the Reds' players themselves, Jerry Springer, you got Bootsy Collins down there these days.  You, you got an interesting group of people in Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So--and got a TV show called WKRP.
Speaker 2: WKRP Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Everybody always ask about that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you know--and the name was not KRP.  The actual name was WKRC.  They changed the name to protect the innocent, as we always say.  WKRC-TV was the other--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --affiliated station there.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, well, tell us about your years at W--LWT, 'cause it--the Crosley had WLWI in Indianapolis [Indiana], WLWD in Dayton [Ohio], WLWC in Columbus [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Columbus, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay that's it.
Speaker 2: Those are the ones, absolutely.  My years there was--started out as national sales manager.  I later got promoted to local sales manager.  Then I oversaw both the local and the national sales, and I spent four years there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after four years, it was the opportunity-- when it came available, I had an opportunity--I'd been looking to try to buy a television station.  And I--
Speaker 1: Now--now you went there in 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two  [1982].
Speaker 1: Eight--eighty-two [1982], okay, 1982.  And you were there four years, so this is--
Speaker 2: Left there in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay, so '82 [1982] to '86 [1986], okay.  So-now what--the mid '80s [1980s] was the time when I think Granite Broadcasting got started.  And a lot of black television ownership got started--
Speaker 2: Well, we--
Speaker 1: --in those days.
Speaker 2: At that time, we had two percent of the country was owned by black radios--mi--minorities owned two percent of all the radio properties at that time.  Granite--it was very few in television.  Granite was one of 'em.  There was another group down out of Texas at that particular time.  It was very few television owners.  So I was trying to buy a television station for almost four years.  I started looking 1982 to try to by a station.  And I could never find the right opportunity.  I had a person who I relied upon--was, was kind of--took me under their wing and said this is a good deal, this is not a good deal, and so forth.  So it took me four years 'til I finally got the opportunity to look--to purchase--a, a station--
Story_ID: 116343
Speaker 1: Now, let's, let's tell people about the incentives that the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --granted to owners.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: They call it certificate.  At this time, there was a certificate that they would provide owners who owned--at this time, it was majority the mino--the majority of the stations were owned by non-minorities by the white community.  And they gave them a certificate that if you sold it to a minority, you would get a tax incentive.  You would get a percentage back, and it was a tax incentive where you would not have to pay taxes on so many of the dollars if you sold it to a minority.  So, but the minorities' biggest thrust was trying to come up with the initial cash in order to get in.  The, the cost of entry was extremely difficult.  It was 10 to 20 percent at that time trying to come up with the monies to buy those stations.
Speaker 1: So this was--this is an attempt to encourage white business to sell to blacks, because they'd actually make money.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was economics.
Speaker 1: It, it was a way that you could make more money selling these stations than if you sold them to a white person.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  It's a called a tax certificate.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's what they provided to the FCC, and they would get a rebate for selling to minor--so it was an economic incentive for them to sell to minorities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess this works better than moral appeal to the--
Speaker 2: Yes, than the moral appeal and plus it was an incentive for them to get cash money.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  So, so you looked--you--was it hard to get the financing to--was that the biggest struggle, to get the financing to initially buy it.
Speaker 2: I was--partly, yes.  It's always difficult.  I mean and not partly.  It was yes.  That was the most difficult piece, to find a bank that would loan you the kind of money to get into the business, and especially when it was millions of dollars.  And you didn't have the wherewithal; you didn't have the mothers and the fathers, and people that had the back and support in most cases to get there.  And most institutions--financial institutions--were not real comfortable in loaning money to minorities anyway.  But I started in 1982, and it took four years for me to finally get a chance to buy a TV station, the TV station that identified, that was up for sale, that's something that we could afford to purchase was an NBC station in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now how--so it's NBC's station in Columbus, Georgia.  But--now who, who--what financial institutions or you know--well, did--I mean who loaned you money?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  It was so difficult.  And I started my process of trying to find out who would loan the money.  It took me four years, and I went to at least a dozen institutions.  And they would all--and they all said no.  I had made a decision that I was gonna--whenever they said no, I would write down why they told me no.  It could be you don't have any experience; it could be you don't have enough down--cap--down--upfront capital. Whatever it may be, I, I wrote 'em down.  And always said to the person I don't mind you telling me no, but just tell me why you're telling me no.  And I began to go back and correct those concerns that they had, so when I go to the next one, I would fix that one.  When I go to the next institution, I'd fix those.  So when I got down to--after, again, over eleven to twelve institutions saying no, I knew that there as one institution that might say yes, that was my best chance.  But I had corrected all of those concerns that the banks had.  And I got to this final institution out of Cleveland [Ohio], a bank called Ameritrust Bank.  And I went to them, and they said yes, and I borrowed the money to start my first company.
Story_ID: 116344
Speaker 1: Was there--was there a particular contact there [Ameritrust Bank, Cleveland, Ohio] or someone that you had to convince to believe in the--
Speaker 2: There was two bankers there that I had met over the years that I had used, Chestley (ph.) Maddox and Sara--I wanna say Aiken.  Sara, I apologize.  I can't think of Sara's--she got married and so I lost her name.  They were my contacts at the bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so a financial institution in Cleveland, you know, loaned you the money to, you know, get started with this station in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Well, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: What happened is Columbus, Georgia--let me back up a little bit.  The TV station that we were trying to purchase, we go to the--close to signing the deal, and the gentleman who owned the station decided he had to back out.  He backed out and said that the reason he backed out is that he was told that there was going to be one program that's gonna take the NBC network from number three to number two--number one.  That program was the 'Bill Cosby Show' [sic, 'The Cosby Show' (1984-1992)]. It took the third network from number three to number one of (unclear) year.
Speaker 1: NBC?
Speaker 2: NBC went number one.  So he back out of the deal.  The broker that I was using had told me that I had spent a lot of money doing my due diligence and so forth, had the capital in line.  He says that I know there's a radio station here that you may wanna consider.  He says it's a guy; he has two stations in Columbus, Georgia, urban stations, and he has two stations in Augusta [Georgia].  He didn't wanna sell but just the ones in Columbus.  We negotiated a deal that I didn't want just the two.  I would like the four.  So if you're gonna sell 'em, we had to sell both Columbus and Augusta.  He came back and agreed to sell both Columbus and Augusta.  We bought those four stations together in 1986.  That was the beginning of Davis Broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so these four stations were WFXC, is that right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Foxy 105.
Speaker 2: Foxy 105.
Speaker 1: WEAM Praise 10--
Speaker 2: Now those were the two--the two that we purchased originally was just Foxy WFXE and WOKS.
Speaker 1: Okay, WOKS.
Speaker 2: Those are the first two.  And the Augusta stations were W--was Foxy WFXA and WTHB.  That was the original station that we purchased--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when we began our company.  Those others that you mentioned we grew and expanded to include WEAM, and IOL, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so four stations in--they--the programming was who--was basically soul music--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was urban R-rated R& B, and, and urban music--R&B and oldies.  We had one was a--was a urban contemporary station; both of 'em was Foxy WXFC and WFXA, and then the two stations was oldies on WOKS and gospel/oldies on WTHB in Augusta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those were the four stations we started.  They were radio stations.  I had never been in a radio station before, but I figured sales was sales.  And at that particular time, I'd invested so much money doing my due diligence in the marketplace that I thought the only way I could recoup my money is to buy radio stations sight unseen--not unseen.  I'd never been in a radio station when I purchased those stations.
Story_ID: 116345
Speaker 1: Now this may come as a shock to people.  I think they think that owning radio and TV stations really had something to do with the programming or something--it's some reason other than--but the major qualification I guess is to know how to sell ads.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  That's right.  Sales is sales.  If you can sell television--and we used to say television was sight, sound, and motion that aroused emotion.  Radio had sound, so we just sold the sound, but you really are selling advertisement to the advertiser.  So I figured if I could sell television, I could sell radio.  And they were good markets, and that was--that was a true and accurate statement.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how large was your audience I guess in Columbus--in Georgia?
Speaker 2: The black population in Columbus was about 36 percent.  And these two stations were the only two urban stations in Columbus, Georgia that serviced the black community; similar to that, it was like 31 percent over in Augusta [Georgia].  And we had the only two urban stations there, so we, we serviced the black communities in both of those places with our two urban stations.
Speaker 1: So it was a pretty large metro area around Augusta and Columbus?
Speaker 2: The population was about 180 thousand people in Columbus, and, and Augusta was right at 210 thousand people.  So there were similar-sized communities, and the population was almost identical, 36, 30 percent.  And we had exclusivity with the black marketplace, so it made good business sense to me that I could sell something very easily--that if you wanna reach this market, you have to buy the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the--were, were there any major barriers to, to, to, to success when you started?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And you know it was--the Northern and coming from the North, people in the South--even though I grew up in Arkansas, people had to accept you.  You know, you coming in outside, come into a community where it's a very close knit community in Columbus.  So we had to kind of break through this shield and become recognizable, become again, I think considered business people in the community.  So we had to do a lot of things in the community to get involved with our local community and so forth.  But a lot of companies would not buy you, as you know, because they thought they were her--helping a black person at that time.  They didn't look at business.  They just looked--we're just not buy this black radio station, even though the owners before were non-black.  It was easy to kind of break through the shield, but we did.  We, we-- with the grace of the good Lord, and a lot of people helped us.  We, we were able to get through that.
Story_ID: 116346
Speaker 1: Okay, now part of the sales pitch I would imagine for advertising would be familiarity with the programming, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: To be able to talk about who's on the air and that sort of thing.  So who, who were--what were you selling?  I mean who, who was on the then?
Speaker 2: At the time, we had local personalities until--and I don't remember the exact year, but we were either the second--we may have been the first.  We were the first or second person to put Tom Joyner on in the United States market.  We, we had listened--I'd heard about Tom Joyner back and forth in Chicago [Illinois] and in Dallas [Texas].  And when he syndicated in Augusta, Georgia, we were on the--and I'mma say at the worst we were number two that brought Tom Joyner to one of the marketplaces.
Speaker 1: So out--outside of Chicago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Outside of Chicago where he was doing this regularly, when he's syndicated.
Speaker 1: He's on the--with WGCI in--
Speaker 2: In Chicago--
Speaker 1: --Chicago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and then in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it GCI or JPC?  I can't think of--
Speaker 2: I think it's JPC now that you--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--right, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --mention it, yes.
Speaker 1: I think it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I think it was.
Speaker 1: And he was known as the fly jock at the time because he was--he was flying between Chicago and Dallas--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --doing the show.  And you know, we--you know, we listen to him in Chicago, you kind of thought he might achieve some national status just because of the he handle his--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So he and Doug Banks, you know, I think--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --started to doing much of the same thing.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, so this is the beginning of, of the syndication of a--one national disc jockey someplace.  Who, who were the lo--were there local--good--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --local disc jockeys and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had--all the others were all local people that we had used.
Speaker 1: But 'The Morning Show' was a national one from Tom Joyner.
Speaker 2: On--yes, we, we brought Tom Joyner.  We still had local people at respective markets in both Columbus and in Augusta.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the biggest local draw I guess in Augusta and in--you know, likewise in Columbus?
Speaker 2: You know, our biggest thing is we specialized in the--in the black community.  We said if you wanted the black listener, we did qualitative analysis.  I came in with Arbitron, who had numbers.  We had the numbers to support.  The biggest--one of the biggest obstacles were that the station, Foxy, was the number one station in the marketplace.  And people didn't wanna pay for the rates on Foxy compared to what they were paying on other non-urban stations.  They wanted to pay forty, fifty, sixty cents on the dollar.  And we were trying to educate our community that if we have a hundred people, and we're competing with another station who's non-urban that has a hundred people, we should be paid the same.  We shouldn't be paid sixty cents and they paid a dollar.  And that was an educational process that we had to go through, and we fought that for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Did advertisers have to be convinced that the black community would spend money like the white community would?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.  We always had to show.  Sometimes we'd have to take pictures; sometimes we'd have to go in there and give campaigns and, and show who's coming through the door.  But yes, we had to show them that they were spending--black spend a lot of money in the communities.  And we just had to demonstrate through research and through qualitative information, sometimes just through pictures to show you here's the--here's who's buying Mercedes out--on a--on a Sunday in front of a church.  We take pictures and say here's, here's (unclear).  Here's five Mercedes sitting right here.  You know, we had to do things like that to demonstrate the value of our product.  But we--that, that was just--and it's--and we not only--other ra--other stations had to some of the similar things.  But particularly, they didn't wanna pay us because we were the highest rated, highest cost per spot station in the marketplace.
Speaker 1: So did you eventually get them to, you know, pay--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the rate?
Speaker 2: It took time.  I took a lot of time, a lot of effort, but it took time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were, were they--most of them convinced that or satisfied that their dollars were being spent wisely?
Speaker 2: If you don't invite 'em to come, you can't expect for 'em to come into your product--into your store.
Story_ID: 116347
Speaker 1: I was told in another interview--well, several pe--people we've interviewed have emphasized that radio is probably the most segregated segment of American society.  And I mean it's like church, you know.  When Sunday comes, black people go into a black church, and white people in a white church--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --pretty much, no matter where they live even, and likewise radio.  Black people listen to black radio and white people don't listen to it.  They don't know what's on it for the most part.
Speaker 2: That's changing, though, Larry; that is changing.  Our composition--music now--the non-urban community listens to the music.  They like--they like the Michael Jacksons for example.  I mean it was cross-cultural, but they--they'll like--I always get--(unclear) people ask me music, I can't tell you half the artists on the air.  But our audience was 27 percent non-black and 74 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should say 84 percent.
Speaker 1: And what about demographics now--I mean, well, when you started, I would suspect that the different demographic of listener in terms of young and old, you know, than it is today.  I think the young and old even in the black community are more polarized now.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  At that time, it was the eighteen to forty-nine.  Now it's twenty-five to fifty-four.  They're getting older, the baby boomers.  So people will move up and they listen to music of that genre that was--again, music they grew up with.  So people in our ages, we like the music in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s].  We don't care much for the music in the 20--you know 2000s, but we listen.  But, but there is a difference in--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) and lifestyle.
Speaker 1: It's like the, the line is drawn at hip-hop, you know, basically.  We were just--
Speaker 2: That's right
Speaker 1: Yeah, and rap music (unclear) and many older African Americans don't listen to.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So--and younger ones, that's all they listen to, a, a lot of them anyway (unclear).  I mean there's some "Slip and Slide" in there, but.  So, so how, how does that affect your sales?
Speaker 2: Well, we've been able to--again, we've been able to expand our footprint and go from--we still run hip-hop on the urban side.  Foxy is still a station of choice.  We've been very fortunate, and I'm very proud of our staff.  We've done a great job.  We have been in Columbus, Georgia, out of the twenty-eight years that we've been ownership, we have been the number one station in that market for twenty-seven out of the last twenty-eight years, which I think is, is not matched by many around the country, to be very candid with you.  And that's because of our involvement in our community.  Everybody can come in and play urban music.  It's, it's, it's what we do in the communities, in my opinion, is what lasts.
