Story_ID: 251315
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr., H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Paul, P-A-U-L, Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, J-R, Junior.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any nicknames or--
Speaker 2: Herb.
Speaker 1: Herb, all right.
Speaker 2: Herb, later in life and Herbie while I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Herbie, Herbie Douglas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now to your knowledge were you named for Paul Douglas the--I think he was a justice [sic.], I believe, wasn't he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm a junior.  I was named--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --after my father [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] and then there's another, Herbert P. Douglas III, my son.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, nine, '22 [March 9, 1922], Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, and from what occupation?
Speaker 2: Sales executive.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you were also an Olympian, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was a 1948 Olympian [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England].
Speaker 1: All right, and you were a bronze medalist in the broad jump I believe, right?
Speaker 2: I was in the long jump in 1948 and won a bronze medal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In London, England.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 7th of February, two, zero, zero, five [2005].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my residence at 3900 Ford Road, Unit 21P [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 251316
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well I like a meat, I like ham, I like spinach, I like macaroni, eggs, love milk, bread, Italian bread, that's about the nucleus.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for some reason I like a blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Light blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the spring, it's a work time and you're preparing for the summer, and I always have, I've always positioned myself to work hard in the spring, and that's a carryover from training in track and field.  We always trained very hard for the meets, and I think it has carried over in the--for me in the corporate community and also carried over just my mode of living.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love Florida.  First eight years that I worked for Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.] and Pabst Brewing Company I would visit Florida, and I like Miami [Florida] and I also have a winter home in West Palm Beach [Florida].
Speaker 1: The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, gathered that when I was like 27 or 28 years old, because I admired someone a lot, and he used to always say, "The deal is." And it has carried over until my age of eighty-some years old, and I was twenty-eight when I used to hear this gentleman.  I admired him he was a terrific business man, and for some reason, if I'm talking to you I will say, "Well the deal is" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, who was this businessman, can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gus [ph.], his first name was Gus, oh gee, I--his last name escapes me right now as well as I know him, but I--it'll come to me.
Story_ID: 251317
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can, Ilessa, I-L-E-S-S-A, May, M-A-Y, maiden name France.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, eight, 1900 [March 8th, 1900].
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: In Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them, first of all?
Speaker 2: To 1830, Caesar, great-great-grandparent, C-A-E-S-A-R.
Speaker 1: Caesar, okay--
Speaker 2: Caesar, I don't recall his first name.  And he was married to a lady looked like an Indian [Native American].  I have photos of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did Caesar do?
Speaker 2: Well, he was not a slave, and he was from the borderline of Virginia and North Carolina, a place called Union [Virginia], I believe.  And that's where he emanated from and it appeared that he was perhaps one of the free slaves.  He was never really a slave and his wife was an Indian, she looked to be an Indian.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Then they had children, and my grandmother was a Satterfield, Henrietta Satterfield [France].  And--
Speaker 1: Now was she born in Pittsburgh--
Speaker 2: No, no, the only one was born in Pittsburgh was my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are all--we're talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they were--
Speaker 1: --the Carolinas and--
Speaker 2: --they come from Mount Airy--Mount Airy area of Pennsylvania [sic.]--of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mount Airy, that's the--
Speaker 2: You know about that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, that's the town that they always refer to as the county seat on 'The Andy Griffith Show' (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right, that's where he's from--
Speaker 1: Going to Mount Airy, right.
Speaker 2: And Senator [Sam] Ervin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You remember the country senator Sam Irving (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sam Irving, right, with the Watergate hearings, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep, that's where he was from.
Speaker 1: Okay Mount Airy, North Carolina.  Okay, so are there any stories passed down from that side of the family--?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: About Caesar or, or--
Speaker 2: My mother's father was named C. R. France, Charles Robert France, and he was born in 1870, and my grandmother was born in 1876, they had land in Mount Airy.  And that's my grandmother and my grandfather, before they traveled north to Pittsburgh.  They couldn't grow any tobacco on this land and little did they know, they sold it, and underneath it was granite, and if you go there now you'll see it's about a mile going down (laughter).
Speaker 1: Of granite.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that rock, and its quarry goes deep.
Speaker 1: So lands were worth a lot of money then I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, millions and you know, that was a part of it, they didn't realize it.  However, my grandfather, C. R. France, moved north, he was an artist and he graduated, he was the first colored at the time to graduate from an art school in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now do they tell any other stories, I mean, about incidents that happened or anything on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: This is interesting--they never said anything much about race.  I didn't know my grandfather, but I knew my grandmother well and loved her immensely, she was just a wonderful little lady, and they never mentioned that much about race, they always looked forward.  And my grandfather, in Pittsburgh, he bought a house in a part of Pittsburgh--it was basically, predominantly white and he was able to get it primarily because he was a Mason.  And it's middle class of the steel mill industry--people of the steel mill industry, and they lived around there and they bought that house in 1916 and we still own it.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixteen [1916], well what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety years.
Speaker 1: --yeah, what part of Pittsburgh is--
Speaker 2: Hazelwood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Hazelwood?
Speaker 2: Hazelwood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we still own it, and I'm gonna sell it and give the net proceeds to my mother's church.  She was a part of this church from her cradle to her eulogy so that's why.  I'm--my children don't want it.
Story_ID: 251318
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ilessa France Douglas] talk about growing up in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at all, did she tell stories about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was advanced.  She was advanced to the extent that there were migratory workers in Pittsburgh, you had the Polish people, you had the Italian people and I have a photo of her in her first grade and it shows about three other colored at that time in this first grade class, in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she have a chance to go on to higher education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went on and graduated from high school.  I became the first to graduate from college, my sister [Ilessa Douglas] did too.
Story_ID: 251319
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Same as mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [Herbert Douglas] Senior.
Speaker 1: --date of birth, yeah, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 20, 1886.
Speaker 1: Okay and--now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: That's strange, I don't know that much about my dad.  He was born in Terre Haute, Indiana.  His father was--excuse me, was a, what do you call them, blacksmiths?  Did the shoes for horses, he was out of Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, out of Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Yeah, really that's where--
Speaker 1: What part of Kentucky, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but I know my dad also, his mother was out of High Point, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories on that side of the family about life on those, yeah, on your father's side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father?  Yeah, my father was interesting; while he was born there in Indiana, Indiana was one of the most prejudiced states in the North, as you know.  And he came to Pitts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody says that--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Everybody seems to say that if they had to pick the most prejudiced northern state it's Indiana.
Speaker 2: It really is, yeah.  And he was living in Brazil [Indiana] at the time and he worked in a coal mine and as he was coming out, the coal mine collapsed and he had the mules, from what he told me and when it crashed, when the coal mine crashed the rolling stopped, you know, the roll and the carts smashed them to the ground, he walked away and never went back.  And he came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and he got a job, and he liked the job primarily because he started taking care of people's cars, he took care of people's cars and he worked for like the Mellons and Lawrences, the real, renowned, notable people in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: So, he worked for individual families in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --maintaining their cars?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, and then in 1919 he went into his own business and started taking care of cars for rich people.  And he finally ended up with one garage in the '20s [1920s] that held about thirty cars and then in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] he had a garage that held in the neighborhood of two hundred and some cars.
Story_ID: 251320
Speaker 1: And the reason I was deferred is because my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] was sightless, he became sightless in 1927.
Speaker 2: What happened, how did he lose his sight?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, on August 4th, 1927 I was five years old, my mother [Ilessa France Douglas] was twenty-seven, she was giving birth to my sister [Ilessa Douglas] on that day.  That's the day my sister was born, August 4th.  My dad was fourteen years older than my mother, and as he got in his car to go to the hospital in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he had a massive stroke and became permanently blind.  And in doing so my mother became his eyes for more than fifty years.  He lived to be, from forty-one he lived to be twenty days less than ninety-two.  Fortunately, because he knew certain people, and during that period you had to be self-supporting to get a seeing eye dog, my dad was fortunate enough to get the fourth seeing eye dog, it was the fourth class, in America and needless to say he was the first African American to walk with a seeing eye dog.  And he walked with a seeing eye dog for fifty years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, and, so he had a succession of those dogs right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had six dogs and he got his last dog at the age of ninety back in '76 [1976] (laughter), and that dog outlasted him, but, all the others, the five dogs that he had, they gave him good service, he never had an accident and he really was a pioneer in the guide dogs of America.
Speaker 2: Okay, there's an extensive article about him in the February 1967 issue of Ebony magazine--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, okay, over there too is another article on him when he was--got his sixth dog, he was ninety years old and that was in the Pittsburgh Press, when he received his sixth seeing eye dog.
Speaker 2: Okay, now he--did he have a chance to go to college or anything like that as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No he didn't, he learned through trial and error.  He articulated well, and in working for a class of people during that period that spoke well, he could speak very well.  My grandmother [Henrietta Satterfield France] did--could too because she worked for missionaries.  So their articulation was above the average because of where they lived, and a lot of habits and what have you.  Education was born with the people they worked for, and they thought about their children, and that's why I always thought I'd go to college 'cause they wanted me to go.
Story_ID: 251321
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: One sister [Ilessa Douglas], she was five years younger than me and she died at the age of forty-nine, 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, she was a nurse.
Speaker 1: All right, so you--it's just the two of you then at the house?
Speaker 2: Just the two of us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your [maternal] grandparents live in the household with you or did they--?
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Henrietta Satterfield France] did, my grandfather [C.R. France] died before I was born.  That's how my dad, if you read that article, (laughter) that's how my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] met her [Douglas' mother, Ilessa France Douglas], because she was trying to sell my grandfather's car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was an accomplishment back there in 1920, to have a car (laughter) yep.  And, he was helping my mother sell the car and they met one another and they married.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about growin' up--now--oh--what year did they get married, I'm sorry--let me get back to that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen twenty-one [1921].
Speaker 1: Twenty-one [1921], okay.
Speaker 2: April 1921, and I was born in '22 [1922], March.
Story_ID: 251322
Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory, the very earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Well I guess I was, you know, about five, six, kinda, I remember goin' to my dad's [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] garage in a little alley, and it was like a carriage house at that time, and I don't recall, but I must have fallen down on this little gravel like road and scratched myself up.  He said I cried like mad, do I remember the carriage house, yeah, I remember goin' in and out of there.  And the house where I was born, I still visit it with frequency 'cause I'm on the board of trustees at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I go in and out and I stay in this little house.  There's a lady who rents it, but there's a room there, I'm a lifetime tenant, so I'll always go back there and stay.  So I grew up in that house, my mother [Ilessa France Douglas] grew up in that house, my children were born when I was livin' in that house and so it's four generations living in that house, but I'm the only one interested in it now.  And this is 2005, but my--here's the interesting thing though, my family was very positive.  My dad was into business, now he couldn't see, but he had an eye for business and he believed in giving service and paying his bills and he said, "If you do that, you'll always make it, you'll always be successful," and that was somewhat his motto.  And, because he was sightless you wouldn't think he was handicapped because he could go where he wanted to go.  He also kept track of his money rather well, in fact, he always kept his money a certain way and until this day, as old as I am, I'm eighty--I'll be eighty-three next month, the way that he folded his money, I fold my money and put it in my pocket.  And if you investigate my pocket now, my money, my dollar bills are so folded just like he did, and I can go right to each denomination, the money, the dollars--and the twenties and what have you.  But he had to learn that.  He also developed another sense.  His memory was fantastic, his memory was--he could remember all telephone numbers because he had to.  And his business, he could tell you what the profit was at the end of every month, although my mother was his secretary.  And I always will say that my dad's--a negative that my dad had was an asset to our family because we were very positive.
Story_ID: 251323
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: The sights living where I lived, I lived on a hill, very seldom I could see the sun when the steel mills were in full bloom.  We lived in the shadows of the steel, of the big, you know (laughter), the smokestacks, and so the smoke and fog, if there was ever a foggy day and smoke, you couldn't hardly see the transportation in front of you.  That's how bad Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was at that time.  Did we notice it as something deterrent, no, we just lived with it.  We lived on a very steep hill going into the Monongahela River but between that was a steel mill, and I never been in a steel mill, I've never been in a steel mill in my life.  But I always looked from the hill down into the steel mill.
Speaker 1: Well in those days Pittsburgh was steel country, that's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was the number one--
Speaker 1: Synonymous with--
Speaker 2: --in the country--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --and in the world at that time.  Andrew Mellon, they were the finance people, and the Carnegies, they were the ones that had the U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Jones and Laughlin [Steel Company, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] knew the Oliver Iron and Steel [Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], he knew all those people.  Some of them even patronized my dad's business.  He was fortunate enough, I'll allude to that, he went from a thirty-five-car garage, and he had chauffeurs and what have you and one of his chauffeurs was Billy Eckstine's dad [William Eckstein] and (laughter) that's true, and his father--because chauffeur business during that time wasn't a bad job.  And, my dad went on and got a larger garage, and I didn't have to go to the [U.S. military] service because my father was sightless, and I had to work for him, very difficult man to work for because he was a perfectionist.  And what I really didn't know because he was a perfectionist, it transcended when I quit him and started running track seriously.  I got a scholarship to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I'll tell you about that sometime.  But, that household was very positive and every day we just felt as though that we would be there and make a contribution that we could want to do something we usually did it.  And I never even regarded my dad hardly as being sightless.
Story_ID: 251324
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about growing up, were you--what did you like to do as a kid?
Speaker 2: Well, the interesting thing, we were the only African American around Hazelwood Avenue [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] up until, oh, maybe 1941, from '16 [1916] to '41 [1941] so as I grew up I had all whites around me but up the street was a colony of African Americans, colored, Sylvan Avenue, and I'd play there and I'd also play with the immediate kids around me, the Italians, Hungarians, Polish, they were all in that community because they had to work in the steel mills.  And what I recall, I never felt inferior because most of the, excuse me, most of of my peers their parents were from perhaps Italy or Polish or Hungarian, they--very few of them could speak English and my parents [Ilessa France Douglas and Herbert Douglas, Sr.] could.  And--but, they were the first generation born over here, and one Italian family that I grew up with, and we're the same age, one of her son's went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], one's a president of Reader's Digest (laughter) that's the, that shows the, where the field house level and where they--when they got their start we were--I was much further ahead, but as my kids' children started growing up, their children had more opportunities than mine from a racial standpoint.
Story_ID: 251325
Speaker 1: Tell us about school, now what was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Gladstone Elementary School in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Was that named after prime minister of England (laughter), that [William Ewart] Gladstone?
Speaker 2: Well. I don't know could have been, I don't know, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Gladstone Junior High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Allderdice, A-L-L-D-E-R-D-I-C-E, High School [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: D-Y-C-E?
Speaker 2: D-I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) D-I-C-E--
Speaker 2: --as in Ida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Allderdice High School.
Speaker 1: Right, we've heard of that, Allderdice too, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, well--
Speaker 2: And then I went to Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] for a year and a half and then University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the University of Xavier in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Right, then University of Pittsburgh, they call it Pitt for some reason most of the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we changed it, yeah, it's gonna go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm on the board there, and, yeah, I'm pretty sure it's gonna go back.
Speaker 1: That's the home of Mike Ditka; I think it was his name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's your Chicago [Illinois] guy, that dumb honky (laughter), dumb guy, he's something else, boy more problems with him.  But he's a good coach, he did a--he really did a job there.
Speaker 1: It's a--well I have to tell you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're good friends--
Speaker 1: --the story of this (unclear) (laughter) after we--
Speaker 2: You got another story (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --about, yeah, there's another story (laughter).
Speaker 2: About Ditka (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dave Duerson [HistoryMaker David R. Duerson] told the story about what happened with Ditka, but I'll tell you that after--
Speaker 2: He's the luckiest guy, I said, I said, "Ditka, you sure are lucky, you couldn't get through school if they gave you the test" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, now what was grade school like?  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I went because the, the interesting thing--I never missed a day of school, never missed a day, I got certificates for not being tardy or late now--absent.  But the school's right across from my st- where I live so it was very easy for me to get there.  Was I a good student?  No, I wasn't interested, but I would keep abreast, and then when I got out of junior high school and went on over to Allderdice, because we didn't have a high school in that part of Pittsburgh, and that's where I graduated from and it was predominantly Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, tell me now in grade school did you--were you involved in athletics, in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah my athletic involvement, when I was a young--in elementary school I ran track and they graded us--they put us in classifications in regards to weight, like the, if you were six or seven or eight, you know, in elementary school they'd weigh you and you'd--and I won.  And then when I went to junior high school I never lost there, I won all the junior city championships in junior high.  And then when I went to senior high with the exception of the tenth grade, the eleventh and twelfth I tried to wi--I won the hundred, two-twenty and the broad jump in the eleventh grade and twelfth--
Story_ID: 251326
Speaker 1: When I was fourteen years old, that was in 1936, Jesse Owens was campaigning for Alfred Landon [Alf Landon] for president of the United States.  My mother [Ilessa France Douglas] took me over to hear him because she knew I was trying to be a track man, and if you ever see 'The Jesse Owens Story,' you'll see where we became great friends when I was a, you know, V.P. and he was my idol, and they show me, they show a young kid there fifteen years old, and that's me.
Speaker 2: In the movie, 'The Jesse Owens Story'?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're actually portrayed in the movie?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now that's interesting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well, anyway, we went on and I--you take in the 1930s, headlines for colored at that time, we never saw them unless it was some sort of derogatory, negative subject--
Speaker 2: Somebody getting shot or robbing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but--yeah, but this was a first that I saw in the Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph, and the press headlines, "Jesse Owens Breaks Three World Records and Ties One in One Afternoon."  The hundred [yard dash], 220 [yard dash], broad jump, and he tied the hundred [sic.] in the hurdles, 220 [yard] low hurdles.  And that was electrify--that electrified, that was in 1935 and the next year, 1936 he wins four gold medals [at the 1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany].  And, I just thought he was the greatest, so my mother, that same year I got the chance to meet him.  And I told him immediately what I had done in junior high [Gladstone Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and he said, "Oh, you did better than I," but he was lying between his teeth, you know, and I believed him, and then I went on and went to high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and I did rather well in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and in the state championships I won three, well I won two broad jump titles and I won the hundred and the 220 my senior year.  And I didn't wanna--I wasn't really interested in going to school, but I loved [Ralph] Metcalfe because he ran second to Jesse Owens, and in doing so I went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when did you meet Ralph Metcalfe?
Speaker 1: I met him in 1940 right out of school.  He gave me a scholarship to Xavier--
Speaker 2: Okay, so did he come around to Pittsburgh or did you, how did you--
Speaker 1: No they heard of me and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, there weren't too many African Americans that were winning championships in states during that time, you know, '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]--
Speaker 2: Now what was the cause of this, was it be--they didn't get the opportunity, you think, or what, 'cause--
Speaker 1: It was just coming, we were on our way, and as a result they opened up avenues in college for track, not much basketball.
Story_ID: 251327
Speaker 1: I was the first to play football at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], 1945, with another guy named Jimmy Joe Robinson, and another guy named Allen Carter.  Jimmy Joe was recruited and I walked on, but during that same year I'd won a national AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] championship in the broad jump and I was the third fastest runner in the country, so I was a natural to go out for football, and Clark Shaughnessy was the living exponent of the T-formation so I fit right in.  And I can't ever recall during 1945 going out for a pass like stop-'n-goes, up-'n-ins that I was covered and I knew one day they'd have to get a track man to guard a track man, or cause a zone defense like they did for Bob Hayes.  And, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, who was at one time the world's fastest human in the '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 1: Yes he was, yes he was, he was the world's fastest human period and no one could keep close to him, and they had to--he revolutionized the wide receiver.  We were called the men in motion; we'd go out and fake and go down and during the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did you play flanker basically or that--
Speaker 1: I was--it was comparable to a flanker but they call the man in motion to go out, fake in, and then go out.  And during that time they just didn't have speedsters covering speedsters (laughter), and that's why I could get out there.  But during that time there perhaps were only about thirty-nine colored athletes, as we were called, during that time in Division I schools.
Speaker 2: Now, let me go back to something you said earlier about weight class divisions in track, this is something I've heard about in--everybody's familiar with it in wrestling and boxing, and I've heard about this in basketball, they actually had heavyweight basketball teams and lightweight teams before, I guess before a certain period of time and they all, you know, everybody played together but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was elementary school [Gladstone Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and they wanted to differentiate a kid eight years old, if he was small, you know, he weighed a certain amount, he would be in one class, if he was big he'd be in another class.  That's the way they did it in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I think I was like 75 or 80 pounds, I recall my mother [Ilessa France Douglas] sitting up in the stands and I ran all away from everyone in my weight class and my age too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's what they did then, I never seen it later on, no, you know, no, but during elementary school in Pittsburgh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, then on to college, now, what happened at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], now you, you were recruited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Xavier, yeah--
Speaker 2: --by Ralph Metcalfe--
Speaker 1: --Metcalfe and there were three of us that went down from Pittsburgh, and we became the first to win the Championships of America 440-yard relay, that would be four-by-four today.  And in winning that three of us were from Pittsburgh that I just mentioned, one was from Charleston, West Virginia.  Metcalfe had to leave, he couldn't go with us 'cause he had to go into the [U.S. military] service and I recall him crying saying, you know, it was really a blow to him 'cause he wanted us to go with him.  But the year before that I placed fifth in the hundred right out of high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], fourth in the two hundred meters and sixth in the long jump, that was nationally, and I was nineteen years old.  And it was because I was on my way, I would have been a sprinter more so than a long jumper--broad jumpers we called it then, if Metcalfe hadn't had to go to the service I'd have had a different life, I'm sure, I'd have been a teacher, something like that.
Story_ID: 251328
Speaker 1: Why did you leave Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Because of the war [World War II, WWII] and I had to go back and help my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.].  And so I worked for him for three years and as I told you my dad was sightless, and he couldn't get help because most of the people had to go and take defense jobs.  And taking defense jobs, excuse me, I had to be there to monitor, make sure at night that no one took cars out of there and joyride as they called it then.  So as a result I was deferred, but my dad was a perfectionist.  Being sightless he had to be.  And it was difficult for me to work for him, so I walked down to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and Clark Shaughnessy gave me a scholarship and I was like a walk-on after they had recruited Jimmy Joe Robinson as the first African American football player at the university.  And then I went on, I only played one year because there was no future in football, in professional football at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't a big deal, it wasn't big.
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: What're we talking about, 1940--
Speaker 2: Five [1945].
Speaker 1: --Five [1945].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so it wasn't a future so, I gained more prominence in making the Olympic team, which I did in '48 [1948], and I became the only Olympic medalist, period, to score a touchdown against [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], yeah, even up until today, 2005.
Speaker 1: The only one (laughter)?
Speaker 2: The only one, the medalist, yeah, because it's two sports, you know, it's not easy (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, at Pittsburgh you ran track and played football.  What was your major?
Speaker 2: My major was phys ed [physical education] and then I got a master's [degree] in education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went straight through.  After I came back from the Olympic Games [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England] I was asked to work for Pabst [Brewing Company], because in '47 [1947], through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had a selective buying program on Pabst, because Pabst at the time was the number one seller in the African American community, but I didn't accept it, but then later on I did accept it.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: The job, position.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer hadn't--they--well--people in my generation heard about 'em as they sponsored the fights, the Friday night fights (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wednesday night fights--
Speaker 1: Wednesday night fights, okay--
Speaker 2: Wednesday night fights, yeah I know all about that, I was there when it started.  I was there for twelve years and then I switched, but Wednesday night fights was the num--it was the premier.  And during that period Pabst was either between first and third best seller in the country, and the reason was because the African American community made it that.  They really did, because--and that's why the selected boycott, selected buying program from the NAACP was administered on them primarily because they weren't giving jobs equally.
Story_ID: 251329
Speaker 1: Let's go back to 1945, you're playing, you played football for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I played football--
Speaker 1: --a year [at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and then--
Speaker 2: --then I ran track--
Speaker 1: --ran track--
Speaker 2: --and I won the IC [intercollegiate] '48 [1948] championship in the hundred [meter dash] and also the broad jump and then I won it the national AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] too.  I won the national AAU broad jump in '45 [1945], '47 [1947] and '49 [1949].  And I won the IC '48 [1948] championship, the intercollegiate, '46 [1946], '47 [1947] and '48 [1948], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you--well, it seems logical that the United States Olympic Committee [USOC] would be looking for someone like you to represent them in the--so do you-- where were the tryouts that year for--
Speaker 2: The tryouts were in Evan--in '48 [1948] they were in Evanston.
Speaker 1: Evanston, Illinois?
Speaker 2: Illinois, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], I guess?
Speaker 2: Northwestern, that's true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the three of--three African Americans were representing the country in the long jump.  And we placed first and third.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An Australian [Theo Bruce] beat me out by quarter of an inch.
Speaker 1: Now, were there black athletes running the hundred yard dash?
Speaker 2: Yeah, during that time Harrison Dillard, gentleman up there, won the hundred and Barney Ewell was second.
Speaker 1: Okay, Harrison Dillard, so this is 1948 [Summer Olympics, London, England], by '48 [1948] I guess it'd been over a decade since Jesse Owens won (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was twelve years--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --there wasn't an Olympic Games for twelve years from 1936 to '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: 'Cause of the war [World War II, WWII] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I became very good friends with Jesse [Owens], perhaps the last twenty years of his life we spoke on the phone just about every month, maybe once or twice.  And that's why I named the award, in memory of him, the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had the dinner every year in New York [New York] at the Waldorf [Astoria].
Speaker 1: Okay, let's, let's get to that, but tell me about going to the Olympics, now, you go to Evanston for the tryouts?
Speaker 2: We go for the tryouts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and trials, and were they--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --easy or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, they--you take twelve years, and I could have made the '44 [1944] team, but by circumstances, the war and what have you, during that period an athlete was considered old at twenty-five or twenty-six, in today's climate no, they're just really reaching their peak, so we would say, "We're gonna make the boat," what we were trying to do was just make the Olympic team, and the interesting thing about it, the eight of us who made the Olympic team in track and field, we all pushed for one another.  The camaraderie was really there, they're all gone now but four of us, of the eight.  But I'll tell ya, we were always rooting for one another, no matter what.  And today is a different climate because it's based on monetary gain.  They wanna earn money and your competitor means nothing.  Then I imagine in--and everyone would say, because there was no planes going over that much, with frequency, we'd all say, "We're gonna make the boat."  And in making the boat that meant you made the Olympic team (laughter) so--and can you visualize on that team there was only one African American basketball player, Don Barksdale (laughter), that's hard to believe, but that's the truth.
Speaker 1: Just one, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how far we've come.
Speaker 1: Say basically black folks were excluded from college athletics because they were excluded from mainstream colleges, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, there was no scholarships in basketball, not many in football, baseball none, only track, really.  And then if you didn't wanna be a track man, you had to be a boxer like Joe Louis or Sugar Ray Robinson, they were your idols there.
Story_ID: 251330
Speaker 1: Tell me about going to London [England] for the [1948 Summer] Olympics, now this is, this is--was this your first trip out of the United States (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yep that was--for me it was.  It wasn't for many of the athletes, like Harrison Dillard and [Mal] Whitfield, who were very renowned, prominent athletes on their team, they'd been in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], I wasn't primarily because of my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] being sightless and I had to work for his business.  But, that was my desire, to make the boat and go to Europe.  That was a part of the reward, just to make it to Europe. And that I did and I remember seeing Ireland, first country I saw as we got to--as we saw land going over, and the land was just as green, I'd never seen anything green like that before, but that's because it's an island sitting out there in the middle of the water.  And it was very beautiful, that was an experience, it was a dual experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there many black Londoners around in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, McDonald Bailey was a hundred [meter dash] man, yeah, but he was--they were very limited, I think he was the only one on that team.  I don't recall any others.  The name was McDonald Bailey--yeah, now I'm thinking the guy from--but anyhow, they had one sprinter and he placed fifth [sic. sixth] in the hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell us what you were thinking, I mean did you--do you think in retrospect, you know, now you won a bronze medal which is pretty good in an Olympics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the world.
Speaker 1: --'cause a lot of people don't win anything, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, listen, that was the icing, as I was saying before, the most important thing was to make the Olympic team, because that was an experience within itself.  The icing came when you won a medal, and if you ever won a medal, then you'll always have pictures standing up on the podium.  You'll always be listed. So no, that was the epitome and--no I wasn't satisfied then, but as I look back on it now I'm satisfied--
Speaker 1: Had you jumped further in the past (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --than you did that day?
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, I jumped as far as he jumped at the time, but, you know, that's just like (laughter) you know, some are ready and some aren't.  And--but I never thought that any three people could beat me in the world.  You, you have to be that positive, you have to be focused and you have to vision.  Anything you do you have to vision and focus, and if you can vision, well it usually comes through.  I've found it true in the corporate community and the humanitarian community, to give back and what have you, vision.  And I think I got that from my family, my mother [Ilessa France Douglas] and father they were positive then, because my dad went blind they didn't quit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are there any outstanding interactions or any good stories from the Olympics in London in--from 1948?
Speaker 2: Well, well we all, as I said, rooted for one another and we all won medals.  All but one, and he pulled a muscle, he placed fourth and that was Dave Bolden [sic. Lorenzo Wright].  But that's the gratifying thing, you know, we represented our country and we did our, our share.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And proportionally, disproportionally we won more than we should have had won, you know how that goes--
Story_ID: 251331
Speaker 1: How were you treated by the U.S. Olympic Committee [USOC], 'cause I know 1948 was the year that [President Harry S.] Truman finally integrated the armed forces (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, FEPC [Fair Employment Practices Committee].
Speaker 1: --the Korean War was going on, the----
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but there--I mean--
Speaker 2: War was on.
Speaker 1: --it's a year that A. Philip Randolph threatened to march on Washington [D.C.], I believe--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pullman porter, yeah he was a leader--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --he was a real leader--
Speaker 1: They were gonna march on Washington for better treatment for black people in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this country, I mean it's still a lot of discrimination in the major cities even as well--
Speaker 2: Today.
Speaker 1: --down south--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --so how did you--I mean were you all segregated in the--at the [1948 Summer] Olympics [London, England]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, during that period what we were doing, we were showing that we could compete as well as anybody in the world.  That was the platform that was the basic pattern that we were out there to show that we could do as well as anybody in the world, and that we did.  Now, from a monetary standpoint we didn't think of it in that vein, we were thinking about next, getting an education and getting a regular job and working the rest of our lives, because the opportunities weren't out here for many young people today.  But that's what the--it made you--it put you in a class where you were always recognized when they said something, where every four years when the Olympics would come around you know that your name may be in the paper, and that's what has happened in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Olympics were glamorous during that time, more so than now, it's--sports is reached a certain plateau where it's very basically money oriented.  Teams are not like they used to be whereby this person would play for the same team for years, today, you know, I may run in Pittsburgh but I may leave there (laughter) and go someplace else, it's not like it used to be.  But sports, camaraderie, I can show you letters right now I got from a guy who I competed against, Payton Jordan, and he wrote me a letter only--not long ago, that's how close, and he was white.  He was on the cover of, during that time, Life.  Payton Jordan, that's the kinda camaraderie we had, and he admired [Ralph] Metcalfe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Metcalfe never lost to Jesse [Owens], but in the Olympic Games and the Olympic tryouts.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there's a famous picture of--did you know Mack Robinson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mack Robinson, sure, he comes to our dinner, he's dead now too, he died that's Jackie--
Speaker 1: The brother of Jackie Robinson.
Speaker 2: --Robinson's, yeah.
Speaker 1: --brother, right.
Speaker 2: And Jackie was perhaps one of the best all-around athletes during our period.  He wasn't--he was a good basketball player, very good football player, but he ended up in baseball.  We could do multiple sports, I was a gymnast, I was a city champ in gymnastics for years in Pittsburgh, tumbling, you never know which way you're going, then the number one school is Springfield [Massachusetts] for gymnasts, physical education, and I didn't want to go there I wanted to go to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] so I could run track.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's funny you should say you never know which way you're going after mentioning tumbling, 'cause that's my problem I don't know if I'm up and down (laughter) I can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, that's true, you gotta-- you don't know where you're gonna really find yourself, and if, you don't even start off--Johnny Johnson [ph.], we were talking one day he says, "You know Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.], you can start off a business when you're 58, 59 (laughter)."  I said, "I know it, you really can."  In today's climate that's, you know, your life expectancy, you can last a long time out here.
Story_ID: 251332
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: After the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you were--
Speaker 2: --Olympic Games--
Speaker 1: --had you graduated from Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] by then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '48 [1948] during the [1948 Summer] Olympics [London, England], then I went on and got my master's degree in education.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when did you get your master's?
Speaker 2: In education in '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the University of Pittsburgh wouldn't hire me as an assistant track coach, but when the head of the physical education department said I was the most outstanding phys ed guy to ever graduate under his tenure they still wouldn't hire me.  The City of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] wouldn't hire me as a coach, but it was a blessing in disguise that I got in the community, corporate community because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] boycotted Pabst [Brewing Company] and that launched me in the corporate community.
Speaker 1: This is 1949, '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: It was really 1950.
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, who, was the leader of that boycott strategy?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know who was, you'd have to go back and find out who was the president of the NAACP back in 1947 and '8 [1948].
Speaker 1: I'm thinkin' it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chicago [Illinois], I don't know, you'd have to check it out.
Speaker 1: --I'm thinkin' it's Walter White was the national president then--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was, yeah--
Speaker 1: --I believe, yeah.
Speaker 2: --he was, but I mean for there, I don't know because it was local--
Speaker 1: It--local in--
Speaker 2: --it was Chicago--
Speaker 1: --in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Chicago, and that's where the headquarters for Pabst was right up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], so they felt the blow.  And during that period, Pabst was just the number one seller by far, in the black community.
Story_ID: 251333
Speaker 1: Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer [Pabst Brewing Company], because of this pressure is looking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --to open the doors a little bit to let--
Speaker 2: --That's right.
Speaker 1: --somebody in--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --at least a few, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 1: And so not every--
Speaker 2: What they, they had a guy by the name of Bill Graham, and he started with them in the '30s [1930s], and was with them in the '40s [1940s] and he would have been like the equivalent of a vice president today, over the African American community.  He was the first to sell a carload, and that was a boxcar load of beer, at the [Benevolent and Protective Order of] Elks convention.  They bought a boxcar load and it was always my goal to try to sell a boxcar load, and I did that down in Atlanta [Georgia] when the Elks had their national convention there.  He was really a forerunner.  The interesting thing his sister was Shirley Graham.
Speaker 1: Shirley Graham who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Married.
Speaker 1: Married W.E.B. Du Bois.
Speaker 2: That's right, was his sister--
Speaker 1: Shirley Graham Du Bois later, but she married--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Du Bois later in life but she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but she was Shirley Graham, that's right and she married Du Bois, yep and that was Bill Graham.  And he was the one that really did his homework and found out about the Negro market.
Speaker 1: So they're from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was like my mentor--
Speaker 1: --are they from Pittsburgh too?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Bill Graham and--
Speaker 2: No, Bill Graham wasn't.
Speaker 1: Where was he from?
Speaker 2: I think he was from Cleveland [Ohio], where she was from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not sure though, but I know she was from Cleveland [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he's the one that hired me.  And he hired me because he knew Bill Nunn, Sr., and Bill Nunn, Sr. knew I was looking for a job and that's how I started in the corporate community.
Speaker 1: Now Bill Nunn, Sr. is the father of Bill Nunn [III] the actor?
Speaker 2: No that's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: --that's the grandfather.
Speaker 1: Oh, the grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah the grandfather, now his father and I are real close, we're like brothers.  And he knows about Pittsburgh, if you really want to interview someone you interview him, 'cause he can tell you all about the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] and all the peripheral things around Pittsburgh, he knows 'em (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is Bill Nunn--
Speaker 2: --and he's never left, yep.
Speaker 1: --this is Bill Nunn, Jr. now?
Speaker 2: Bill Nunn, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, but see you young guys know the one that's your age (laughter).
Speaker 1: The one who played Radio Raheem in ['Do The Right Thing']--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Radio Raheem, boombox and his mother didn't like that, now she liked him in 'Regarding Henry' and what is--Harrison Ford, and you know, where he's an intern or, I don't know, what was--they carry bedpans and what have you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, I think I most recently saw him in 'Spider-Man' as a--
Speaker 2: Was he in 'Spider-Man'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a news reporter working for J. Jonah Jameson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he gets a lot of those jobs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so Bill Nunn, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're getting breaks now when, you know, it wasn't many of us getting breaks back in the '40s [1940s].  And I remember Billy Eckstine sayin' that they wanted him to be something like a porter on a train or something, he said, "I don't want my children growin' up seeing me carry luggage." (Laughter) And then that servitude so he wouldn't take a part, yeah.
Speaker 1: In a movie huh, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah in the movies, yeah, that's where they want us, step-and-fetch-it type.
Story_ID: 251334
Speaker 1: You got your chance, you got a break too, and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how it started.
Speaker 1: --how did they [Pabst Brewing Company]--what position did they hire you for?
Speaker 2: Well, they hired me to (clears throat) basically go out and make contact with the retailers in--that sold the beer.  And then I worked all the southeastern states, and that's because I went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I knew I had contacts through that area.  And the interesting thing, I remember going into Jackson, Mississippi and the distributor there said, "Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.], I have a striker."  Now a striker was a guy who carried the beer into the store, and the salesperson he didn't do anything but write up the order. And this gentleman said, "You know Herb," I remember his name was Franklin [ph.], he says, "Herb, Willie is a good young fella and I'm gonna hire him to be a salesperson--a driver salesman."  And he did, this is in Jackson, Mississippi, back in the '50s [1950s].  This young guy went out there, and you know who helped me take him through the African American community was Edgar--Medgar Evers.  He took him to every--see that's when--before desegregation and blacks owned their own stores, their own hotels, their own restaurants all through the South.  And I put on African American salespeople all through the South before I could do it in Wasing- in Baltimore [Maryland] and places like that, even Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where I worked, where I was born.
Speaker 1: So this is--when Medgar Evers helped was that in--
Speaker 2: He took me to the owners and they would say, you know, he'd say, "Look, put this Pabst in here."  And it's a wonder we didn't run into repercussions because Falstaff [Brewing Corporation] other--you know, they had white salesman, they could have, you know, pressured them, but they fell in line, and put our product in, like West Palm Beach [Florida], I remember going there with four white sales reps and myself and as I got around to being introduced and he had met the white reps, this bottler and this distributor of ours, he wouldn't shake my hand.  Now, during those days it didn't bother me, 'cause I knew I was as good as any white (laughter), you didn't have to tell me, so he didn't wanna shake my hand, I didn't wanna shake his.  And I would report--and then every day that I'd go out and I'd work the black community, I'd come in with the most sales.  And then I'd prove to him that he should put on an African American salesperson and he did.  The only one that he requested back was me, of the five of us who went down there.  Now that was 1950.
Speaker 1: Well, that seems to speak to the importance of making money and (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Bottom line, that's right, yep.  You do something where you can make money you're there.
Speaker 1: That's the deal I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it, and more so today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've often heard people that worked in the Civil Rights Movement in the South say that in the big cities especially and along the Gulf Coast a lot of the merchants really didn't care--I mean, they--segregation was a custom but it interfered with their business, and they could see beyond what their business could be if they could only get segregation out of the way, so a lot of them really didn't want it but they seemed compelled to do it.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, because of the law, there was a law you couldn't just go into those places.  Now as I go to Atlanta [Georgia] I was there, I worked there from '50 [1950] to '60 [1960], as I go to Atlanta now, this is unbelievable that's one of the best places for young people like yourself to start a business.
Story_ID: 251335
Speaker 1: And, I saw an inter-I saw an ad, the guy who won the Oscar [Academy Award] once, I was talking to him in Seattle, Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sidney Poitier?
Speaker 1: No, not, he won an Oscar, supporting.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Way back there and he says he goes to the Oscars now they won't even put the camera on him, and he won.
Speaker 2: Al Freeman, Jr. or--
Speaker 1: No, remember he was--no, no, this was before, you remember he played the captain in a military and Richard Gere; he gave him a hard time, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh [HistoryMaker] Louis [Cameron] Gossett Jr.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, Lou Gossett, yeah, Lou Gossett (laughter).  He was saying that they should--he was trying to influence Ted Turner to open up Atlanta [Georgia] in the black community and put studios there for African Americans, and he said all you have to do is really put it in the midst of Atlanta and, and the interesting thing what grew out of Atlanta anyway was Spike Lee, and the [Samuel L.] Jackson, [Wesley] Snipes, all them, that little group, and Bill Nunn [III] (laughter) they were the ones that--and Lou Gossett was on target and this was back in, oh maybe twenty years ago, yeah, he was thinking, he was trying to sell Ted Turner on doing that, but he wouldn't.
Story_ID: 251336
Speaker 1: Let's get back, well--back to the chronology, now you worked for Pabst [Brewing Company] for ten years you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did and eleven (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From 1951 maybe to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to '62 [1962]--
Speaker 1: --sixty-two [1962], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I went to Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Schieffelin and Co. was an old, the oldest pharmaceutical company in the United States, but they didn't have much of a sales force.  But during Prohibition they sold spirits, they sold spirits for medicinal reasons, like gin and all of that (laughter).  Well, that's the way it happened (laughter) McKesson & Robbins [Inc.; McKesson Corporation], they--you take those old pharmaceutical houses like McKesson Robbins, and Schieffelin and that's what they did, so after repeal, they did a wonderful job of continuing that line.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And the first black they hired was from Chicago [Illinois], guy by the name of John Ross, you ever hear of him?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you might have.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then they hired another guy named John Woodruff and then they hired me.  And with my background in business, I was able to build a company within a company.  And we concentrated on Hennessy cognac, and I remember when we had to stress and piggyback other products just to get Hennessy into an account.  And they made me national special markets manager in '65 [1965] (laughter).  That's where the (unclear) called special markets then, and so what we did, we started getting distribution all over the United States with Hennessy.
Speaker 1: That's in '65 [1965], they made you national special markets manager.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then in '68 [1968] I was made vice president of special markets (laughter) it was just the same thing but they just changed the title.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there were five of us they made VPs, that was the regional whites and me, I was the only African American with the company.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they divided their markets up into geographical territories then special markets (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then the special markets where I worked them all.  I had to work Los Angeles [California]; we had representatives out there that worked for distributors.  Chicago, remember the Edelsteins?  I don't know if you remember them, but they were the dominant distributor [South Shore Liquors] in Chicago.  Then we had a vice president in Chicago later in years who became the head of all the Midwest, his name was Bill Jackson, and he just quit, he resigned or he retired about five or six years ago.  He was good, I hired him, and the--see I wore a lot of hats, personnel, advertising, P.R. [public relations], I did it all (laughter) and they should have been separate jobs for different people.  Today, yes, they have that but as I walk down 57th Street [New York, New York] and I see Hennessy--Moet Hennessy that building, Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy [LVMH Tower], I know that those of color have made a tremendous contribution of those two brands, 70 percent of Hennessy is distributed in the black community and 50 percent of Moet.  That's one thing I feel good--and when I retired eighteen years ago, there were three African American vice presidents, I felt good about that--that's one of the good things I felt good about from a corporate standpoint.
Story_ID: 251337
Speaker 1: So you helped bring other African Americans in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's the only way we could make it.  That's just like Jesse Owens, how was I gonna give back to Jesse, he traveled with me, I'd have him do certain promotions with me for one of our products, and I made sure that he got equal pay.  If they hired someone else that was more so--and I don't know if you heard, you know he worked for Sears [Roebuck and Co.], he worked for Ford [Motor Company] and I learned through Jesse that they would never pay him what they'd pay an Arnold Palmer, Ted--
Speaker 1: [Ted] Williams, yeah--
Speaker 2: --Williams and all them, yep, you're right, you hit it right on the head.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he, he went through some changes in those days, he couldn't get a--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no--
Speaker 1: --job.
Speaker 2: --no, and the good thing about it, he could articulate nearly as good as [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And we were very close, like he was maybe like a big brother.  And if I didn't call him he'd wanna know why.  And then when he--we were in Indianapolis [Indiana] going through a program there with one of our products and they'd put him on TV and I'd be on too, and he would mention spirits now during that time you weren't allowed to mention spirits, but they could--he could get away with it because that's why they'd say, "Well why are you here," and he'd have to say why he's here.  And the interesting thing is, we got good distribution and I started a program with a black athlete and we did it in '71 [1971] and it was circulated more so than--Modern Pictures Service [ph.], they were the ones who circulated it for us and it went from places to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to the prisons, 'The Black Athlete.'
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the documentary, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Black Athlete.'
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And we did it in '71 [1971] before Arthur Ashe.
Speaker 1: Who directed it?
Speaker 2: We did, Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did that through a grant.
Speaker 1: Yeah but who, who directed it and--
Speaker 2: Oh, Bud Greenspan--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a, you know, he's really the guy that knows the Olympic movement.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He's been with me for years developing film for me for the dinners.  That's Cappy Productions, the president is Bud Greenspan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, so yeah, that's quite a, yeah I remember that--
Speaker 2: Do you remember that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--'cause I launched it in Chicago [Illinois] with Jesse.  I was trying to think of where we did it, may have been over there at the [Chicago] Defender or, I don't know where, maybe it was downtown--but anyway, we launched it there in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that, well that was right on the call for, you know, more black history, you know, on the air--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I think it's for the first time, it's probably the first time that I saw, you know, film of some of the great black athletes, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --assembled like that--
Speaker 2: We had Jack Johnson, and all of them--
Speaker 1: Jack Johnson, right.
Speaker 2: --it was really, you know, turn of the century, you know, the best jockeys, out of the first sixteen Kentucky Derby winners, thirteen of 'em were black jockeys.  But when it became commercial, what happened?  Then we lost out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when Willie Shoemaker and all those guys (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when I told, I told David Stern, not, oh a couple years ago, I saw him at a luncheon, I said, "David," you know David Stern who is, he's commissioner of NBA [National Basketball Association].  I said, "David, you gonna have a foreign basketball league (laughter)".  He says, "Oh no Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.], the brothers are still gonna come."  And I said, "Well, you're 20 percent now are foreign (laughter)."  This was a little over a year ago and I can only think of when it becomes commercial you'll see more and more changes of complexion--
Story_ID: 251338
Speaker 1: It's more and more comin' 'cause I don't know if basketball can get any more commercial now, it's pretty, pretty commercial, I mean it's strongly commercial now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: They're--
Speaker 2: Well you'll see, you're--as much as I'm sitting here you--you remember this interview because in fifteen or twenty years you're not gonna see many, many of us playing bas--you're gonna see many, but not proportionally like you saw when it was 70 and 80 percent like, you know.
Speaker 1: Now there's a theory--I was reading an article in the Detroit Free Press a couple years ago when they drafted, ironically, his name is Darko Milicic, he's a center, he's from one of the Eastern bloc, I think from some--one of those Yugoslavian spinoff countries--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, Croatia, yeah--
Speaker 1: --but he's, right.
Speaker 2: --they go for there.
Speaker 1: --he's described as--he's young, he's still--
Speaker 2: He's about eighteen--I think--
Speaker 1: --nineteen now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, nineteen.
Speaker 1: --Nineteen or twenty--
Speaker 2: I remember when they, yeah I--
Speaker 1: --and he's on the bench of Detroit [Pistons] now, they say he has all the skills but he doesn't know how to play the team game yet, so Larry Brown is sitting him, but what they said about him was is that his background, like a lot of Eastern European players when they come over here and, you know, of course they come over here and they're identified as white players--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --they, his background is a ghetto background, basically in his country, I mean the way--he said he played in a hall--in a gym, filled with cigarette smoke and people drinking and stuff and in the gym while they play, that's--people betting--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the games and everything else.  You know they said that he came out of a pretty tough background and, I guess they--the essence of the article was he has a lot more in common with some of the black athletes that come out of the projects and other things, not everybody does, but a lot of people do come out of poverty.  They play basketball to get out of poverty--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they box out of poverty they run track to get out of poverty--
Speaker 2: --they think it's disproportionate but it isn't that bad any more, these kids come from pretty good families--
Speaker 1: Some of them do, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, they--
Speaker 1: --a lot of them do--
Speaker 2: --they built it up magnified.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then you see on the bench they got mediocre players of white on the bench in college and all the best basketball players are out there on the court, and there could be jobs, could be positions sitting there on the bench 'cause some of them are that good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you think that it's because of conditions in Europe to create this, all this new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the money--
Speaker 1: --basketball talent?
Speaker 2: --oh the money, the bottom line is when it becomes commercial that's just like the steel mills, when they immigrated, you know, all the immigrants come over here to work in our steel mills, it's the same thing this is just not an industry and they're coming now just like they did then.  And they're gonna be good and they're gonna coach and what have you.  You see what has happened with the coaching and the football coaches and the collegiate level, we're only down to two.  We did have five, and you know, but--you know I remember when the quarterback wasn't heard of to be of color, now we might see in the Pro Bowl, three colored, three African American quarterbacks, yeah, yep--
Speaker 1: This is true, I, well, yeah, it's true--
Speaker 2: --yeah, you'll see and you'll see the revolution of change it's cyclical.
Story_ID: 251339
Speaker 1: Now how long did you work for Schieffelin and Company [Schieffelin and Somerset Co.]?
Speaker 2: I worked there for twenty-four years and then they kept me six extra years as a consultant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I built a company within a company where we disproportionately represented maybe about 46 percent of the total revenue in the country--in the company period, African Americans.
Speaker 1: What was that called?
Speaker 2: What was what?
Speaker 1: What was that called, the company within a company?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't--they--it was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just--oh, okay, you didn't say (laughter)--
Speaker 2: --literally, you know, it was literally like that but they didn't name it (laughter) but they knew it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see, I think I understand what you mean now that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, see there we built a company within a company that's just like if you start working for a company and then your area you're dominant and for a certain part of your portfolio and the moneymaking part of your portfolio and that's how important it is.  That's just like I would make suggestions, and you can relate to this, way back, and I told our CEO, I said, "I tell you what we should do, we should advertise this particular ad in Johnsons Publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], either Ebony or Jet, and caption it with, "The Baddest Cognac Out There is Hennessy," (laughter) and then name it, and he put up his hands, "Oh my God, no."  Well what he didn't understand, our culture and what bad meant in the African American community, that meant it was good (laughter) and he couldn't see it.  Now, they've seen--they see the light now and you'll see that advertisement even in white publications.
Story_ID: 251340
Speaker 1: Now in Chicago [Illinois] I know we had a man by the name of Mandrake [Henry McNeil Brown, Jr.], have you ever heard of him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard of Mandrake, I'm trying to think of--yeah.
Speaker 1: And Mandrake was a man who was incensed by the liquor ads in the black community and he went around--he spray painted over 'em, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, our advertisement.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Advertisements for any, any liquor ad or cigarette ad--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and especially if they're near a church--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or near a school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would spray paint over these and, now did you ever--I mean how did you feel about that kind of thing in terms (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we had that problem up in Harlem [New York, New York] too.  But we saw the minister and then we went to the company and we had them far enough from those areas such as schools and churches, however, we never had the severity of like Mandrake in Chicago, whether you're near a school or away from a school he'd paint them.  But we got the complaint from [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr. Calvin O.] Butts up in Harlem to move them 'cause he was lookin' right at a Hennessy ad, billboard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll put it like that, yeah, he went and got the billboards and Mandrake (laughter) well, it'll last a while.  That's just like boycott, they boycott for a while, then they stop and go right back, but I'll tell ya, one--I recall one year that a boycott was 110 percent effective in the St. Louis [Missouri] area, if you'd go in to purchase a Budweiser, I don't wanna mention a brand, but this particular brand, it was 110 percent that the people wouldn't buy, but the backlash, the backlash of it was up--it was because of the backlash it was up 26 percent, this goes back twenty-some years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The price went up 26--
Speaker 2: No the backlash with the whites--
Speaker 1: Oh the back--
Speaker 2: --buying more, not buying maybe Schlitz or Pabst they'd buy Budweiser and so--
Speaker 1: Oh to counteract the black--
Speaker 2: That, that's right.
Speaker 1: --boycott.
Speaker 2: Just like the voting, it's the same thing it's a backlash.  More African Americans went out to vote this time than ever before and what happened?
Speaker 1: More whites than ever before voted.
Speaker 2: In your heartland, in all that area, Anglo-Saxon, you know, the only, only commentator I heard say anything about that one was Tom Brokaw.  But that's really what happens.
Story_ID: 251341
Speaker 1: We were talking about [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Calvin [O.] Butts, New York [New York], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that's in regards to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Olympic--upcoming Olympic Games and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well he's on the committee naturally, and I'm on the athletic committee, and there was a meeting in regards to contractors that were gonna do the work on the Lower West Side [Manhattan, New York, New York] and I just asked him, did he hear anyone say anything about an African American contractors, and he hadn't so I thought we should approach it, so, we'll see (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 251342
Speaker 1: You worked for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.]--
Speaker 1: --for Schieffelin about thirty years I guess; all total--
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirty years, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: --as a consultant and as an employee--
Speaker 2: --yeah, '62 [1962], '3 [1963] to '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Now you--as we sit--
Speaker 2: Now.
Speaker 1: --in this office--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you look around the room, there are pictures of you with everybody, I don't think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --everybody from Ed Sullivan to you name 'em, Jackie Robinson, to Bishop [Desmond] Tutu, to everybody, I don't know--look around this--Cab Calloway there's--
Speaker 2: Kofi Annan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and (laughter)--everybody's on the wall here, okay so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you met a lot of people I take it and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were able to get these, you know pretty good pictures with them and so you've really sort of networked, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, starting out in the business in the '60s [1960s], there were only five of us who became African American vice presidents, and--Harvey [C.] Russell [Jr.], Chuck Willia--Harvey Russell was Pepsi-Cola [Company; PepsiCo, Inc.], [Charles] Chuck Williams was with one of my competitors Schenley [Distillers Co.], Joe Black, you heard of him with Greyhound [Lines, Inc.], Tom Shropshire [Thomas B. Shropshire] came a little after, and myself, and Jackie Robinson if you want put him as the five 'cause he was with Chock full o'Nuts but it wasn't national.  And they put us in a--there in a position and then they didn't know what to do with us (clears throat) most of them, they went the PR [public relations] way while I went more the mechanics and developing products, and so the PR end of it, they would get more coverage, but on the inner works of the company I was really changing the bottom line not through public relations but by having fellas go out and make, and concentrate their efforts in getting placements of our portfolio.  And that's what they would do.  Chicago [Illinois] was one of our good markets, Los Angeles [California] was one, also, Atlanta [Georgia] in the South, New York [New York], naturally and sometimes a product would start on the West Coast and come east and sometimes east and go west.  But it's amazing though how Hennessy cognac, when I went to Schieffelin, Courvoisier was the number one seller in the African American community, and when I left, Hennessy was, and it has continued to escalate, continued to grow.  And you take products like Dom Perignon; Dom Perignon is a high ticket item as you know, that's champagne, and 50 percent of that is sold--distributed, in the African American community.
Story_ID: 251343
Speaker 1: --Within the African American community you bring in, you know there's psychographics, we either buy the best or the worst.  We buy the best for social reasons.  If we drive up to a corner and we're in a Mercedes [Benz] we feel equal, that's the mentality, that's carryover from, I guess, slavery, we're positioned like that and then when we can do it, go and get out, we do it.  That's just like we could tell when products in Los Angeles [California] would be consumed by people up in Hollywood, now the reason we could tell it is because a lot of the people that worked down there would come down to the bars in Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California] and Compton [California] and they ask for what they (laughter)--up there.  And as a result that's how, excuse me, that's how we started drinking the best or the worst, because of emulating, and it did--we could emulate the best because we worked in sometimes the best places, like our parents, back there during my generation they worked in leaders, you know, like [Andrew] Mellon or [Andrew] Carnegie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --they had African Americans.  Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.], the reason I started working for them, well, William Schieffelin's mother was a Vanderbilt and he never had too much contact with me, this even transcends and goes into the corporate community, so we became very good friends, and you know, he saw me in a different light and that's the only reason I think I became a vice president back in the '60s [1960s] 'cause there weren't hardly any--many, there weren't any hardly, you know, vice presidents of color and not too many of white.
Speaker 2: I think you make a good point there that we--where we meet white people in the most intimate ways is usually working for the rich and the--I know my grandmother was a maid for the mayor of Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean my great-aunt, rather.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My great-aunt, you know and people that had money, that's funny, the taste of, I don't know it's--yeah, it's a good point, it's a good point that people do either get the best or the worst.
Speaker 1: Yeah we do.  Then we can go the other way too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know--
Speaker 1: --Thunderbird and all that--
Speaker 2: --the cheaper, yeah, Old Style beer being the cheapest beer sold--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --a lotta black people drink that or they drink--
Speaker 1: The best.
Speaker 2: Heineken or somethin'.
Speaker 1: Or the best, Heineken, yeah.  That's the way our--that's our culture.  Now one of these days we're gonna level it off--
Speaker 2: A clunker or Cadillac--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that's true.  Now you take, in the '60s [1960s] and you know how many years, that's forty years ago I'd been there.  I thought that I'd become the first president of a company, major company.  But then after, you know, I started seeing the glass ceiling I said, "I don't think we'll ever be."  And, you know, this was years ago, now, we have an African American in the corporate community, the head of Time Warner [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons], the largest communication company, we have an African American, Ken Chenault, the head of American Express, [Stanley] O'Neal, the head of Merrill Lynch [& Co., Inc.], finance company, and then, you know, Franklin Raines was the number one government company on Wall Street with Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].  They built more houses and gave more loans for housing than any other organization in the country, Fannie Mae, and he was the head of that--Rhodes Scholar, they're all very qualified they're very, very, qualified academically.
Story_ID: 251344
Speaker 1: Do you still do any consulting now, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I started programs with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and there's a carryover.  And then--and I'm very close to Schieffelin [and Somerset Co.], I'm gonna be put in the New York Athletic Club, as I was telling you, on the 17th of February, and Schieffelin they support me, they'll buy a table and even one of the Schieffelins, the ninth generation of Schieffelins, see there was in 1781 they were really started, that's over two hundred years.  Officially, it was another name, but in 1794 it was officially Schieffelin and Co.  And it's the oldest company name in New York City [New York, New York] now.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: No other name is two hundred and some years like that.
Speaker 1: Are you workin' on--what are your future plans what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna write a book, you know, on all this from an athletic standpoint, family, how my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] overcame an obstacle and then from a corporate standpoint, then from a giving back.
Story_ID: 251345
Speaker 1: Now the reason I started this Jesse Owens International Trophy Award, as I told you before, he never won it.  And that really hurt him when he broke three world records and tied one in the afternoon, won four gold medals, he never won the [AAU James E.] Sullivan Award.  So that's the reason I started it.
Speaker 2: Now the Sullivan Award is a award (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For the best amateur athlete in the United States.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He never won it.
Speaker 2: Even though, now this is unbelievable, he won all those gold medals and yet did not win the Sullivan Award here in the United States (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true.
Speaker 2: --for the best amateur athlete of that year--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-six [1936]?
Speaker 1: That is right.
Speaker 2: Who won it, is it--was it--who was so much greater--
Speaker 1: [Glenn] Morris the decathlete won it in--at the year '36 [1936], the Olympic Games [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany] year, and in '35 [1935], Byron Nelson won it, a golfer, so that tells you, but we've come a long way the first one to win it was in 1954, that's a long time.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: Who won it in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Mal Whitfield, the gentleman right up on the wall over there.
Speaker 2: That's Fredricka Whitfield's father right?
Speaker 1: That's Fredricka Whitfield's father, she just had a baby last week (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she's with CNN--
Speaker 1: CNN, she used to be with Tom Brokaw, used to be with NBC--
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the 'Today' show, right.  They used to have her standing out on the beaches where the hurricanes are gonna hit.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right (laughter). Yep, they had her out there all the time, even up in Iraq (laughter), you know she was in Turkey when they bombed (laughter) she said, "I'm outta here,"  I guess.  That's all part of it, she's laying the foundation.
Speaker 2: So--well that's incredible--
Speaker 1: She's much younger than you though--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that a lot of people don't realize that Jesse Owens really was a--though they're probably not surprised, that he was, you know, shunned by or cut--shut out by some of the American organizations even though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, sure, I mean they would hire, they'd hire great athletes and he would be the best speaker.  I saw him one day at the sales executive club in New York [New York] and he came on right before [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan, and that's when Ronald Reagan was still governor of California and he was hard to follow, he definitely was.  But what I did to give back, I said, "I'm gonna do something." And I took part of my budget and I started the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award--athlete, and that's for the athlete, and we started off with Eric Heiden and we went straight through 2001, and then when Mrs. [Minnie Solomon] Owens died the kids wanted the name back, so we don't call it Jesse Owens anymore, it's called The American.  Number two, we started a peace award.
Speaker 2: So it's called the American International Trophy Award?
Speaker 1: Athlete.
Speaker 2: Athlete?
Speaker 1: The [American International] Athlete Trophy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'll show you the magazines and all that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I did that with part of my budget in the early '80s [1980s] 'cause Jesse and I were so friendly and he died in '80 [1980] and I started this in '81 [1981], started it and it's IAAA, the International Amateur Athletic Association, IAAA, that's the association, and all this is--the awards are under that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Carl Lewis has won it and Sebastian Coe, and just go on down the line all the great athletes, Olympic oriented.
Speaker 2: Okay so it's not just black athletes it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no, this is for--
Speaker 2: --a lot of international--
Speaker 1: --I, I thought it should be because--
Speaker 2: Eric Heiden was a figure skater right--speed skater--
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Sebastian Coe was a miler--
Speaker 2: Miler.
Speaker 1: --Mary Decker, Ed Moses.
Story_ID: 251346
Speaker 1: Well I'm on the boards of--my good boards is University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I strive there, I'm emeritus now, but I was on it and I still go back to the meetings, I'm on committees, affirmative action committee and also the school athletic committee.
Speaker 2: Okay, when you--what aspect of philanthropy gives you the most satisfaction?
Speaker 1: Well, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] naturally, 'cause I got both of my jobs through them because of the boycott in Chicago [Illinois], I got that job and because of the boycott here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I made the switch, but the switch was the head of Schieffelin and [Somerset] Co., I went through school with him.
Story_ID: 251347
Speaker 1: Being on the board at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] when I, believe it or not (clears throat) when I graduated in '48 [1948] the ma--there--their annual book, the way they describe me being in the[1948 Summer] Olympics [London, England] was one sentence.  They said, and incidentally, you know, Herb Douglas [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.] represented Pitt at the Olympic Games, didn't tell my event, that, that goes to show you (laughter) what we were going through during that time, it didn't mean anything.  Jesse Owens had to work in an elevator, you know, I guess [HistoryMaker] Marlene [Owens Rankin] told you all about that.  But we were, well, coming out of slavery we were property, and we're still fighting a lot of that now, we're still property but--
Speaker 2: Does seem like it sometime.
Story_ID: 251348
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The way I visualize it, number one, twenty-five or thirty years it's gonna be a beige society.  With 30 percent of the United States now being what--of color, I actually believe that we're gonna blend in and only be--it won't be the dark person like me, or the light person like Matthew [Hickey] over there, it's gonna be in between, I see it coming.  I saw it coming years ago, but now it's legal and you're gonna see more of it, so we won't have that problem in thirty years.  But leading up to that I feel as though, just like Booker T. Washington in 1881--education, we're gonna have to do really do something for our children so they can become better educated, and that never stops.  We have to be concerned about China, this is cyclical, you can see what's going on.  China they're gonna start selling cars over here, this is gonna be a country where there'll be just a marketing place where they'll sell, and I can see maybe Australia being the omnibus where whites will go and live from all over the world.  Now I know that may sound way out, but I've seen so many changes, I can believe that it can happen, because I had a guy on our board (clears throat) who was a former secretary, he's dead now, he was the secretary of the treasury of the United States, and he started concentrating in this Pacific Rim, and that was Australia, banking and what have you.  So, (laughter) I don't know, I may be way off target but I actually see it drifting toward that.  Even at the school--I did some research not long ago and I guess you know about the median income now of minorities, do you know who's on top?  What group?
Speaker 1: Probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Asians--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know who's second, Native Americans, they don't have the spread that we have, they less population, but the--I guess the gambling situation and what have you has made it a lot different for that community.  Then the Latinos are next and we're last again.  So there's something wrong, there's something wrong where--but our buying power is what, still number one, $688 billion last year, $720 odd billion, 2004, 2003, it was [$]688 and then by 2009 it's gonna be a trillion, but where are we spending it?  That's what we're gonna have to adjust, we're gonna have to adjust it and sell--buy more into education and other things.  We're still trying to prove ourselves in so many ways by buying the cars, and other things of status that makes us look, but we don't have that substance yet, like we have and we haven't, 'cause we can learn anything.  We can learn just as well as anyone and physically we can act as well as anyone.  We've proven the physical end of it, and now I think this is the tip of the iceberg by Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] being the head of the largest communication company [Time Warner], and why did he get it?  Because they weren't doing too good--too well, there was a big shake up, so he got in there and they didn't think he would last.  I don't believe that they felt--thought that he would continue, he turned the company around, so did Ken Chenault with American Express.  So we can do it, we're not only on the athletic field, we're going to show that we can do it in industry and other areas too. In anything--any place where we get equal opportunity we can do it.
Story_ID: 251349
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life and all your activities is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I would have gone to law school so I would have been able to cover myself better.  When we were going through, amongst the guys that were graduating, were going through the post office and you know being a lawyer was a criminal thing, it wasn't a corporate--and so many areas that you can go into.  That I should have gone into at that time, even if I would have been a criminal lawyer, what have you, but you have to do what you like best, and they never let me do what I wanted to do, and that was to be a coach, 'cause I thought I could have been a good coach as a corporate man or anything.  But it did transcend and I have no really regrets.  I'm happy I went into the area, the corporate community, I'm happy because I was a pioneer and I laid a foundation for others to build on.
Story_ID: 251350
Speaker 1: That leads to a question of legacy, what would you consider, at this point, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I feel as though that I've helped people and that's, in my own way.  I've helped a lot of people academically get scholarships and if Schieffelin and [Somerset] Co. if they get stuck on something, they'll come to me and ask me what my thoughts and views are, and I enjoy that, giving them my input, might not always be right, but it's not always wrong either so I find a happy medium.
Story_ID: 251351
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't asked you that you think that you need to address?
Speaker 2: Well one of the greatest men I've ever met was Paul Robeson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I respected him and his son and I, we were IC48 [ph.] champions back in 1946, he won the high jump and I won the long jump, that's Paul Robeson, Jr., so we've been kinda friends, not real, but we respect one another, he came to a couple my dinners that I have at the Waldorf [Astoria New York, New York, New York] in memory of Jesse Owens.  But Paul Robeson, I had him in my black athlete film, and I recall the producer didn't want him because he was labeled as a communist and all that, and so we had a meeting and we voted him in and he did it.  And then later on that same producer came to me and said, "Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.], you were sure 110 percent right by putting Paul Robeson in your black athlete film."  I said, "Sure, you have to be fair."  And I remember my coach telling me as we were going to the national AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] championship in '45 [1945], my coach said, "Don't patronize, don't loaf around with the Robesons."  And I said, "No."  I mean, I have the utmost respect, here's a man that's as great an actor, orator, humanitarian (laughter), I mean, I have to see it through his eyes 'cause he's got the richness of experiences to take us to another plateau.
Speaker 1: Now did you know Paul Robeson during his last years--I know he lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a small--for a short period of time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't know him then, but he lived here with his sister I know that.  No, I never got a chance to see him, I wish I had, you don't know him--but I missed it because he was really great.  And then that other man that I have a lot of respect to--for is the man right up there, Mr. Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you meet Nelson Mandela?
Speaker 2: We gave him the award [Jesse Owens International Trophy Award; American International Athlete Trophy] one year, and I came and pitched--we have it on video, excellent.  I made the pitch and I said, "You were, you were seventeen when I was fourteen, he laughed like mad, you know, and I met him and you know him but his response was, he says, "Jesse Owens, we can go any place on this planet and somebody would know about Jesse Owens."  He said, "Sports can get into places where politics can't get near."  He said, "I was an athlete," you know, that's why he got it, he was a boxer, and then what he did for peace was obvious.  And, he was just a wonderful guy.  And I really respected him, those two, of African American, I really admire, along with Jesse Owens from an athletic standpoint and a friend and a mentor and my idol, 'cause that's why I'm sitting here, 'cause I went through the athletic community, the corporate community and the academic community, I went through all three of those, and that's why I've been able to meet people on a broad spectrum.
Speaker 1: Now, somebody having been raised here as one of the great athletes of Philadelphia is Joe Frazier, did you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I know him, yeah, I got pictures of him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what are your thoughts about Joe Frazier?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I admire him, I, he just didn't have the opportunity, but look at his son, his son [Marvis Frazier] is good, his daughter [Jackie Frazier-Lyde] is a lawyer.  Fought Muhammad Ali and all that, and look at Joe Louis's son, his son right today is the head of a golf setup, what is it, Second Tee [sic. First Tee] or something like that, Joe Louis Barrow, Jr., Joe Louis's son, Joe Louis, when I would see him his mind was just as sharp as yours or mine, it's just the channel and the path, so, and the amazing thing, when I come out of school, my can was up on my shoulder and I remember going into like St. Louis [Missouri] and I met a guy there who was over Street Hotel [ph.], you know, his English was poor and everything else but he knew how to handle money.  And then I went to Atlanta [Georgia] and the leading guy down there was a number guy, and a lot of these fellows during my young days they were number people, like in your area it was who?
Speaker 1: The Jones brothers, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right, they could have been--you know who told me, he said, "Herb, if they were living today they would be good finance people."  Earle Dickson told me that.
Story_ID: 251352
Speaker 1: And I was president of the classroom [at Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I, there I am centered in the first row.
Speaker 2: And my homeroom teacher was Miss McCandless [ph.] who was on my right, facing the picture on my left in the second row.  She's, did I describe that okay?
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay in 1971 with Schief--while I was employed by Schieffelin [Somerset] and Co.  I produced a film called, 'The Black Athlete.'  Jesse Owens, the great Olympian, was the narrator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The lady next to the photo is my mother, Ilessa [France] Douglas, and she was seventy-one at the time and I am on the left of her.
Speaker 1: Next, okay.  This is my favorite.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, going back to Georgia.  Yeah, that's Gladys Knight and, I was in Tucson, Arizona, and I was one of the underwriters of a tennis tournament, and she played in the tennis tournament, and on another occasion in Las Vegas [Nevada] she took us, took me to dinner.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is an interesting photo, there I am on the left and in the middle is perhaps the greatest boxer pound for pound, Sugar Ray Robinson.  And on the right of him is a gentleman who was a pioneer in the wines and spirits community, his name is Joe Makle [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: I am shaking hands with Jackie Robinson, who needs no introduction, but I can tell you he and I performed in the same event, the long jump, had there been an Olympic Games in 1940, Jackie would have made the Olympic team.  He jumped that far, he was national collegiate champ in the long jump in 1940.
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Chancellor Mark Nordenberg is on the left of Nelson Mandela, who is center.  He received the Jesse Owens Global Award for Peace in 1999 and he was pre--it was presented to him by Mark Nordenberg, the chancellor for the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: In 2001 to the right of my wife, who is centered, Minerva [Brice Douglas], is President George Herbert Walker Bush.  He was presented the Jesse Owens Global Award for Peace.  He received it primarily because during his administration the Cold War ended and the, what was it, the Cold War ended and he was also the captain of the--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --yeah he was the captain of the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] baseball team that was runner up in the national collegiate championships.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Jesse Owens, there I am with him, he was my mentor, my friend my idol when I was a youngster, and I started the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award because he had never won an award as significant as the Jesse Owens International Athlete Trophy [American International Athlete Trophy].  He was my good friend and he really guided me to the extent that's really the reason why I was a pretty good athlete and became a corporate man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's wonderful you got to work with him, you got to know him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] where Bill Cosby was presented an award.
Speaker 1: Actually the opposite way for a change, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's back in the late '70s [1970s], Bill Cosby and I we were--we attended the NAACP convention.  He was an athlete; he was a long jumper and also played football at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those of us pictured here were all National AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] indoor champions in our event (clears throat).  I'm there with, to my right is Harrison Dillard the sprinter, who won the hundred meters in the Olympic Games in 1948 [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England] and [Dave] Bolen, who was a four hundred meter man and he won the six hundred yards indoors.  That was a maiden flight of the Pan American [World Airways] airplane called the Mayflower.  And all the others there were champions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a family photo of my sister [Ilessa] Barbara [Douglas], my mother, Ilessa, my dad, Herb Douglas Sr., and me at the age of six years old, Herb Douglas Jr. [HistoryMaker Herbert Paul Douglas, Jr.].  That was in 1929.
Story_ID: 251353
Speaker 1: That's me with Bill Clinton, President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton and he was the president.  We were at Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] and I had met him prior to that, I met him at the White House [Washington, D.C.] when they honored Wilma Rudolph and a few other athletes and I found him to be very cordial and understanding.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the emblem of the 1948 Olympic Games [1948 Summer Olympics, London, England] with the javelin--discus thrower, and it was held in London [England], that was August 14th.
Speaker 2: Okay, the next one.
Speaker 1: That's me on the podium to the right when I received a bronze medal in the long jump.  And Willie Steele was the winner and a gentleman by the name of [Theo] Bruce was the runner-up.
Speaker 2: Okay and bottom?
Speaker 1: And that's me jumping at the Olympic Games in Wembley Stadium [London, England], 1948.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My mother's [Ilessa France Douglas], my mother's funeral, when we lined up in front of her house and that's--I'm on the right and, should I name all of them?
Speaker 2: If you can, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Left to right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, left to right.
Speaker 2: Start--
Speaker 1: Yeah, my daughter-in-law, Suzie [ph.], her--my son, my grandson, Christopher [ph.], my great-grandson, Alexander [ph.], my wife, Minerva [Brice Douglas], right next to her is my grandson-in-law, Thad [ph.], and then my granddaughter, Tracy [ph.], my son, Herb III [Herbert Douglas, III], Renee [ph.] is next holding her baby.  Then my niece, Shauna [ph.], my--the gentleman in the back looking over everyone is my nephew, Douglas [ph.], then my niece's son, Scott [ph.], and then I'm on the right.  Gee that's interesting when you try to get it all together you don't get it together (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's my dad [Herbert Douglas, Sr.] one month before he passed.  He'd just gone out and taken a walk, it was winter time and that was March 8th 1978, and he was ninety-one years old, and one month later he would have been ninety-two.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my mother, she was perhaps about eighty-six or seven at that time, at my house in Wyncote, Pennsylvania.  Ilessa May Douglas, she died in 1996 at the age of ninety-six.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, start at the top one.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a display of the Olympic suit I used in 1948, also a Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] jersey and my shoes that I used in the Olympic games and that's in the Western Pennsylvania Sports Museum, and that's a part of Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, November 2004, it was opened, and the photo under that is me jumping at the University of Pittsburgh, and that's my image up on the wall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my father in 19--he was eighty years old at that time and he got--received his fifth seeing eye dog.  He was a pioneer for the guide dogs in the United States.  That dog was called Ista [ph.], and my dad, no that's Winnie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Winnie, right.
Speaker 2: --that's Winnie, yeah, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was gonna say I recognize it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, yeah, that's Winnie, I was thinking of Ista.  Yeah and he walked with this dog for something like nine years, and Winnie was very humanlike. And then up in the corner is the first dog, that's Lisa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you flip it the other way?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank You.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and his first dog was Lisa, back in 1930.  He became the oldest man walking with a seeing eye dog in the world and also the first.  He was with the pioneers.
Speaker 1: First U.S. group?
Speaker 2: Yeah first U.S. group, and by far the first African American.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, those old cars are old and--yeah, that was during the war [World War II, WWII] and they repaired them.  And there he is in his garage.  He had a four-stories car garage and it held around two hundred and some cars.  On one floor he had this repair shop and those were the people who worked for him at the repair shop.
