Story_ID: 473629
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Do I have to (laughter)?  George; Mac is the middle name, M-A-C; Duke, D-U-K-E [HistoryMaker George Duke].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not S, with an S on it like Bootsy [Bootsy Collins] said a few minutes ago.
Speaker 1: It's not Dukes.  It's Duke.
Speaker 2: It's not Dukes.  There's only one.
Speaker 1: All right.  And is there a story behind the Mac in the middle?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, I'm named for my grandfathers on both maternal and paternal sides.  My grandfather on my paternal side was Mack.  His name was Mack David Duke [Mack Duke], but it was M-A-C-K.  But however I got to be M-A-C, I don't know, but that's what my mother [Beatrice Burrell Duke] gave me.  And George [George Burrell] was my grandfather on my mom's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born in San Rafael.  That's San Rafael, California, and in 1946.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a date?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, January 12th, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: January 12th, 1946.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?  I don't know.  What is it?  (Laughter) September 17th?  It is?  Wow, how time flies.  It's almost Christmas.
Speaker 1: Two thousand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) September 17, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my recording studio, my home.  And we're actually in the s- the live room, which I call the live room, where we actually record live instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles, California.
Story_ID: 473630
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably do.  I'm kind of a pasta-farian (laughter).
Speaker 1: A pasta-farian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I like pasta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's tough.  Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Right here at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, that, that's a good one.  I've had several (laughter) that I've used over the years.  You know, there's actually a quote from the Bible that I've always ascribed to, you know, which is from Psalms, I think it's 46:10 [Psalm 46:10], which says, "Be still, and know that I am God."  Be still, you know, be still.  That, that, just that alone, those two words, you know, meant a lot to me.  I know you said a short answer, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, whole phrase, "Be still, and know that I am God," kind of cools me out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Remind you to have some patience.
Speaker 2: It means chill out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, that I'm in con- that He's in control, and you know, don't worry about it.  And so, that, that answers a lot for me.
Story_ID: 473631
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thaddeus Duke] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mom's name was Beatrice [Beatrice Burrell Duke].  That's B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Lucile.  Now here's where it gets interesting.  I've seen two spellings of her name.  I think she was originally spelled L-U-C-E-A-L.  And I don't think she liked it, and she changed it to L-U-C-I-L-E, not with two Ls, but one L, because I've seen it both ways, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Duke.  Well, actually it's Burrell, that's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  B-U-R-R-E-L-L?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, she was born in Shepherd, Texas.
Speaker 1: Shepherd?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have that all documented for you on another piece of paper.  And the date of birth is in question.  Most of the places that I've seen it, it was 1911.  But I have questions about that, and I know that early on she went through a situation about her birth certificate and all of that.  And I, I know it's somewhere between 1909 and 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she said, she claimed 1911.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what are the stories in your family that are handed down about the, your family origins on your mother's side?  How far back can you go with them?
Speaker 2: Well, the paperwork that I'm going to give you goes back a lot further.  And I probably can tell you right now something that my mom put together when I was twenty-two years old.  I think she sat down and wrote everything she could remember, you know.  And then twenty or so years later, she actually wrote an addendum to it, you know, which I'm going to give you.  My earliest memories of the family is kind of--one thing is kind of interesting.  I'll tell you one, one story which might clarify certain things.  In, on my mom's side in Shepherd, Texas, there were--and the family was very large.  There were my grandfathers and all of that who I never met were, there were about fifteen of them, you know.  I can't tell you how many boys and girls.  I just don't remember; I never met them.  And, then I've heard the names, and they kind of--and I say, oh yeah, that name I've heard.  But apparently they, after slavery, they, the family kind of split up and went in different directions.  Some wound up in Arkansas.  Some stayed in Texas.  Some wound up in Detroit [Michigan].  Some went to Colorado.  So, they went, you know, they spread out.  But two of the brothers stayed in Shepherd, Texas.  Now, here's where it gets interesting.  Apparently, one of the brothers kept the name Burrell.  You know, he decided, after slavery he decided to keep the name Burrell.  And that's my mom's side, you know, where, the line that I come from.  Then there was another one.  Let's see, how can I put this?  Let me back up just a little bit.  You know who Lyle Lovett is?  Now this is kind of interesting.  Lyle Lovett is a singer, actor, and all of that.  And I've done some work with him in the past, and I found out that he was from Shepherd, right.  So I said, "Wow, you're from Shepherd?"  He says, "Yeah, yeah, my dad's [William Lovett] from Shepherd.  We have a home there," and blah, blah, blah.  I said, "Really?  That's where my mom is from."  So we were doing, we were doing 'The Tonight Show,' right.  I'm playing 'The Tonight Show.'  And so I said, "I'm going to ask my mom about this."  I came back and I called my mom on the phone.  I said, "Ma, I just was playing on the show with Lyle Lovett, and he said he's from Shepherd, Texas."  She said, "Oh, that must be Papa Lovett's son."  I said, "Papa Lovett?  Who's Papa Lovett?"  She said, "Oh, he was a good man."  She said quote unquote, he was a good white man.  He had, they were slaves, but she said that once the slaves were freed, part of our family decided to stay on and work for him, and they took on his name.  So, there's a line of Lovetts that's a black line that's actually part of my family, but they took on that name.  Now, that's kind of in- it blew Lyle's mind.  I called and told him, I said, "My mom knows your dad."  You know, and it goes on from there.
Story_ID: 473632
Speaker 1: And so, that, that's where it got kind of interesting.  And then there's another line of what's called--they took on the name Pitts.  They kind of changed their name, you know.  So there was--as far as I know, there was three, there different lines.  There were the Burrells, who kept that name.  There were the Lovetts, who were actually brothers.  And then there were Pitts, P-I-T-T-S, and I don't know any of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I--
Speaker 2: --it probably make it kind of difficult to trace everybody, I guess.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, with fifteen of them.  And then in my mom's [Beatrice Burrell Duke] immediate family, see, there were nine.  So, you know, there were what?  Five brothers and four sisters.  And so, those I knew, except for one who died before I was born.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that's kind of--and now I've forgot your question (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I was asking you about the origin of the family and what stories are passed down.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The only other story that was kind of--it was kind of--that was definitely one story that was kind of interesting, that my mom clarified for me.  I know that there's definitely some Indian [Native American] blood involved on my mom's side and also on my dad's [Thaddeus Duke] side.  Apparently my dad, his father [Mack Duke] was part black and part white, he was mixed.  And there's some Indian blood within the family, which was Cherokee.  And he was born in Carthage, Texas, my dad.  I know you--maybe I shouldn't--maybe I'm getting ahead of myself.  But you said you were going to ask me about my maternal side.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I am going to ask--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll handle that later then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, anyway there was one story my mom told me, and I can't remember who it was.  I'm not sure if it's in the paperwork or not.  But it was one of the grandmothers that was actually hanged, you know, which was an unfortunate--it was a source of real, like, aggravation for my mom, you know.  I remember she used to talk about it, but I don't remember which one it was.
Speaker 2: So, this is one of your mother's grandmothers?
Speaker 1: I believe so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was actually, was actually lynched?
Speaker 1: Was actually lynched, yeah.  And one of the brothers, George [George Burrell], was actually--who I wasn't named for.  This was my mom's brother, who was actually killed in a shoot-out in a nightclub or something.  But everyone is gone now except for two brothers who are still alive.  There's a brother Quinto [Quinto Burrell] who passed on, who I met once, maybe twice, big tall guy, you know, and dark-skinned.  All my mom's family was basically very dark, you know, there's more African side.  My dad's side was more, was lighter, and obviously mixed.  But there was a brother, Quinto; the brother, Warren [Warren Burrell] who lives in Louisiana now, who, he's still alive; a brother, James [James Burrell] which is the youngest brother, who's still alive; and the brother, George who was killed.  And then there was my Aunt Rebecca [Rebecca Burrell Cochran], my Aunt Grace [Grace Burrell Jeffrey] who died when she was very young, my Aunt Lillian [Lillian Burrell Bedford], and Viola [Viola Burrell Simmons] who died before I met her.  So, there were a bunch of them.  And I did get a chance to meet all of them except for Viola.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 473633
Speaker 1: --Is there any story about why your, your mother's [Beatrice Burrell Duke], your great-grandmother was lynched?  Was there a story as to why?
Speaker 2: She--no, not to my knowledge, not t- not to my knowledge.  I just know that it was a source of serious aggravation.  And I think that that alone, and a lot of other things--my mom was high-strung, you know.  And all of the ladies in the family were kind of like that.  The guys were more, seemed to me were more passive, you know, more tolerant.  But the ladies, especially my mom, she was like hard-nosed.  She just didn't take nothing from nobody.  And she, if you did something to her, she was going to tell you about it; she didn't care if she was going to get hurt or not.  And so I think that that lynching, whatever that was, stayed with her the rest of her life and affected the way she felt about, about Caucasians.  It felt--her whole demeanor changed as a result of that lynching.  And--
Speaker 1: She, she knew her grandmother then?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  She was closer to my Aunt Hannah [Hannah Dirden], who was--you'll see in the paperwork that I'm giving you--was a source of tremendous inspiration to my mom.  But I think singlehandedly that lynching, that, that set the tone for her life.
Story_ID: 473634
Speaker 1: So di- was she [Duke's mother, Beatrice Burrell Duke] raised in Shepherd--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Texas?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she go to school there and everything?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to school there, and graduated from high school.  And basically during the war, she met my mom I guess in Longview [Texas] or Houston [Texas], somewhere there, and they got married.  And--
Speaker 1: She met your father [Thaddeus Duke]?
Speaker 2: She met my father, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And they moved to California--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during the war, because there were job opportunities to work in the shipyards [San Francisco Naval Shipyard, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she moved around 1941, you say?
Speaker 2: I think it was--that's a good question.  I think she moved around 1944.
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], okay.
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere--it was towards the end of the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She moved to San Rafael [California], or--?
Speaker 2: She, well, she moved to a place called Marin City [California].
Speaker 1: Marin City.
Speaker 2: It was an area, it was a World War II [WWII] housing area where they put all the people of color.  That's where they had to live to work in the shipyards.  My dad worked in the shipyards, so he, by trade was a mechanic, an auto mechanic.  And my mom was a schoolteacher, she taught in the elementary school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother went to, did she go, get a chance go to college?  Did she go to teachers college?
Speaker 2: She went to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Oh, San Francisco State, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did go there, yeah.  She got her teaching credential.  She never graduated as far as I can remember, but she was teaching school, basically elementary.  And then she did some subbing in some of the higher grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because I know in those days you could get a two-year degree you would be a teacher, a normal degree or something to teach perhaps (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Maybe you know more than me.  I don't know.  I know she had her teacher--which was a big thing, because she always wanted me to get my teaching credentials.  "No matter what you do, you know, get your teaching credentials so you'll always have something to fall back on."
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a time when you could get a two-year normal degree, they called it, a teacher's degree, and teach without having to finish a bachelor's [degree].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In some places of the country you know.  A lot of--especially down south you could do that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Well, she had her teaching credential in Texas.  But then she, she had to get one in California.  So I think she had to renew, she ha- needed to take some courses in order to fulfill that obligation.  So she, she went to San Francisco State College.
Story_ID: 473635
Speaker 1: Give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's--here's another good one.  (Laughter) Thaddeus, that's T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S [Thaddeus Duke].  And then he has an, what I thought all these years was an Indian [Native American] name, which now seems like it's a Polish name.  It's Kosciusko.  And apparently--and then Duke.  And I did, about a year ago, I did a little study.  I looked it up, and I found that there was a town named Kosciusko [Mississippi].  And I was like, "Really?"  Or Kosciusko, some people call it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Mississippi, right.
Speaker 2: And then I found out that this was a Polish general from World War I [sic. American Revolution] or something that worked closely with the president and all of that.  And I said, well, this couldn't be a coincidence.  And then I found out that Oprah Winfrey was from there.  And then I said, oh, this is a place."  So I said this guy's name--a Polish general.  It was Tadeusz Kosciuszko, whatever it was.  And I said it couldn't be a coincidence.  But I never could go any further than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kosciusko, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: On the Pearl River down there.
Speaker 2: So, you know.  Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my in-laws are from Carthage [Mississippi], which is the next town down--
Speaker 2: No kidding.
Speaker 1: --off of the highway, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was just shocked.  I didn't know that there was a town called that.  And so anyway--and that was my dad's name.  He was born in Carthage.
Speaker 1: Okay, Carthage, Texas.
Speaker 2: Texas.
Speaker 1: Which is interesting, because Carthage, Mississippi is right next to Kosciusko, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you know more than me (laughter).
Speaker 1: No.  Well, we're putting it together, we're putting it together.
Speaker 2: I've never been to Carthage.  Yeah, I've never been there.
Speaker 1: Carthage, Texas.  Okay, all right.  So, what are the stories from your father's side about the family?  Did they pass down any stories about--?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not as far as I could with my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke].  I mean obviously, you know, my mom was the historian of the family.  Because she kept as accurate records as she could possibly remember, and actually put a family tree together along with some personal letters that she left for me, you know, to have, which, which I'm actually copying for you.  My dad's side is a little different, very large family.  As far as stories, I don't remember much.  My dad was--and we weren't close.  You know, he was an auto mechanic, a good guy, but prone to the bottle, and, and that got the better of him in the end.  And so, that's why eventually my mom, you know, divorced him.
Story_ID: 473636
Speaker 1: 'Bout how old were you when they divorced then?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, it's--well, basically by the time I got there, I think I was around four or five years old.  You know, my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] said she was--you know, that was it; she had had it.  She was, you know, all the things that you can think about when you're dealing with someone that's basically a quote unquote drunk, you know, who comes in, you know, with all of that.  I won't go into details of all of that.   She, I cried.  As a matter of fact, I remember.  You know, I said, "Oh, I don't want my daddy [Thaddeus Duke] to leave the house," blah, blah, blah, blah.  She says, "Okay, I'm going to keep him--," I distinctly remember, she says, "I'm going to keep him here until you're old enough to understand."  She says, "He can live here," she says.  "But when you're twelve years old," she said, "I think you'll be old enough to understand he's out of here."  And when I hit twelve years old, he was out of there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he did stay until you were--
Speaker 2: He stayed until I was twelve.  Well, yeah, it was kind of a traumatic--it was really traumatic, I mean essentially what happened as he came home one night.  And this is kind of a tragic story for me, because I had to--you know, he--normally he was a passive drunk, just, you know, he would just pass out, you know.  I mean, you could smell him coming; everything you could think about when you think about it.  And it was a terrible situation because when he was sober he was a totally different guy, wonderful person, you know, wonderful light-hearted guy, you know.  But when he drank, normally he was passive.  But for whatever reason, he was not on this one time.  And he came in and he actually assaulted my mom.  So, I was twelve years old, and I never will forget.  I said, man, this is getting serious.  You know, I felt that her life was threatened, and I said I have to do something.  So I--and I never forgot it.  But I actually had to attack him, you know, at twelve years old.  And I distinctly remember hitting him, and he eventually--you know, he was drunk, so he fell over.  But he was still strong, stronger than me, you know.  So he fell over, and eventually, you know, he left the house.  You know, but that was the straw that broke the camel's back.  And I remember that was the last night that he was going to be in the house, and my mom said, "He will not come back in this house."  She says, "You're old enough to understand," and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we tri- I actually tried to reconcile with him later, because you know, I knew that there was, it was a disease essentially.  It was not, I don't think that was really him.  And a lot of the people on my dad's side of the family thought I would never forgive him.  But that's, you know, I learned early on to let that stuff go, you know.  I couldn't, I couldn't hold to that kind of stuff, you know, otherwise it was going to eat me up.  And so essentially I have forgiven him, and I understand what that can do to people.  And, but he never got pass it, so we never were close.  When he moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I used to come down and see him; I'd play down there.  And I tried to develop a relationship; I tried to take my kids [John Shiffer and Rashid Duke] out to see him.  But I could tell he just, he just wasn't interested.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 473637
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents have told you, or your mother [Beatrice Burrell Duke] told you, about how she and your father [Thaddeus Duke] met?
Speaker 2: I'm sure she did, and I don't remember.  I'm being honest, I couldn't tell you.  But I probably, I probably could find out, because there's still some nieces that are around that were very close to my dad that would know him.  Most of the people from my mom's side, I don't know if they would know or not, because they were living in Houston [Texas].  Actually James [James Burrell] might know, my uncle who's still around.  I could probably find out.
Speaker 1: So they met in Houston?
Speaker 2: As far as I know.  I think it could have been Longview [Texas] because Longview--it was Longview and Houston, somewhere in there.  They lived for a while in Longview.  My mom was teaching school and my dad was fixing cars, that's kind of what he did; he used to tinker around with cars.  He'd fix any car and make it work.  But the job opportunities on the West Coast were too strong, so that's why they decided to move.  And that's, and consequently I was born out here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --dispositions.  And I mean, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, I definitely take after my mom.  I mean it's because I was around her more, you know.  My mom--see, here's the interesting thing.  My mom was very Afrocentric. For the time, you know, it was before people started wearing African headdresses, and African clothes and stuff.  My mom wore that stuff, you know.  And she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so really--now, I remember distinctly when people were not doing it.  And that would have been--but she was--?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was doing it in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, she would wrap up in one of these things and, you know, I don't know what they called them back then.  But she would be very--I said, "Man, you look like an African princess."  You know, and she would see something in a magazine she'd like, and she'd go get some material and make her an outfit that looked like that.  She always wanted me to be aware of my, where I come from, you know.  And that's why family was so important to her, almost more important than anything else.  She wanted me to know who my family was.  And I didn't, I didn't follow that trail, you know, the way she did, because she was obsessed with it, you know.  She said, "I want you to know who your family are," and blah, blah, blah.  And like she'd leave me messages like, "Okay, this is Uncle Reuben [Reuben Burrell].  He did this and he did that.  And he did this for you," blah, blah.  "Just make sure to keep him in your prayers.  Remember him."  Blah, blah, blah.  Now, she would take me to see anything out of what, this little ghetto area that we lived in, you know.  She would take me to see concerts, ballet, classical music, R and B shows, jazz shows.  And that's what launched my career, when she took me to see Lionel Hampton and Duke Ellington.  And that's how I got first involved with music, you know, and listening to jazz from my uncle's little Victrola he had.  He had these, these, what are those--one of those acts--I can't--Woody Herman.  He had this Woody Herman record and Count Basie records on 78s [78 rpm record] that I used to spin, that were absolutely amazing.  And that's my mom's sister.  And I have some pictures of him as well.  Grace [Grace Burrell Jeffrey], who I loved tremendously, she was the youngest sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there any--I mean when you think about your mother's family--was she, being Afrocentric in those days, it just makes me wonder if--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if they had a history in the Garvey movement or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  I mean, I know, I had, I had some family in politics.  Barbara Jordan was a cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that was, you know--and I actually got a chance to meet her.  She came to one of our family reunions.  She didn't stay long, but she came and she ate, because my Aunt Lil [Lillian Burrell Bedford] was a tremendous cook.  And so, she cooked all this food.  And there were people who I never met before.  They were all cousins, aunts, uncles, all these people.  But I was very young, and I got a chance to meet her, and eventually found out who she was.  I said, wow, this was a very well-spoken, intelligent woman.
Speaker 1: One of those Phillis Wheatley High School graduates.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  So that, but other than that (shakes head) no.
Story_ID: 473638
Speaker 1: Are you related at all to [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke?
Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're interviewing him tomorrow I think, or the next day.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, at one point I actually spoke with Bill Duke about this.  I said, "I wonder if we're related."  But I never really tried to figure it out.  But I don't think he feels we are, and maybe we're not.  It's just interesting, because most people I know are Dukes, and not Duke.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So, it's kind of interesting.  And even the fact that my grandfather, his name was Mack David Duke [Mack Duke], you know, which made me want to--I said, wait, is he related to David Duke?  (Laughter) You know, what's up here?  I said, I hope not (laughter).  But I began wondering certain things about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, tell me this.  Now, what--do you have--?
Speaker 2: And there're other artists involved too.  You know I mean--I'm sorry, I didn't mean to break in.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, go ahead, yeah.
Speaker 2: But there's a--what's his name?  He's also one of my cousins.  Now see, you've put me on the spot.  Lando Calrissian [Billy Dee Williams].  What's his name?  You know, actor.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, I forgot his name, and I can't think of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can see his face.  Yeah, the sex symbol guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And as a matter of fact I'll see him not too long.  The brain--see when you get old--it's early senility.
Speaker 1: It's true, because I should be able to pull his name right up, and I can't pull it up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's been around.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he doesn't live too far from here, at least he (unclear).  I don't see him very often, but he's a distant cousin.
Speaker 1: See, we came with the 'Star Wars' name, but not his name (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Lando, I remember.  It's crazy.  I will before this is over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, so there're others.  And Cleanhead Vinson [Eddie Vinson] was a cousin who's a saxophonist.  So, there are musicians in the family.  My aunt played a little bit.  And of course [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves is a cousin.  She's one of the ones from Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grew up in that area.  So, there are some artists.
Speaker 1: Are you related to [HistoryMaker] Charles Burrell too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, Charles, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because we interviewed--
Speaker 2: You know Charles?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed Charles Burrell in Denver.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Charles is my cousin.  He's--
Speaker 1: Bass player.
Speaker 2: He played--I found out there's a story behind that, you know.  I know I might be jumping ahead, but when I was a teenager just graduated from high school [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California], I went to the San Francisco Conservatory of Music [San Francisco, California] as a freshman.  And I picked up the, I picked up the--what do you call it?  The catalog, or whatever you call it with all the names of the teachers who were in the school.  And I said, "Charles Burrell, that's my mom's maiden name."  I went home and said, "Mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke], there's somebody named Charles Burrell teaching in the school here."  She said, "Oh, child, that's your cousin."  I said, "Really?"  So I went back over to the school the next day, I looked him up.  And he says, "Oh, yeah, George [HistoryMaker George Duke].  How you doing?"  And we started talking.  He was playing the San Francisco Symphony at the time.  And he'd come over every Sunday, every Sunday that he could.  He'd drive over in his little Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz].  He had this little old Mercedes, a little green Mercedes.  Drive up to the--we lived in the projects then.  He'd drive up to 59 Cole Drive, Apartment 10 [Sausalito, California].  I remember it, unbelievable.  And I had this little room, and he'd come up and bring his bass, and we would play 'til, 'til he got tired.  You know, he would teach me, (unclear) me.  He said, "No, don't do this.  Do that."  And he's the one that kind of singlehandedly told me that--when I couldn't decide if I wanted to play classical music or play jazz, he singlehandedly directed me towards jazz.  He says, "Your talents come, you know, rely in playing jazz."
Story_ID: 473639
Speaker 1: Anytime I go there to play, you know, some, some of the younger ones, they're younger than me, you know, they come around and I see them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Billy Dee Williams you're related to.
Speaker 1: Billy Dee, thank you.
Speaker 2: Billy Dee Williams.  I finally, it finally came to me and I wrote it down.  Okay, yeah, we were talking about Billy Dee Williams.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we were mentioning his stage role as Lando--
Speaker 1: Lando Calrissian [in 'Star Wars']--
Speaker 2: --his stage role as Lando Calrissian.
Speaker 1: Lando Calrissian or whatever (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.  (Laughter) It's funny we should remember--
Speaker 1: Billy Dee.
Speaker 2: --an intergalactic fictional name, and not his real name.  But that's, yeah, Billy Dee Williams.  So he's a cousin on your mother's [Beatrice Burrell Duke] side?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a talented side of the family, it seems with--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: As we recount, Eddie "Cleanhead" Vinson [Eddie Vinson], [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, [HistoryMaker] Charles Burrell, Billy Dee Williams--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --all on that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 1: And Barbara Jordan, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a talented side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, among others, you know.  There's, you know, actually--and there is another one who I should mention who is a Burrell, who is the rapper from Oakland [California], you know, that lost all the money.
Speaker 2: Oh, not, not the Hammer?
Speaker 1: Yes, MC Hammer.
Speaker 2: MC Hammer's a Burrell too?
Speaker 1: He's a Burrell [Stanley Burrell].
Speaker 2: Oh, gee whiz, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know a lot of people wouldn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Hammer was something, you know, when he was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when he was in his day, he was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he's a preacher now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's--yeah, we talk about.  We were at BET [Black Entertainment Television] one day, and we were sitting and talking.  I said, "Hey, man, my mom told me we're cousins."  So we started talking and he said, "Oh, yeah, yeah, my aunt," blah, blah, blah.  And there it was.  I never really knew him, still don't know him well.  But he's a younger cousin.
Speaker 2: That's certainly a creative side of the family.  I mean, art runs in the family.
Story_ID: 473640
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah in the family, you know.
Speaker 2: I would have to say--in the family?  Well, in the family, well, you know, my earliest childhood memory is my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] taking me to concerts, you know.  It just, it just is.  And that was family just in terms of my mom, you know, wanting me to be exposed to various things of an art nature, you know.  She would take me to see Duke Ellington, she'd take me to see Lionel Hampton, Leontyne Price, you know, whoever she thought was artistic, you know.  And so, and course her taking me to see Duke Ellington is what messed me up.  You know, and I can't, I can't tell you exactly what it was.  But my earliest memory is that, really.  It's sitting at the Presidio [Presidio of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] and watching Duke Ellington's band, and seeing this guy do something with his hands (gesture).  I was just four or something years old.  And I later found out he was playing the piano, and then every now and then he would wave (gesture).  And I found out he was conducting, but I didn't know for a long time.  I said I didn't know what he was doing.  Every time he'd wave his hands, he'd do something like put his hands down, and something would happen in the band.  Like (makes sounds)--something would happen.  And I didn't know what it was, didn't understand it.  But I was like, wow.  And his name was Duke, you know.  Well, later I found out that wasn't his real name, but they called him Duke, so I thought he was a relative, you know.  "Ma, uncle?" You know, no, no, no, we're not related.  But he was a well-dressed guy, spoke very eloquently, but at the same time he sounded like some of the guys in the neighborhood, you know.  Because he had those other kind of--hip, jive, those kind of words that I used to hear down on the porch where I lived when I was little, because we used to live in the World War II [WWII] housing.  Not to go backwards, but there were five units to a flat kind of thing, with kerosene heaters, you know, and only one kerosene heater in the center of the apartment.  And so, it'd get cold up in San Francisco [California] sometimes, you know.  But anyway, he sounded like those guys that I'd hear on my porch, you know.  And it was a liquor store around there, and a grocery store and a little gas station, you know.  That was kind of a country town thing.  So, I wanted to be that guy.  I told my mom, I said, "I can, I can be him."  I saw myself as him, and, though I didn't understand the music; it was beyond me.  But the idea of him is what I liked.  He was a man in control, he seemed to be controlling his own destiny.  And other people were, they were clapping; people were happy to see him.  I said, wow, I want to do that.  And of course, years later I wound up being able to do that.  So that's a, that's a blessing, seriously.
Speaker 1: So your mother would take you to these concerts?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now--
Story_ID: 473641
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: Just me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was an only child.  My mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] tried earlier on when she was in Texas, but that child was, you know, it didn't happen.  So she was worried with me because she was already thirty-one, thirty-two when she had me.  So she was concerned, you know, because it was a late childbirth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think I turned out okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, for those days, maybe it seemed like it was late.  Nowadays it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not--it doesn't seem to be as big a deal.  I guess medicine is better these days.  But now, can you describe--like did you grow up in the same house, you know, the whole time, or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: No, we moved.  When I first was born in Marin City [California], when I went to see Duke Ellington, we were living in that, that--well, I don't even know what to call it.  There were five units to a building, you know, and they were on the flat part of the ground.  So it's mud, and there was a porch.  I've got pictures of me on the porch with my mom, you know, and you can kind of really see what it's about.  And they had a little barbershop there and all of that.  But we moved eventually to another place, which was like a house on stilts.  I believe it was, I don't remember the name of the street, but I remember the number was 371, that's all I remember.  And it was, you know, a very small community of southern people, mostly blacks.  There were a few Latinos and a few whites, you know, poor people didn't have a lot of money; workers that worked in one of the shipyards generally.  And so we lived at 371, and then we moved to the projects.  When they built the projects, I was already a teenager by that time, and I was going to high school [Tamalpais High School] in Mill Valley, California.  And that's when I met Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Burrell].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that's when I was in high school.  And the projects--we didn't know.  I thought the projects were the savior of the--I said, wow, the projects.  Oh, they're new buildings.  You know, because the old buildings, I used to--instead of five units on a porch, the 371 where I lived were like, they were on poles with a basement.  But they were up, and they were--the doors, there were two units, and each one, the back-end faced each other.  You know, it was like the doors were on opposite ends, the front door.  And so in this one place, my room was right next to this guy who used to play jazz.  And he used to play this--I used to hear the bass (makes sounds).  And the bass used to resound, you know, through my room.  My room was right there, the walls were thin.  It was right there, you know.  He'd be in there, and if I wasn't hearing the music, I was hearing him banging some chick over there or something, you know.  I could hear the girl, "Oh, oh, oh," or whatever was going on over there.  Anything that was going on in there in his bedroom, I could hear.  But the thing that really got me was the music.  I was like, man, this is like--th- you know, I don't know what it is.  This is jazz.  Didn't quite sound like Duke Ellington, you know, because his was a different brand of jazz.  But I was into that, and that got me into jazz.  And I'll just go on with the story and then I'll end it.  I--when I was, what?  Ten years old, eleven, I took the bus to San Rafael [California], which is about seven miles north of Marin City.  Marin City was the town where I was, where I grew up.  That was the little ghetto town where all the blacks had to stay.  I drove the bus, went in the record store and asked the man--he said, "What would you like?  Can I help you?"  I said, "Yeah, I'd like some jazz."  So he said, "Well, who would you like?"  I said, "I don't know."  So, you know, he says, "Well, go look over there under D.  There's a lot of guys, a lot of people seem to like this guy named Davis."  I said, "Davis, okay."  So I went thumbing through the Ds and I came up on, you know, this thing, this cover.  And it was Miles Davis, and I came up on this cover that 'Kind Of-' it was 'Kind of Blue.'  And it was a real dark cover with this brooding guy on it.  And I said, okay, let me get that.  So I took that; a big album you know, not CDs, you know, LPs.  I took it to the register and said, "I'll take this."  I paid the money and got back on the bus, and went and played it on my little record player that I had that I bought from st- from Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  (Laughter) And it changed my life, changed my life.  I had never heard any music like this.
Speaker 1: This is a classic Miles Davis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Everybody says this is probably his best CD ever.
Speaker 2: It just changed my life.  You know, whether the guy next door who was playing the jazz--this was different than that.  This was different than Duke Ellington.  It totally messed me up.  So, I knew then.  I said, jazz is really wide open.  This is about a lot of different kinds of things.  So I said, I got a lot to learn here.
Speaker 1: So ten years old and you were into 'Kind of Blue,' and you could appreciate that?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had sophisticated musical taste then (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know what it was.  I had no idea, I had no idea what it was.
Speaker 1: But you liked it though.  That's what I'm--
Speaker 2: I liked it, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: That meant that you had cultivated an ear for something different, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did well, I heard--I used to--my mom every Sunday, you know, it would be Mahalia Jackson and The Caravans, you know, all the--The Staple Singers--not The Staple Singers.  It was all of the gospel groups of the time, you know, The Caravans, the gospel Caravans, and all of those people, a lot of Mahalia Jackson.  My mom loved Mahalia Jackson.  So that was always there.  And I used to hear the R and B during the week, you know, whoever, The Coasters, The Drifters, whoever, you know; all those doo wop kind of groups.  But the jazz, I don't know, I can't tell you what drew me to it.  It's just, it just, it just did, just did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 473642
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, other than my dad [Thaddeus Duke] (laughter) that was not a good smell.  But that was one of them, and one that I definitely remember in terms of smells.  In terms of smells, when I lived in 371 [Apartment 371] I could--the dampness on the ground, because there was no pavement, it was all dirt.  So in the basement, you know, the water--you could see the water just drip down.  And I made--my dad was also like a, he used to do a lot of work with wood.  And so I kind of, kind of fell into that, though I didn't pursue it, you know.  Where I built what I called a shop, you know, and I got, found whatever pieces of wood I could find.  And I built a shop in the basement where I could kind of have a little haven for me and my friends.  I used to say, "Let's go the shop," you know.  So we'd go hang out down there and just talk and dream.  And the smells that we had in there were basically of whatever was in the basement, you know.  Mostly I remember wet dampness, you know.  In terms of the sights, you know, Marin City [California] was a community in the true-- what they call I guess African sense in many ways.  You know, it was a village of people that raised the kids.  I mean if I screwed up across town, I might get whipped two or three times before I got home.  And no, and there was no telephone, and I don't know how my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] knew I messed before I got there.  I said, how is she going to know?  You know, but word had a way of getting around.  You know, all the way the home they said, "Oh, you're going to get it when you get home.  Oh, you're going to get it."  I mean, how do they know what I did?  I, I never understand that.  I still don't understand it today, you know.  And I remember--I remember (laughter) before television, you know, when there was no television.  I remember, you know, getting my first black and white TV--black and white TV with the--you know, and then eventually, you know, color TV.  When that came in, that was a whole different thing.  I remember before telephones, party lines, which most people--probably kids nowadays think a party line is a line to call to find out where the next party is.  But I remember party lines, with four or five different families on the phone.  You know, you're dialing out, and finally when you had a dial--when you had a dial--because there were phones, you know, didn't have a dial.  You had to call the operator (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, several families shared the same phone?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or phone number?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, and you'd get on, and somebody else would be talking.  "Get off the phone, Judy.  You know, I got an emergency."  It was just crazy.  And you wanted to find out who you were going to be on the line with, because sometimes people were more on the line than others, or just crazy and take up all the time.  And eventually, I remember we got the little phone where you could dial your own number.  That was like amazing.  So, those were some of the sights I remember.  I mean it's--yeah.
Story_ID: 473643
Speaker 1: Now where did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a beautiful area, too.
Speaker 1: Marin City [California]?
Speaker 2: Let me mention that too.
Speaker 1: Marin City?
Speaker 2: I mean, because it was right off the water.  It was near Sausalito, California, it's a beautiful area right now.  Marin City is a prime property, you know.  It's not--it was owned by the government, but then eventually--it's very integrated now, you know.  And, but the projects are still there.  I just passed by a couple of weeks ago.
Speaker 1: And to be fair, in those days the projects, a lot of people were fighting to get into the projects.
Speaker 2: Oh, we fought to get in them, well, yeah.  Because my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke]--yeah, I can distinctly remember you couldn't make over a certain amount, you know, or you couldn't get in the projects.  But we wanted to be in the projects, you know.  And so I think you had to, you couldn't make more than thirty dollars, thirty-five dollars a month or something.  And so, I don't know what my mom did, but we got in there, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: It was hard times, you know.  My dad [Thaddeus Duke], he made like eighty, eighty-five dollars a month, I mean a week, you know, at the shipyards [San Francisco Naval Shipyard, San Francisco, California].  And then he might take fifty dollars and go drink and then give my mom thirty dollars.  You know, she had to buy food, gas, whatever, you know, to last.  So, it was tough.  But by the time we moved in the projects, my dad was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were about twelve then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When I was twelve years old, like I said, he was out.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you first start grade school?  What was your first grade school?
Speaker 2: Marin City elementary [Marin City School, Marin City, California], okay, and I went to kindergarten school there as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mom was teaching there as well.  She taught not, not kindergarten, but she taught first, second, third grade, somewhere in there.  She would--it would change from time to time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Fair, fair, I mean average.  You know, once I got to grade school and found out that--and I started studying piano when I was seven.  So, I finally convinced my mom to get a piano that she bought for fifteen dollars from a family friend.  And she put it in, and I started taking lessons right away from a lady named Wyna Barrett [ph.] who lived up the street from me.  And--
Speaker 1: So, was that your idea at age seven?  Did you want to play the piano?  Did you tell her to--?
Speaker 2: Oh, right after I left that Duke Ellington concert, I imposed on my mom, saying, "I want to do this."  And she talked to some people and they said, "You know what?  We think he's too young.  That he shouldn't start right now, because he's--."  I was really little.  And he says, "Your feet don't touch the ground, you know."  He said, "You should wait until your muscles develop a little more."  So by the time I was seven, I finally convinced her.  I mean, I always knew I either was going to--I wanted to be a doctor.  I used to have these little--they used to have these little play doctor kits, which as a kid I used to play around with, or either music.  But I had no piano, you know.  And I said I want to do what that guy named Duke, whatever his name was, whatever he did, you know.  So, eventually she got the piano and I--you know, and that's it.  I've been playing ever since, and I was seven years old.
Speaker 1: So, what kind was it?  What kind of piano did she get?
Speaker 2: Oh, god.  I think--you know what?  I think it was called a Kohler [Kohler and Campbell].  I can be wrong, though; K-O-E-H-L-E-R [sic.].  That's a good question.  I might have some pictures with that piano.  I haven't thought about that in a long time.  I have to look (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it one of those upright pianos?
Speaker 2: Upright.
Speaker 1: The kind that's in the church basement and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And people--and in schools, and--?
Speaker 2: It was upright.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She paid fifteen dollars for it, and they brought it in.  And I thought heaven had moved into my house.
Story_ID: 473644
Speaker 1: And she says, "Look, if I do this--."  'Cause sh- fifteen dollars was a lot of money.  She said, "If I do this, you're going to have to make a commitment, you know, that you're going to practice."  She said, "You've got to practice thirty minutes a day, you know."  And she said, "I'll give you the weekend off."  (Laughter) Because we go to church on Sunday, and that was all day.  And then Saturdays, you know, you can go out and play.  But she says, "Five days a week you got to put in that half hour day."  And of course, you know, it got tough.  Because I could hear the kids out, you know.  There were no computer games; they were out there playing marbles, you know, or basketball.  And I was really, I loved playing basketball and I loved playing marbles.  And I could hear them out there; I could hear the laughter, you know.  And they were shooting the balls, "Hey."  And I'd be in there like (makes sounds).  And then after a while, because I was playing the piano, the kids would say, "Hey, come on, sissy," you know.  'Cause--they called me a sissy because I was in there practicing.  Well, you know, you know, it worked out for me.  (Laughter) Maybe they're still playing marbles, I don't know.  But I'm glad my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] made me.  You know, and then she didn't have to really push me, because I wanted to practice.  But by the thir- second or third year, it started getting tough, and I actually thought about quitting.  I said, "This is too hard, you know, to play this music."  I had to do things with both hands.  And I almost quit.
Speaker 2: So you were about ten years old when the pressure started hitting you, I guess?
Speaker 1: It started hitting me hard, it hit me hard.  And by the time--yes.  And, but by the time I was in gram- in grammar school, elementary school [Marin City School, Marin City, California], which would have been fourth grade through eighth grade, that was what it was at the time.  They didn't have any middle school at that time; it was fourth through eighth.  High school started in ninth grade.  By that time, they had an orchestra there, and I went and I wanted to be involved in music.  But the teacher told me that they didn't have any room for a pianist.  Said, "Do you play anything else?"  I said, "No."  I said "Well, I really want to take a music class, you know."  They said, "Well, we have an opening for a cello."  I said, "What's that?"  So she said, "See that thing over there?"  So I got it, and I started playing it, you know.  And I said, "Okay, I'll play it."  Anything.  I just wanted to be in the orchestra and learn.  So, I started playing this thing.  I got pictures of me when I was like twelve or thirteen playing this doggone cello.  And I tri- but I couldn't stand the A string.  It just, it sounded awful to me; it just like, it made my skin crawl.  So when I got in high school [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California], you know, they said, "We hear you play cello."  I said, "No, no, no, no.  What else do you have?"  I said, "I still can't play piano?"  They said, "No, we don't have any--nothing for piano."  They said, "We need a trombone player."  I said trombone; I knew what that was.  So she says, "Here."  They gave me a trombone, I started playing trombone and I played trombone all through college [San Francisco Conservatory of Music, San Francisco, California].  As a matter of fact, I have a bachelor's in music in trombone.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Most people don't know that.
Speaker 2: I was reading that.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I have a bachelor's.  So I played trombone in marching band.  And baritone horn.
Story_ID: 473645
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have a favorite teacher in, in school?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  Absolutely.  There was a guy, his name was Bob Greenwood [Robert Greenwood].  That was in school.  Of course, my private teacher, his name was Sir Jules Haywood.  And he was amazing.  I studied with him for ten years or so; piano, private lessons.
Speaker 2: Sir Jules Haywood.  Now this is a black man I guess--
Speaker 1: Yes, he is.
Speaker 2: --with a name like Sir Jules?
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir Jules, yeah, yeah.  He was gay, and, but he was, he was a great, great teacher.  And he really--he used to put on recitals and I used to play.  I mean at the time, I didn't even know what gay was, you know.  But I found out later he, you know, he had a guy friend, you know, which didn't change my opinion of him at all.  The guy was a great teacher, and, and, and laid all the initial foundation for what I did, along with Wyna Barrett [ph.], who was my very first piano teacher who I studied with for three years.  So between the two of them I was there for thirteen years studying with them, you know.  But high school and elementary school [Marin City School, Marin City, California], especially high school with Bob Greenwood, reinforced everything that Wyna and Sir Jules had taught me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So were you at, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 1: It was Tamalpais, Tamalpais, T-A-M-A-L-P-A-I-S [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California].  It was a beautiful campus.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was the, what was the racial makeup of your high school?  Was it--?
Speaker 1: Very mixed, because all the kids from Marin City [California] were black.  I mean, there may have been one white guy.  But, and of course, Mill Valley [California], all the kids were white.  So it was very, it was very, very mixed.  As a matter of fact, it was the only school in the area that was mixed.  All the other schools were predominantly 99.9 percent white, you know.  And so, it was very interesting.  Tamalpais High School was very different than any other school in the Marin County [California] area.  San Francisco [California] was different, you know.  And then of course later on they wound up with all the whole bussing thing--but this was after I'd already gotten out of school by that point--to try to even the stuff out.  But Tamalpais High School was very mixed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was almost an experiment, really.  There was no other school we could go to.  And so, there on the basketball team, the football team, and of course, involved in music.  Now, the good thing about Bob Greenwood, who's still alive, by the way, is--and I keep in contact with him.  Is that he challenged students.  Like, he found out that I could play the piano, so he made use of it, where everybody, everyone else told me, "No, we don't need a pianist."  So he says "Look," he says, "obviously, in the advanced band you're going to have to play trombone or baritone horn."  He says, "But I have a dance band that rehearses after school, and we play for little dances at the school," and blah, blah, blah, "and we research charts."  So, I got involved in that band.  I said, "Oh, yeah, this is like the jazz band."  But it was really, they called it a dance band.  But it was after school for extra credit.  So I used to do that, the advanced band.  I was in the chorus.  He said, "You need to join the chorus so you can learn how to s- you know, develop your voice."  So I did that.  I joined the orchestra.  I mean, I had more classes in music than I did in English and algebra.
Speaker 2: That's something. Now, so when you were in high school, were you involved in student government or any other of those activities?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) No, no, I was, I was totally into music.
Speaker 2: You said you played football, too, basketball?
Speaker 1: They got me, they--what happened is (laughter) he--they shamed me.  The kids shamed me into going out for football one day.  They said, "Look.  You, you're a big guy.  We need a center, you know."  And so again, Bob Greenwood said, "If you do this, I'm going to flunk you in every class you, that you have.  You're in four classes of mine. That's going to hurt you."  He says, "You are a musician.  You are not supposed to be on the football field.  You're supposed to be playing for them at halftime."  So I said, "No, I got to do this, I'm--."  You know so I went up for one practice, and got knocked on my butt a couple of times by somebody coming--you know.  I got the ball, and, boom, I got knocked back.  I said, "You know, I don't like this."  And then the man made me run around the track two or three times.  I'm like, this is not me, you know.  (Laughter) You know, I quit.  I said, y'all got this.  You can call me a sissy if you want.  I'm going back to the band.  And he was very happy about that.  And Bob used to do musicals.  We would do, he had me sing the tenor lead in such operas like Gian Carlo Menotti's 'Amelia Al ballo' ['Amelia Goes to the Ball'], so I did that.  We did cer- 'Carousel' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II].  We did all kinds of musicals which involved the drama department, the orchestra, the band, the dance band, everything put together.  So, it was a wonderful high school experience in terms of art, the arts in general.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was the one that was like pu- you know, he was the force behind it all.
Story_ID: 473646
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations beyond high school [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California]?  Did you have good counseling?  Did you know you were going to college somewhere?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually originally wanted to go to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].  And you know, I wasn't the greatest student in terms of grades.  I was terrible at algebra, you know.  I didn't even understand--I said, what do I need to know about algebra?  All I need to know is two and two is four.  What--I couldn't ever see what I would be using algebra for in the rest of my life.  And to tell you the truth, I still don't.  I don't know what I'd be using algebra--or trigonometry and geometry.  What?  I said all I need to know is two and two is four, and learn how to count, you know, so I can check my bank account, my money and all of that.  Anyway, getting back to what you asked, I wound up going to--I wanted to go to San Francisco State College, but my grades were a little short, you know.  And though I got A's in music, some of the other courses were like Bs and Cs.  So I didn't have my grade average strong enough, though I did get a scholarship.  I mean I wound up playing and they offered me a scholarship, but I couldn't get in due to my grades.  It was a state college.  So I said, you know what?  Maybe I need to go to this music school.  Maybe--and I looked at some place called the Music Arts Institute [San Francisco, California].  I went there with my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke], and we looked at it.  And I said, okay.  And then I went to the San Francisco Conservatory [San Francisco Conservatory of Music, San Francisco, California], and I looked at it, and I said, this is my school.  This is where I should be, the San Francisco Conservatory of Music.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated--
Speaker 2: --a very strict class.
Speaker 1: --from high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, in '63 [1963].  And you started the conservatory in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yeah,'63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay San Francisco Conservatory of Music, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you--
Speaker 2: And they just moved, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were specializing in the trombone, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  The reason for that is that it was a trombone scholarship, and I wanted to--you know, we didn't have a lot of money.  So I wanted to aid my mom in paying for the school.  And I hate to even tell you because it was--if you went for a full year, not just one semester, it was $980.  That's it.  I mean, compared--if you think of what it cost to go to college now.  It was $980, but that was like a mountain to me, to us, you know.  And so by getting the scholarship, that was a $500 scholarship.  That was a semester paid, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there were no trombone--there were no trombone majors.  So I said, "Well, what do you do with the money when there's--."  And so they said, "Well, it just sits there."  I said--I got that trombone out--and I didn't want to play the trombone.  I said, "What do I have to do?"  And they showed me the material I had to play.  I said, shoot, I can play that.  I went and got it, and they had four years in a row (makes sounds) I was playing the trombone.  I got the scholarship, helped pay for my college education.
Story_ID: 473647
Speaker 1: So you're at San Francisco Conservatory of Music [San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, well how did you find San Francisco [California]?  What kind of--did you like it?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't like Marin City [California].  It was a bi- it was the big city, you know.  And of course my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke], we joined Third Baptist Church [Third Baptist Church of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], which was a big church where Sir Jules Haywood was the minister of music by the way.  We started attending every Sunday going to the church.  And so that's, that's really my early recollection of San Francisco, along with the fact that I had a girl that I liked there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you stay on campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  There was--no, there was no campus.  They had a few exchange students or foreign students and things that to live in some houses there.  There were some places that you could rent and stay with families.  No, I stayed with my mom until I was twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was twenty-one I told my mom, because she was alone.  I said, "You know what?  I'm going to stay until I'm twenty-one.  When I'm twenty-one, I'm leaving.  So, you're prepared now."  And I told her that when I was eighteen.  I said, "I don't know how I'm going to do it, but I'm gone."  And she said, "Okay."  And when I was twenty-one, I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I moved to San Francisco and lived in a little place around the corner from school.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any particular teachers or mentors at San Francisco in terms of music?  Or anything else?
Speaker 2: Other than [HistoryMaker] Charles Burrell--I mean Charles was still there all the time that, during my undergraduate.  He was probably the strongest influence on me.  There were other teachers there that I think were very good.  Actually, there was one who kind of, kind of, interestingly enough, shaped a little bit of what I think about, you know.  Charles was very much involved with that, but it was another guy.  I don't even remember his name.  But he was--it was required to take a psychology course, you know, for one semester.  And we walked in there, and all of us were freshmen.  And they said, the guy says, "Look," he says, "there's nothing I can teach you about psychology in one semester."  He says, "However," he says, "by time you finish this course, you should be able to answer two questions."  And we were all looking like, what in the world is that?  He says, "First," he says, "I'm going to help you better understand yourself."  He said, "That's the best thing I can do for you, and how you relate, you know, to your fellow musicians and to your constituents, so to speak, the people that listen to your music.  And the second thing is to answer the question, why music is important.  What's the value of it?"  He said, "Because mark my words, the day will come when you will have to justify the reason for music."  And we all said, "Ah, you're kidding," you know.  He said, "No, mark my words.  The day will come when you will have to justify why you--they should continue keeping music in schools, why music is important."  You make, you know, records at the time for the masses.  He said, "And you'd better be able to answer that."  He says, "Because it's not like eating an apple, or food," he says, in that sense for sustenance.  "So you've got to be able to answer that.  And it's going to be individual for each person."  And so, that was his goal.  And it was very interesting.  Most of us kind of sat there like scratching our heads.  And it was an interesting day.  So it helped; it made me think.  It made me dig down, and that affect- affected what I feel about life now.
Story_ID: 473648
Speaker 1: What is your philosophy about music?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, it's, you know, it's a deep- it's a deeply personal thing.  I mean obviously, music feeds the soul.  I mean it's very, it's a very important element.  I think the whole situation of music in the schools now--I mean to be able to justify why it's important--the whole aspect of teamwork.  I know what it meant to me, and that's what I kind of explain when I go into colleges and schools now.  I say, look, it's, it's very important for us as artists now to take it to the kids, because a lot of times they don't get it in school.  So, it's incumbent upon us not to just sit in our houses and play our gigs.  I started instituting a program now where if I play gigs somewhere, especially in a major city that has a college, I want some of those kids from school to come play with me.  That's the way you hand the stuff down.  They need to actually--not just listen to me on the record.  They need that hands-on thing.  Let's be in the same room together talking about music, playing music on stage together.  Because by experience, they learn so much.  So, the paradigm has changed.  And I think it's important for us as musicians to take it to the musicians, because they're not getting it any other way, you know, in a lot of ways.  And so, that's kind of what's happening.  This, this class [at San Francisco Conservatory of Music, San Francisco, California] kind of helped me think about that among a whole--along with the whole idea about why music is important.  And that's why music is so serious.  I mean, I have a lot of fun.  I laugh, but there's a serious side to what I do, too, and that's reflected in my lyrics.
Story_ID: 473649
Speaker 1: Now, this is--I'm going through my mind now, and I'm just thinking about what the music scene might have been, from what I know of popular culture in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] in those days.  Just some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the '60s [1960s], back in those days?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I tell you man, it was wide open.  The great thing about the San Francisco Bay Area when I was an undergraduate is that it was wide open musically.  And I was really fortunate, because all the time I was an undergraduate at the conservatory [San Francisco Conservatory of Music, San Francisco, California], I had a gig.  I was working at the Half Note club [San Francisco, California].  Al Jarreau was there.  Al Jarreau and I hooked up for like two and a half, three years, working four nights a week or so, you know, in this place honing our craft at night.  I'd go to school during the day, go play this club at night, you know, or any other gig I could get.  And that was, that was like a learning experience.  I mean the whole scene with the--I saw the hippie movement come and go, the whole, you know, free love thing, you know.  Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California], which was not far from the conservatory, we used to go down there all the time.  You could go to the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California] and you could see Country Joe and the Fish, Cannonball Adderley, and some other group, you know, all on the same show.  It was just crazy.  It was just wide open, musically; Santana, Malo, those kind of Latin groups, you know.  So, for a musician, you know, all of this was kind of a sponge, you know.  And that's why I do what I do now.  I mean it's a little jazz, a little R and B, a little rock.  That's why I do all of this, because I was exposed to it and I love it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There seems to be a lot of live albums that were made in San Francisco in those days.  I know they've got 'Taj Mahal Live' ['Taj Mahal Live In San Francisco 1966'] that's in San Francisco.  Or the Monterey Pop Festival [Monterey International Pop Festival]--
Speaker 2: Oh, all of them.
Speaker 1: --was near San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With Hendrix [Jimi Hendrix] and Hugh Masekela--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and all these different--
Speaker 2: All that stuff.
Speaker 1: --musicians.  Richie Havens and different people coming through town playing.
Speaker 2: Richie Havens, god, I haven't heard that name in a long time.  All--San Francisco was alive musically, and it was a great place to be.  I mean eventually I had to move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] when I joined Frank Zappa.  It was just too much, the travel back and forth, so I decided to move to L.A.
Story_ID: 473650
Speaker 1: How long were you at the conservatory [San Francisco Conservatory of Music, San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: I stayed there four years, graduated with a bachelor's in music, in trombone, and eventually music composition.  And I was a bass minor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is '67 [1967] I guess when you came.  Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: That's the year, that's the year of Monterey Festival [Monterey International Pop Festival], I think it was.  Or was it the year before?  Sixty-six [1966] or '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] was like Summer of Love, and Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter) Oh yeah, well, Haight-Ashbury.  I used to be down there all the time.
Speaker 1: And it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I mean this was really a live--I mean culturally live--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --part of the United States in so many ways in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was--
Speaker 1: The San Francisco Bay Area [California], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was I mean any kind of music you wanted.  And the musicians, the music crossed, you know.  I think this is where this whole idea about fusion came.  Because when I first started working with the violinist, Jean-Luc Ponty, the whole idea came about.  And of course, Miles Davis solidified it.  When he did it, they said, oh, okay, it's cool to do.  It was what would happen if you combined jazz with a rock beat?   Well, what would happen if you combined jazz with a Latin beat?  Or jazz with a Brazilian beat or groove?  You know, and so everybody was thinking about those kinds of things, and began experimenting with music.  And so that's, that's kind of what that was all about.  And I was kind of there in the beginning of it, and helped shape it, actually.
Speaker 1: One thing I just neglected to ask is what, what was Al Jarreau's sound when you all were playing together?  What--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: Did he sound the same way as we--?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, he was younger.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was younger.  So he had--Al was a cut or two, or three, above every other singer that walked in that club.  We already had the gig before Al came, you know, and joined us.  Al used to come in on Sunday afternoons and sit in.  And he'd be singing swing, you know, just popping his fingers, you know (makes sounds) that kind of stuff.  Jon Hendricks was scat singing, and it worked.  And so the club owner, who was a very interesting guy, used to work at a place called Sugar Hill in San Francisco [California] where a lot of music came through; Carmen McRae, you name it.  He owned this club with his wife, and he suggested, he says, "You know what?  You and Al work really well together.  You guys--would you mind Al coming in and just joining you on the weekends, you know?"  And I said, "No, not at all."  And so Al and I developed a friendship.  We began working out arrangements, you know, and tunes, and sent it out to every record company that I knew about, summarily turned down by everybody.  But yet and still, all these years later Al and I are still around, still doing it.  But Al's sound was, was, was higher, his voice was higher.  His voice was pure.  He, but he was swinging.  He could sing, man, no doubt.  No doubt that he was special.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, who else around?  I mean there's so many people, I guess (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, Willie Bobo.  There were all kinds of--
Speaker 1: Willie Bobo, right.
Speaker 2: --there were all kinds of guys that used to come by this club.  And the Half Note club [San Francisco, California] was the first place I met Cannonball Adderley, who I eventually went on to work with.  He and Nat Adderley, who worked down the street at a club called the Both/And Club [San Francisco, California], would come in and work with us, or come in and sit in with us and hang out.  Because it was--the club, our club was kind of like a neighborhood club where all the ladies came to hang out.  It was a party scene in there, especially on the weekends.  So everybody used to come in there.  Carmen McRae used to come down there.
Speaker 1: And what a beautiful voice she has, she's--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  And you know, Wilt Chamberlain used to drop by.  So it was sports figures, you know, people from the jazz world, all kinds of folks used to come in there.  Willie Bobo, they were friends, so he was always in there.  But the Both/And Club was like the big jazz club on this street called Divisadero [Street], which is two blocks away from the club I worked.  And so, I began working that club as well.  And so I got a chance to--between the two clubs, I got a chance to work with Dexter Gordon.  As a matter of fact I recorded that and put it out on my label, BPM Records, which is 'Dexter Gordon at the Both/And Club' in what?  Nineteen sixty--I don't know, whatever it was--'67 [1967], '68 [1968], whatever it was.  And I taped it and it's out on a record now.  But I got to chance to work with him, with Bobby Hutcherson, with--you name it, whoever was in town.  I became kind of the house band for the Both/And Club, and still worked at this other place called the Half Note club.
Speaker 1: Both/And? That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Both slash And.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 473651
Speaker 1: Now when did you form your own trio [George Duke Trio]?
Speaker 2: Actually--and I got some pictures I'll show you.  The first band I had was when I was in high school [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California].  And that trio was formed in 1962--'61 [1961], '62 [1962], somewhere in there.  And we used to play little gigs, you know, around the Marin County [California] area.  And that eventually went on to be--I always kind of had a trio, you know, at one time or another, you know, and personnel changed from time to time.  The most, the group that stayed the longest was one with a guy named John Heard, who's still around.  He worked with Oscar Peterson and Count Basie.  He's a great bass player, still alive living here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And, that's H-E-A-R-D is his name.  And we had the longest group.  He played on 'Feel,' he was the bass player.  And as a matter of fact, that was the last album I think he did with me.  But we've been together for a long time before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can hear the bass part on that now in my head.  That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was him.  And so that's how I got together with Jean-Luc [Jean-Luc Ponty], because I already had a trio that had been working together for a long time.  We kind of had a sound and a vibe.  So I called Jean-Luc and said, "Man--."  I--not Jean-Luc.  I actually called his producer and said, "You know, I already have a group.  You should let me hook up with Jean-Luc and do this."  And that's kind of how that started happening.  And of course, by working with a violinist--who, and he gave me a shot.  He said, "Okay, let's hire the guy."  He gave me a shot working here in L.A.  Playing jazz violin was a phenomenal thing.  It was just, it was a novel idea.  And so, every musician would show up.  I mean I would--we played a place here in L.A. it was called Thee Experience.  It was a rock club.  The producer of Jean-Luc's record said, "You guys, I believe you could get over in a rock club if you just play a few of your songs and put a rock beat in it."  He says, "Just play the same thing, and just change the drum part every now and then, you know, on a couple of tunes."  We went to--Jean-Luc didn't want to do it, but I said, "Yeah, well, come on let's do it," and we wound up going down there.  And who was in the audience?  [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Frank Zappa, Gerald Wilson, was a great band leader, all these guys.  And out of that, I started getting gigs.  Because I saw these people and I knew who they were.  I said, oh, stuff.  I got to be on tonight.  Because something told me that was a pivotal moment in my life.  So, and there was no piano.  There was an electric piano, which was a pain in the butt.  I didn't, I didn't want to play that sucker.  I said, I'm a piano player.  And I told Dick Bach [Richard Bach], who was the producer, I said, "I'm willing to do this as long as you have a piano.  Don't come in there with one of those little sawed-off electric pianos, you know."  (Laughter) So, because I'd played it with the Don Ellis big band, and I knew what it was.  So, I'd walk in and there's that little silver top piano.  I said, doggone it.  So, okay, here we go.  I'm going to play, and all of a sudden there're ladies out in front of the place cavorting with no bras.  Now, you have to, you had to keep in mind this is 1969, you know.  No bras, things shaking everywhere, dan- nobody's sitting down like they do in the jazz clubs, you know.  And it was just a different--the whole rock scene was a whole different kind of thing for us, but we did it, and it worked.  So that gave Jean-Luc and I the impetus to say, "Okay, man, let's do this.  Let's do this for real."  And we started thinking about combining rock beats with jazz.
Story_ID: 473652
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I got a lot of work, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Gerald Wilson called me.  Frank Zappa called me after that to join The Mothers of Invention.  That launched my career.
Speaker 1: So, I mean--all right.  So, now Frank Zappa, now he's an interesting character.  Tell us a little bit about Frank Zappa, and how that, that connection happened.
Speaker 2: Well, from Jean-Luc [Jean-Luc Ponty].  We did a record called 'King Kong,' which was 'Jean-Luc Ponty Plays the Music of Frank Zappa' ['King Kong: Jean-Luc Ponty Plays the Music of Frank Zappa'].  Interesting record, because Frank had a lot of interesting music.  And after a gig I played with Jean-Luc one night, I heard some music on the radio.  We had gone to, to have breakfast after a gig, and I was listening to this music on the radio.  And I said, I wonder who that is?  It was like 4:30 or 5:00 in the morning.  And I wanted to go to sleep, but this music drew me in.  And I was like, what is this?  And it turns out it was Zappa.  They said, "Zappa."  I said, oh, that's that guy.  So I didn't think any more about it, and went home.  Sometime later, I got a call at my house.  I was living with my mom [Beatrice Burrell Duke] at her house.  And Frank called and says, "George [HistoryMaker George Duke], I want you to join The Mothers."  And my mom said, you know, basically at first she said, "There's somebody named Zupa on the phone."  I said, "Zupa?"  I said, "Oh, you mean Zappa."  Okay.  "Hey, Frank, how you doing?"  "Oh, fine."  He says, "I want you to join The Mothers."  I said, "The Who?"  He said, "Not The Who; The Mothers."  I said, "The Mothers?"  Okay, I didn't even know what the Mothers were.  But I knew Frank, I knew his--the music.  So I said, "Oh, this is going to be interesting."  He flew me to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I walk in, and he had me playing some of this 1950 kind of doo-wop, rock and roll stuff.  And I found out what The Mothers of Invention was about, and I didn't want to do that.  But something told me to stay.  And I had a lot to learn, and I eventually stayed with Frank for, for one year before I joined Cannonball Adderley.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, you got with Cannonball.  Now, Cannonball, this is about 1970?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 19- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is when--
Speaker 2: I joined Cannon--I joined--I joined Frank at the end of '69 [1969] and worked with him through 1970.  In '71 [1971], I joined Cannonball Adderley for two years.
Speaker 1: Now, did you take the place of Joe Zawinul?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now Joe Zawinul was a great keyboardist with Cannonball--
Speaker 2: For ten years.
Speaker 1: --when they made the album, 'Mercy, Mercy' ['Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! Live at "The Club"'].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: With Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and all that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Big shoes to fill.  And I was not up to the job at the moment.  I mean, you know, I thought I was, but I had a lot to learn.  And Cannon was a great teacher, so he was a hero of mine.  It was something like I had to do it, I had to do it.  So that was like a walking historian, and someone I respected for a long time; loved his music.  And he was wide open, musically.  I mean he, he, he, you know, he and Frank Zappa together, you know, at different times, really reinforced this notion about you need to explore more.  You know, don't be so, don't think in such a s- narrow framework, you know.  Open up your mind to other forms and disciplines of music.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that people often talk about--Zappa just being a weirdo and that sort of thing.  Somebody who named his kids Moon Unit [Moon Zappa]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the Dweezil [Dweezil Zappa] and that sort of thing, and Pie [sic.] and that sort of thing.  But he was really, you know, you really respect his musical knowledge.
Speaker 2: Oh, the guy was a genius.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I don't put that out lightly.  But, I don't think there're many people that I would call a genius, but he's about as close as you can come to it.  Basically, in terms of me, he was the first one to get me to do a lot of things--to really seriously think about singing, because he had me singing in the band.  He was the first one to get me to play a synthesizer, the first one to get me to open up in terms of my--when I play on stage he says, "You know, why are you so serious?  Why don't you--?"  He says, "You're all funny offstage, and then you get on stage and you've got this look, you know."  I thought I had to be hard, you know.  So, he got me to open up and let my humor out, and my personality out on stage.  So, all these things.  I saw how he worked in the studio.  You know, he would tell the engineer certain things.  I'd hear him say, "Okay, give me two or ten."  I said, "What'd he say?"  You know, and then I said, "Oh, I got something to learn here.  He knows something that I don't know."  And so, he basically just opened me up to just life in general.  And he, the guy was a nut.  He was definitely a freak and a nut.  But he was so open, musically.  He just liked--I mean he'd go from 1950 rock and roll to music that was in a style of Edgard Varese, which is very neoclassic kind of music, you know.  And a lot of distortion, a lot of heavy, you know, dense textures and things like that.  So, he was all of that.  And I learned to appreciate that, because I did not want to be playing no 1950 doo wop music.  I'd gone through playing a lot of jazz, and it was kind of intricate.  And he said--he taught me the value of all forms of music.  He says, "Don't put it down because it's simple."  He says, "There's value in simple forms of music."  And he says, "And you got to learn that."  So, I credit him with that; and Cannon.
Story_ID: 473653
Speaker 1: Because Cannon [Cannonball Adderley] got me involved--you know, I used to play 'Mercy, Mercy, Mercy,' all those kinds of tunes that he made popular, you know.  He could play all that other kind of stuff the (makes sounds)--all that kind of stuff--and just turn around and go (makes sounds) I mean and have as much fun playing that as the other stuff.  And he got into playing Brazilian music.  He says, "You need to listen to this."  Took me to his house and said, "Listen to this, because you need to include this in your arsenal."
Speaker 2: Well, who were the Brazilian influences?  Who was he listening to in those days?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was listening to Milton Nascimento.  Now, I had heard back in '65 [1965], 'Brasil '65' with Sergio Mendes in Sausalito, California, they were playing a gig.  So, I was already familiar with Brazilian music on a surface level.  Then I went to Brazil with Cannon.  He took me to Brazil, and the band.  And I bought every Brazilian record I could find.  I bought another suitcase, packed it with records, brought it back, and just sat in front of the, my set and listened and listened and listened.
Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to meet Gilberto Gil?
Speaker 1: Gilberto Gil, I didn't meet during that time, no.  But I've met him since.
Speaker 2: Tania Maria, Gilberto Gil.
Speaker 1: Well, of course, I've worked with Tania Maria.  I've produced an album for her.
Speaker 2: Milton Nascimento--
Speaker 1: We did--but back then, well, I did 'Brazilian Love Affair' ['A Brazilian Love Affair'].  I said, one day I'm going to go back there and I'm going to do an album, and I wound up doing it.  And it's still singlehandedly one of the most consistent sellers that I've had on CD.
Speaker 2: I think in 1970, Sivuca was up here with Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.].  Did you--
Speaker 1: Sivuca?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: He was up here with Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, we knew all those people.  What happened is Airto and Flora--Airto Moreira and Flora Purim--became good friends.  And they were--I met them through Cannonball.  And of course they'd worked with Miles [Miles Davis], and I'd never worked with Miles at that time.  But, you know, I use to see him occasionally and we would talk and say hello.  But Flora and I, I mean Airto, was actually working with Cannon quite a bit, and he began working with me and my band.  And then Flora and I became friends and I began doing records with her, and shows, and the whole--there was like a group of us here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], which included [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock, included (Unclear), who's a bass player.  It included Jaco Pastorius, me, Airto, and all these other--there were all these people, like, into music.  And we used to get--Flora used to live out at the beach in Malibu [California] at the time.  We used to go there and she would make Brazilian food, black beans, feijoada, and all this.  And we'd be drinking cachaca and listening to music and talking about where we could go with the music.  It was an incredible time.  It reminded me a lot of what was going on in San Francisco [California] a little bit before that, you know, during the hippie movement.  But this was like, you know, in a smaller setting with a group of people that all felt the same way about music.
Story_ID: 473654
Speaker 1: Did you run into the Earth, Wind and Fire group and the--
Speaker 2: Well, I used to see--yeah, of course, Maurice [Maurice White] and those guys.  I mean, I, those were--that was an incredible band.
Speaker 1: What Doug [Doug Carne] and [HistoryMaker] Jean Carne, I think, were out here in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jean Carne.  As a matter of fact, Jean--my, my biggest record 'Reach For It,' Jean, a lot of people don't know it.  She's actually singing on it (laughter).  Jean Carne, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, she's something.  So, wow, all the talent out here at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, it's still out here, I guess.  There's still a lot of talent here.  But what was your next--let's see.  So, we're about nineteen seventy--yeah.
Speaker 2: Essentially I stayed with Cannon [Cannonball Adderley] for two years, and in 1973 I wound up going back with Frank Zappa, because he hired Jean-Luc Ponty.  And I thought, oh, this is becoming more of a jazz group.  Well, he never would admit it, but it was becoming jazzier.  And Ralph Humphrey was playing drums, who was in the original Don Ellis big band.  So, there were a lot of guys I knew, you know.  And so I stayed in the band until 1976 when I formed a band with Billy Cobham, an incredible drummer.  And he was working with the Mahavishnu Orchestra at the time, and we did some shows with them.  And Billy and I started talking, and he says, "Man, if you ever leave Frank," and I said, "Well, if you ever leave the Mahavishnu Orchestra," I said, "let's hook up."  And that's what happened.
Speaker 1: And those are some fantastic, it's a fantastic pairing.  I mean, I was listening to 'Rush Hour' ['Rush Hour/Road Rage'] last week and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) there's about three versions of it on YouTube.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, with Cobham playing and you playing back at him, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's like the dialogue, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's really fantastic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Billy's great.  We only did one album, unfortunately.  And I played on some of his ear- other records, but as a Cobham/Duke [The Billy Cobham/George Duke Band] project we only did one album.  But I have more material which I plan to release.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I know the public will appreciate it.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Cobham has got to be, sounds like he's playing--he's got he's three drummers playing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's an amazing guy.  Actually, I got a young guy who's working with me now, Ron Bruner [Ronald Bruner, Jr.].  He's twenty-five years old, and he's the closest thing to Billy Cobham that I've worked with since Billy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The guy is strong, man, and he can play.  You got to hear him.
Speaker 1: But you're keeping up with him, you know.  So, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, Billy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I do what I do, you know.  But Billy--but back in the day though, Billy used to mess me up, man.  Because Billy would--you know, we'd play some shows.  And when I first started playing with him, I used to play the first solo.  And I'd be up there playing, and everybody's eye--like, I'd be over here and Billy would be over there, and everybody's eye was watching Billy to see when he was going to play that roll--that patented Billy Cobham (makes sounds).  And so I'd be playing (makes sounds) and as soon as I'd get through playing--okay, I'm through.  Then Billy would go (makes sounds) and everybody would was like, "Ah."  And then they'd look over at me, and I was through.  I said, "Oh, man, that's--."  And he'd be giggling, he'd be giggling.  I was like, "Billy, that is cold, man."  And he'd be--that's, I never will forget it, never will forget it.  But that used to happen all the time.
Story_ID: 473655
Speaker 1: When you started in your young years playing, did you idolize any particular keyboard players?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, the organ player in the church.  Oh, I played--I was very young when I first started playing in the church.  I don't even know the guy's name, but he was amazing.  Because I just, that's how I learned, you know, that music is related, you know, it's all related.  Like what he would play was related to the pastor, and then what the pastor said was relating to the aud- to the congregation.  And it was all related.  And so I found out by playing certain things, that I could, I could get in that soup, you know, and cause some reaction, you know, or something.  So, and I took that out of the church and started to apply it outside of church.  But to answer your question, he was the first.  Anybody that kind of had that churchy feel, I was into.  Ray Charles, I used to listen to this record of him and Fathead Newman ['Fathead: Ray Charles Presents David Fathead Newman'].  Wore me out, one of the first records I ever bought before Miles Davis, before I heard that ['Kind of Blue'].  Because it had that, they called it soul at the time.  Cannonball Adderley, he had that soul in his playing.  [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, Les McCann, Wynton Kelly, those kind of players were my heroes.  Gene Simmons [sic. Gene Harris], you know, is that hi- yeah, from Three Sounds [The Three Sounds].  Man, those guys, they had that thing, you know.  And eventually it went on to other people.  Miles Davis single-handedly became a huge influence on me, and everybody that worked with him; everybody from Trane [John Coltrane] to, to Bill Evans became very important as well.
Story_ID: 473656
Speaker 1: We were discussing--now, you started to produce records too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --at a certain point.
Speaker 2: Well, after--I formed my own band after the Cobham/Duke [The Billy Cobham/George Duke Band] experience, which was, for lack of a better word, I call it the 'Reach For It' band because 'Reach For It' was a big hit from that band.  It was like a funky kind of thing, a Parliament-Funkadelic kind of a trip which was really a funky bass solo, really, all the way through.  It had some talking in it; jive talking and all of that.
Speaker 1: Was this before 'Feel' or after 'Feel'?
Speaker 2: This was after.
Speaker 1: After 'Feel.'
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  The first record I did for MPS [MPS Records], it was a German label.  And actually I'll be quick with it, I'll tell you about it.  In 19--because that means going back.  In 1965, when I was still working with Al Jarreau, I did a Monday night gig at, at the Jazz Workshop in San Francisco [California].  And it was a Monday night, and Les McCann was supposed to be playing.  He wasn't there on Monday nights, it was his off night.  I happened to be playing, and these guys from Germany came in and saw me and asked me if wanted to record an album.  And I thought they were joking.  They called me at my mom's [Beatrice Burrell Duke] house and I said--they said, "George [HistoryMaker George Duke], do you want to, you know," blah, blah, blah, "do the record?"  I said, "Yeah, okay."  So they me gave me scale, which I think was $130 I got.  I went in and we did two sessions like that.  I got my $300 and went home, and the album was finished.  And then I developed a relationship out of that.  That record was called 'George Duke Presented by the Jazz Workshop in 1966' ['The George Duke Quartet Presented by the Jazz Workshop 1966 of San Francisco'].  It came out a year later.  Then I began doing several records for them, and signed a contract in 1971 or so.  Came out with a record called 'Faces In Reflection,' and the record you were talking about, 'Feel.'  And those series of albums have now come out in a box set.  So that goes back to that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's interesting.  Because 'Feel' has a different feel from some of the other work.  I mean it's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --really a nice--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, man, like I told you, that set, that early period, that's when we started experimenting with music.  And I was really getting into synthesizers and begun to sing some parts, you know.  Because Frank [Frank Zappa] had made me comfortable enough to think about singing, you know, and I was not thinking about singing a song.  I just was using it as a texture, you know, kind of vocal leads almost, no lyrics.  But then eventually I began singing lyrics and it mor- moved on from there.
Story_ID: 473657
Speaker 1: And so, the--what happened in 1977 after I left Billy Cobham--because all that Frank Zappa influence with the comedy kind of filtered into the, the fusion thing.  And I began to tell Billy, I said, "Fusion has gotten too serious, man.  You guys ain't smiling."  I said--so I started doing things by putting little crazy things around the stage.  I used to have a train that used to--on one of my keyboards I used to--doing the show would, you know, go around.  Anything stupid.  Gas masks, you know, Frankenstein heads, anything.  It looked like Halloween around my keyboards (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, due to YouTube, you know, I was able to see you and Billy Cobham play, you know, 'Rush Hour' ['Rush Hour/Road Rage'] twice and just--
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --just watching you, I'd never seen you play before.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I'd just only heard the records.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But watching you play, I mean, people can see that you, you're just having a good time.
Speaker 1: Oh, man.  I--
Speaker 2: You're having a great time playing.
Speaker 1: I hope to, and I still do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But after I left Billy, I formed this band with Ndugu [Leon "Ndugu" Chancler], who's a good friend of mine.  And he kind of introduced me in 1977, '78 [1978] to Parliament-Funkadelic.  And that's kind of, kind of--I said, "Man, I love this.  We should start doing it."  And this whole idea of this thing with 'Reach For It,' and "Dukey Stick" developed out of that.  And then I developed a real strong following out of that, and we began playing much larger places, not just clubs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--that's true, that's true.  I mean I remember that when those came out, the funk thing was bigger than--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was definitely strong, especially in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area.  It became very strong out in that area.  And then I began to see where what I played--I needed to change the visual aspect of what I did.  And that's why I came up with this idea of the Dukey stick, which was a magic wand, and began putting my keyboards in Plexiglas, so that what you see--my manager [Herb Cohen] used to tell me this.  He says, "You know, 50 percent of what people hear is what they see."  He said, "When you're playing a place which is four thousand to fifteen thousand seats big, or twenty thousand seats, you need, you need to be visually bigger than you are, you know.  And so you need--something needs to happen.  You need to get out from behind those keyboards."  So I came up with this idea of wearing a synthesizer, you know.  And that's how I first started playing what they call a keytar now.  But it was not called a keytar back then.  People thought that was the Dukey stick, but it was not.  The Dukey stick was actually a magic wand.  I got pictures of that, too; I'll show you.  But that whole funk thing kind of took me into another realm.  We had people come through the band like Sheila E.  When she was eighteen years old, I went to her father [Pete Escovedo].  I heard her play.  I said, "Man, I want her in my band.  I know she's eighteen."  We called him Pops.  I said, "Pops, look."  I said, "I'm going to take care of her.  I'm going to keep the hounds away from her, don't worry.  She's a great player."  And Pops says, "You better watch my little girl."  And I said, "Don't worry, Pops, I got it."  You know, so, and she stayed in the band for two or three years.  So--
Speaker 2: She played the timbales and the congas (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the congas, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was--
Speaker 2: Sheila Escovedo, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sheila Escovedo, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well, go, go ahead.  I don't want to stop you.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well, that was--essentially we began doing that.  I made several records for Epic Records, 'From Me to You,' the 'Reach For It' album, the 'Don't Let Go' album, which contained "Dukey Stick."  It was a record called 'Master of the Game,' 'Follow the Rainbow,' some of these which are available on my website.  And these are all done with a band.  I mean, we toured together.  We became a family, riding around on a bus and going from one gig to the next.  Life was great.  We had, we had a hit record, we were doing well.
Story_ID: 473658
Speaker 1: I started doing records with Stanley Clarke.  Came up with the idea of this song called "Sweet Baby," which became the biggest hit I've ever had overall.  It's kind of like a pop song.  And of course my relationship with Stanley has developed over the years.  We've done, what, three albums to the present, solo records.  But at the same time--you see, all of this was going on kind of simultaneously--I began producing records.  And so what happened is essentially I began by--early on, in 1968, actually, working with a group of Filipino girls.  There were five of them.  And they were like s- eleven to seventeen, and they were called The Third Wave.  They have a record called 'Here And Now,' and I produced an album for them which came out only in Germany.  And I said, man, I think I got a future in this.  And so, fortunately I was able to do a record with, from--what's his name?  [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, who was then at Capitol Records, asked me to produce this guy who was a trombone player.  I said, would be great.  His name was Raul de Souza.  And I had been working with Raul de Souza with Flora Purim.  So I said, "I'd love to do it."  So I did two albums with Raul.  And I was a trombone player, so I understood.  We, we, kind of had, we had a hit record, man.  It was a thing called 'Sweet Lucy' in Germany, and became a big record, you know.  And so we got a chance to do a second record.  And then I was asked by a guy named Don Mizell to produce a vocal act who was [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater, which was the first vocal act I'd ever produced outside of The Third Wave, the vocal group.  I really wasn't ready to do that.  You know, musically I'd never done it, and I wasn't sure.  And I apologized to Dee Dee over the years.  But we did what we did.  And then the big break came, I mean, the real big break, by a guy named Bobby Colomby, who was a former drummer with Blood, Sweat and Tears, who actually offered me to produce A Taste of Honey, which was a big disco group.  Now, disco had become very strong at this time, and the funk thing had kind of died down.  So I figured this whole producing thing might be a way for me, an alternate way for me to make a living.
Speaker 2: So this is like in the late '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: This is '80 [1980] now.
Speaker 2: Eighties [1980s], '80s [1980s].  Okay, Taste of Honey.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Taste of Honey, right after--what year did that record come out?  It would have been seventy--I would say '78 [1978].  Yeah, yeah, '79 [1979] or '80 [1980], '78 [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980].  And they already had 'Boogie Oogie Oogie,' which was their big hit.  So, Bobby Colomby, we were going to produce this record together, he decided to bow out.  He said, "Yeah, I got other things to do.  I'm a big record exec.  You do this.  You can do this."  I was scared to death.  I mean here I am working with a platinum selling artist, platinum.  I had never--you know, I'm working with jazz artists; you don't sell those kind of numbers.  So I walk in the studio, scared to death.  Do the song.  First single comes out, nothing happens.  The second single comes out, nothing happens.  So I'm like, oh, god, I've blown my career.  Third single--Janice [Janice Marie Johnson], who was the bass player, kind of leader of the group, was a song called "Sukiyaki," which became a huge hit.  It sold 2 million records.  She says, "I know this is a hit record."  And she had, she made the company sign a paper or something saying that if these first two singles come out and they don't happen, you must agree to put this record out, because I know it's a hit record.  They said, "You're out of your mind."  I thought she was out of her mind.  Record came out and became a huge hit, and launched my production career.  All of a sudden when you have a record--you know, it was a single--comes out and you sell those kind of numbers, the phone starts ringing.  I got a call from Jeffrey Osborne.  Jeffrey says, "I want you to come produce my album, man.  I'm leaving L.T.D."  And I'd known Jeffrey because we'd done some dates together, you know, with one of those funk tours, you know, where they have all of the R and B bands.  And I was kind of the only kind of jazz R and B band in that, that crew.  So, we did several records.  One was 'On the Wings of Love,' (unclear) love, those kind of records, which were very strong for Jeffrey.  I did 'Stay with Me Tonight,' and one other record after that.  So we did three very, very, strong records, all of them Gold records.  I think one of them went Platinum, or two.  Don't remember now.  Deniece Williams, we got, I started working with her.  We did a song called, "Let's Hear It for the Boy," which became a huge hit.  Thirteen million records later, now my phone's even ringing more.
Story_ID: 473659
Speaker 1: Yeah was in the movie 'Footloose,' right?
Speaker 2: It was in the movie 'Footloose.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I went to hear this song with Niecy [Deniece Williams].  I was working on an album with Niecy here called "Do What You Feel."  And we wound up--she said, "I just got a call from CBS for us to go down and do this song for this movie."  I went with her down there to this guy's house.  He played this little song (makes sounds).  I said, "Okay, Niecy, let's go back to work."  In the car on the way back, I said, "I know you don't want to do this."  She says, "Yes, I do."  I said, "Well, I don't know if--."  She said, "Yes, you do.  You doing this."  I said, "Niecy!"  She says--I can't even tell you what she said, because she called me kind of out of my name.  Niecy's rough.  (Laughter) Niecy said, "You're producing this, and we're going to do this.  We got to do this now.  So put everything else on hold."  Went in, I cut it, and she sang it.  I sent it to them and I called and apologized.  I said, "I don't know what else to do with this.  I swear, I don't know what to do with this song.  I'll give you your money back and you can get somebody else to do it, or whatever.  I don't know what to do with the song."  And they said, "You're crazy.  This is a hit record."  I said, "Oh, yeah, sure, sure."  I went on the road and the next thing you know, the phone is ringing.  People are talking about, "Man, this record is huge," you know.  I said, "You got to be kidding."  Everybody's talking about (singing), "Let's hear it for the boy."  Oh, my god, I hated the song ["Let's Hear It for the Boy"]; still hate it.  Sorry, (Unclear).  I mean I'm sorry for the cats, you know, and Tom Snow, a great songwriter, but I really didn't like the song.  But it bought me a house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, well--
Speaker 2: And a car.
Story_ID: 473660
Speaker 1: During this period, wasn't--now you were involved somewhat with Anita Baker's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --first album too, right, during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, I met Anita in a limousine on the way (laughter)--she came--there was a party here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and we were sharing a limousine to go down to this party.  And her record ['The Songstress'] had just come out, the one with--what was that song, the first one she had out?  Anyway it was the one, you know, the first song that she had out before she became Anita Baker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I had an album that was out.  And so we started talking, became friends.  We started working together, and I took her to Europe.  I said, "You know, we should go to Europe."  And I produced an album for her over there, which actually never came out.  Interesting.  It was a jazz record actually, where she's singing standards.  That record should come out, it's interesting.  But anyway, I began touring with her and we did several records together.  She asked me to do more or less the jazz oriented stuff.  That's what she's always wanted me to be involved with.  So we've been friends for a long time, and I've worked on her records ever since I guess the first one that she did for Elektra [Elektra Records].
Speaker 1: Kind of in unheralded way, capacity, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was behind the scenes.  I didn't produce all the records, but basically I was there kind of behind the scenes.  You know, she would call me and say, "What do you think about this or that?"  She always wanted me to go on the road with her.  For some reason she felt comfortable with me just being out there.  And I said, "Look, you know--."  Even the part--I was on the ill-fated tour with her and Luther Vandross, you know, where they turned out to be enemies.  And fortunately before Luther passed, they kind of patched that up.  And actually they were talking about doing a duet together, and they wanted me to produce it.  But he died before that happened.  So that was, that was a trying moment though, with them on the road.  And they were playing huge places, and there was just, the animosity between the two was (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened actually?  Do you have any analysis (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You probably should ask her.  And you can't ask him now.  But I think there was some jealousy there.  But one thing is Anita was coming on before Luther.  And again, she basically had more balance, you know.  But she was a very strong act.  And she was doing one of his songs, you know.  And she says, "Look, this is the only up-tempo song I have.  I've got to do it."  "Step to Love" [ph.] or whatever.  And Luther said, "Well, look, this is my tune.  I've got to do it on my show."  And so she said, "Well, I'm doing it on my show too."  And so that's where it started.  Now, and then all of a sudden they didn't want to see other in the hallway, you know.  They used to put up (gesture) instrument cases so they wouldn't have to see other passing.  It was just, it was just--and then all of a sudden I became in the middle of it.  Because Luther would look at me and say, "I see you're with the enemy."  (Laughter) I said, "Luther, I am not.  Come on man, let's stop all this," you know.  And eventually I'm glad that they patched it up.  But I stayed out there for a couple of weeks and I said, "You know what?  I'm going home, I've had enough of this."  And we were liv- I mean, we were living large.  I mean it was nothing but big limousines, car, you know, big hotels, fancy hotels and all that.  I mean they were, that was living large when we were doing that tour.  But I just, I had to come off of there.
Story_ID: 473661
Speaker 1: Yeah, Anita [Anita Baker].  So, anyway I worked with her over the years.  And a lot of, eventually because of the whole production thing, I began getting calls from everybody from Sister Sledge to, to Barry Manilow.  Miles Davis, I did some tracks for some later albums of his.  And so I kept my foot in the jazz door, but I also branched out doing other artists.  And of course, now, even internationally.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because I see here like [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, the Pointer Sisters (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 2: 101 North, Najee, Jeffrey Osborne, Take 6, Howard Hewett, Chante Moore, Everette Harp, Rachelle Ferrell, Gladys Knight, Keith Washington, Gary Valenciano, Johnny Gill, Anita Baker.
Speaker 1: All during that time.
Speaker 2: All these people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Natalie Cole.  Yeah, Al Jarreau.  I got a chance to work--you know, it's really amazing the amount of artists that I've been fortunate enough to work with.  And they're all great artists in their own right, you know.
Speaker 2: There's more.  George Benson, Larry Coryell, Stanley Clarke.  I don't know; it just goes on and on, but yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's a lot.
Speaker 2: So is there any particular project that you, that is your favorite, or the one that you--?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's interesting.  A lot of the--I say the first or second album I produced with Jeffrey was really a lot of fun.  I mean mainly because that's--I can't tell you why.  Jeffrey is just, besides being a great singer, it was just so much fun being in here with him.  And we just laughed all the time, it was just fun.  And that was probably the most fun I had on a record, you know.  Of course the whole paradigm of the business has changed now, so everything is different.  But, and I've been fortunate enough to work with some young artists, especially recently.  I was just bringing up today artists like Ledisi, who I also think is an incredible artist.  She's a lot of fun to work with.  But back in the day, Jeffrey.  Man, that was--I have to say that was the most fun.  Al was tough, only because--Al and I go way back, now.  We're, we're like brothers.  You know, he's like my older brother.  But Al, at the time, he liked to work at night, and I mean night.  He'd start at one in the morning and work until five.  I'm like, man, he totally turned my schedule around.  So that was like, rough.  But--
Speaker 2: He started at one in the morning?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  He's, he's supposed to come at ten, but he'd come at noon--at midnight--and sit down and, you know, have a glass of wine and, you know, talk a little bit, smoke some cigarettes, and then come sing, you know (laughter).  It was tough working with Al on that; just because of the schedule.  Not, not him, he was great.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess that could be, you know, throw you off track.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I'd say that Rachelle Farrell was probably the hardest record I ever did, because, just because she's an incredible talent, you know.
Story_ID: 473662
Speaker 1: And of course, I've always enjoyed working with my cousin, Dianne [HistoryMaker Dianne Reeves].  Now Miles was deep, too, producing these tracks for Miles Davis.  You know, Miles called me on the phone one day and said, "Hey, hey, George [HistoryMaker George Duke]."  I said, "Who is this?"  He said, "This is Miles."  And then he swore at me.  I won't swear right now.  He swore at me.  I said, "Okay, what's up?"  He says, "I want you to write me a song."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "I'm going to send you a tape, and I want you to write me something like that.  Bye."  And hung up.  And he sent me this tape, and I listened to the tape.  And I did this thing-- interesting thing.  I did this thing, and I was working on it and Dianne Reeves walks in.  She says, "What's that?"  I said, "It's a track I'm putting together for Miles."  She said, "Oh, no, no, no, this is going on my album."  She said, "I need a track like this on my album."  I said, "No, I'm writing this for Miles."  She said, "Well, you got to call and tell him he can't have it.  We family."  I said, "You call Miles and tell him he can't have it."  And so she said, "Come on, come on now."  She put that Burrell charm on me.  So I went out, called Miles on the phone.  I said, "Miles?"  He said, "Yeah.  You finish my song?"  I said, "Yeah, man, I got it.  But there's only one problem."  He says, "What?"  I said, "You know Dianne Reeves?  You know she's a--you know, she's a--." "Yeah, I know her."  I said, "Well, she heard me while I was working on it."  I said, "I got this other song for you."  I said, "But this one, she really wants to use."  He said, "Tell that bitch to get her own song."  I said, "You know, Miles, look, this is family."  I said, "Can you--?"  Shit.  Oh, he went off on her, you know, and then finally he gave it up.  I said, "I got this," I said, "I got this other song, I'm going to send it to you later.  If you don't like it, then I'll get this other song back for you."  So he said, okay, he hung up.  I gave the song to Dianne, it was nominated for a Grammy [Grammy Award], actually, a song called "Fumilayo."  It didn't win, but it was nominated.  And then I sent Miles the other song and he wound up using that, which was called "Backyard Ritual," which was a song that was on the 'Tutu' album, which kind of set the tone for what that album was going to be.  Because he was looking, Miles was looking for something.  And though that was a demo--you know, I sent it to him in a demo form.  And I thought we'd go in the studio and record it, and Miles--I said, I asked him when he was going to go and record it, and he said, "I'm done."  I said, "Done?"  I said, "We ain't recorded it yet."  I said, I said, "What I sent you was a demo."  He said, "I like it, because it sound funny."  I said, "Yeah, Miles, but that's, that's a demo," you know, those little old stupid saxophone synthesizer sound.  He said, "I like it, it sounds funny.  I'm going to leave it like that."  So I was like, oh, my god.  My first time--my hero, working with Miles Davis, and he's putting a demo on the album.  I couldn't believe it.  And that's exactly what happened.  So, it was an odd experience.
Story_ID: 473663
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about when you first met Miles Davis?  I mean it, it must have been a thrill, having, you know, idolized him when you were young, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, man, I, I saw--I used to see him at a place called the Black Hawk [San Francisco, California] when I was underage and I couldn't get in in San Francisco [California].  And they had this fence, this cyclone fence kind of thing.  And you could get Cokes, Coca-Colas.  And there must have been fifteen or twenty seats in this area maybe.  And I used to try to get a front seat so I could look through the chain-link fence and see Miles.  And I saw that band, you know, with all those great guys--Philly Joe Jones, and all that.  Trane [John Coltrane] wasn't in the band, but it was--anyway there were some other people in it.  Wynton Kelly was playing, Paul Chambers.  It was a good band.  And so, to see Miles--I was playing in New York [New York], and I was playing at the Village Gate [New York, New York], downstairs.  And Miles came in, and the word got around.  They said, "Miles Davis is here."  I said, ohh, you know.  And I did my thing, and he didn't come and say nothing to me, you know.  And a couple of year- this must have been 19--I was with Zappa [Frank Zappa] then.  No, '68 [1968], '69 [1969].  And then several years later I was with Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley] in '71 [1971], and I was playing the Beacon Theatre [New York, New York] with the Mahavishnu Orchestra and Cannonball Adderley.  And I was standing--we had played, and Mahavishnu was going on next.  Or was it the Weather Report?  But anyway, the Weather Report.  That's what it was, the Weather Report.  So I wound up coming off the stage, and I was standing there.  And Miles came and he said, "Hey, Duke [HistoryMaker George Duke]."  I said, "What?"  I said, "Hey, Miles, what's up?"  He said, "Man, what you doing in that band?"  And I'm like, "I'm just playing, I'm playing some music," (laughter).  "You ought to call me sometime."  I said, "Well, I ain't got no number on you."  And he walked away.  That's all he said.  And I said, I ain't got no number on Miles Davis, you know.  So, I went on about my business.  Next thing I know that I actually heard from him, was when he called and asked me to write him a song.  That was the next time.  Straight up, you know.  And, but we've been friend- ever since then we've been friends.  I mean I saw his big comeback here at the amphitheater, at the Universal [Universal Amphitheatre, Universal City, California]--yeah, you know, the amphitheater down there.  Not the amphitheater--the Hollywood Bowl [Los Angeles, California] when everybody was there.  He made his comeback because he had gone off the scene for a while.  I remember going down there and being back in his trailer.  I saw him at Universal when he was still with Cicely Tyson.  And we were backstage, just he, Cicely Tyson, me and Corine [Corine Duke].  And I don't--see, I can't say why--I don't know why we worked in terms of--he just liked me and we were cool with each other.  And he was always, he was funny.  And most people thought he was dark, and he was.  But offstage, man, he was funny, you know. I mean I had this tremendous respect for Cicely Tyson, and he would just tap her on the butt and say, you know, "Look."  He'd say, "Hey, George."  Yeah, he said, "See this ass?"  He said, "That's my ass."  And I'm like that's Cicely Tyson.  What is he talking about?  You know, Cicely Tyson.  You know, I mean I look at that as being like, you know, the goddess of being an actress, you know.  So, to see Miles just kind of like--that was tough.  You know, Corine kind of just--you know, my wife, Corine, she just kind of looked the other way.  But that's, that's what Miles was, you know.  And I'd see Miles disrespect people.  Sometimes I'd be in the room, and--you know, I can remember distinctly being in a trailer at the Hollywood Bowl with some friends back there.  And he said, "Hey, George."  I'm like, you know, that's what he called me.  A lot of people called me Duke, but he called me George.  And I went over there and he said, "Hey, man, you hear that stuff that--."  I won't name his name.  "Did you hear that shit he sent me?"  I said, "Yeah, I heard it."  He said, "Can you believe he sent me something like that?"  And the guy is standing right there.  And I said, "Yeah, Miles."  But he said, "Tell him, tell him don't ever send me no stuff like that again."  I can't, I don't want to say what I feel like saying, but you get the drift.  And I was like, "Oh, Miles, I mean lighten up, man."  You know, and the guy just kind of walks out of the room, there's nothing he can say.  So Miles could be cold, man.
Speaker 1: That's what I heard.  I mean I've heard it, you know.  That's what people say.
Speaker 2: And I'm being gentle language-wise.
Speaker 1: This is interesting.  But, yeah, so Miles Davis, he passed, what?  Was it in ninety--
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: --two [1992] or '93 [1993]?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  He used to call me and tell me to write different things.  Because he'd say, "I ain't dead yet.  You know, I want you to write me something."  But he was always, the interesting thing about him that I always loved about him is that he always looked forward, he never looked back.  I mean he always looked forward musically.  Or if he did look back in terms of like, I'm going to revisit some material, he did it a different way, you know.  So man, I mean how many times could you record some of those songs he recorded?  But they all sound different.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think he recorded the Cyndi Lauper song ['Time After Time'] last, I mean the last--
Speaker 2: And that became a hit, right.
Speaker 1: It became a bit hit.
Speaker 2: I used to, he used to play it live all the time.  Matter of fact that's when he played the Bowl; that song was popular.  When he hit that song, people went nuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a perfect song for him, lyrically.
Story_ID: 473664
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The one, one thing we didn't do, man, is--well, anyway the whole drummer thing, machine thing, came in, you know.  And so we kind of, that kind of screwed up that thing with me with Jeffrey [Jeffrey Osborne] for a while, because we stopped using live drummers.  That was a big mistake.  But we were enamored with the sound.  But 'Stay with Me Tonight,' see, the good thing about that is that it was a real drummer, but playing an electronic set.  It was Steve Ferrone.  And when we recorded that, I said, "Man, this is a hit record."  But the record company [A&M Records] said, "You're out of your mind."  And they, you know, we had to force them to release this.  And it was a big record.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  Well, all the, seems like all the songs on that album were hits, really (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, there're some great songs, great ballads, yeah.  Jeffrey was, he's the first one--you know, him and [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, actually, too.  But he was the first one who really made me think about lyric, really think about lyric.  So now I--you know, I was a musician.  So I was like if I get the music right, it'll take care of the lyrics.  You could say, "Oh, baby, how about me and you getting together and we'll live in the sea."  That's good enough, you know.  But Jeffrey used to agonize over a lyric.  And Dianne's the same way.  You know, that one little word can change the whole meaning of a phrase or a sentence.  And so I, now I've begun to do that in my own music, I mean especially with the last few albums that I've done.  And this, the new one is important.  I'm sitting in there really thinking about lyrics.
Speaker 2: I think that's a--
Speaker 1: Really thinking about lyrics.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting point you're making.  Because I think a lot of people consider Dianne Reeves, she's supposed to be a poet.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Osborne, when you listen to his lyrics, they're really--yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, he's serious about it.  Yeah, but then Dianne--yeah, well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean people, when she performs they sing along with those songs, and they really have a meaning.  I mean each word has a meaning.  So--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, Anita Baker writes her own lyrics, too, doesn't she, for a lot of her music?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  She's the same way; all of those, those real singers, you know.  But see, I came up from an instrumental thing, and so the lyric was not as important.  It was all about flying away, and you know, (singing), "Fly, fly, fly."  You know, it was all up here, you know.  But when I started working with Jeffrey, you know, he was like, he brought me right back to earth, you know.
Speaker 2: Like 'Feel,' though, I kind of like the lyrics to 'Feel.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: That was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Well, I still--but I wasn't--yeah, that was a--that was an accident (laughter).
Speaker 2: A very positive, you know, very positive--it was a good feeling (unclear) you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well now, my new album I got songs about Sudan, the situation in Darfur [Sudan].  I got, you know, just certain life questions, you know, along with some funny stuff too, you know.  I'll make sure you have an album before you leave.
Story_ID: 473665
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now you were telling me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kind of funky.
Speaker 1: --before we started the formal interview, we were talking about conversations you were having with Bootsy Collins, of all people.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: That, that, you know, a lot of people consider the--you know, kind of the comic side of funk and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Great musician.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But he's, you know, he's talking about what it means to be a musician, and what you owe the public and what you owe, you know, other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's, he's, he's definitely--Bootsy's definitely looking for something that's larger than his own existence.  And he, and from what I can tell, he really only wants to be involved in projects now that are really meaningful in terms of making a statement out in the world.  You know, he's just feeling--he's like, it's almost similar to what [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones went through at one point in his life when he said--Quincy's always looked for the huge thing.  I mean, you know, it's just--something little is not, is not enough for Quincy, you know.  He's always been about universality and just like--okay, we can take this and make this that.  And, and of course, he's always been like that, I mean with everything he does, you know.  So Bootsy kind of seems like he has, he's feeling that way about things now in terms of his projects.  Or doing something for kids, he's really involved in that.  I got involved with him in doing something for the fallen soldiers museum [Fallen Heroes Museum Foundation] in Cincinnati [Ohio], which is, which will open very soon.  Or maybe it has opened now, I'm not sure.  And I wrote a song for this album ['Dukey Treats']; it's an album as well.  And I thought it was a good thing, since I have a kid that's in the [U.S. military] service.  He's, you know, he just got back from Iraq and Kuwait.  And so I said absolutely I will be part of this.
Story_ID: 473666
Speaker 1: So, for you, like, when did you kind of like start thinking about music as a, as a message?
Speaker 2: Oh, I kind of--well, maybe around that time when I started working with Jeffrey [Jeffrey Osborne], you know.  I mean I'm not saying I didn't think about it, but my lyrics were more limited in terms of scope.  They were generally about love and anything around that.  Of course, it all revolves around that in the end anyway, you know, if you deduce it.  But I started thinking about specific subjects and questions, you know.  And I began making questions my song, as opposed to talking about, I love you, you love me, that kind of simple A, B kind of thing, ABC, and just asking a question.  Well, I have a song, for example, called 'Whatever Happened To...'  You know, and that's the name of the song.  And the lyric, I can't recite it word for word.  But it's something like, whatever happened to honor and love?  Whatever happened to respect?  Whatever happened to tolerance?  Whatever happened to respecting certain, you know, precepts of just, just--.  It all revolves around tolerance, you know, and patience.  Whatever ever happened to being able to just say, you know, "Have a nice day," something as simple as that.  It's the way people treat each other.  And it's all involved around what I call man's inhumanity to man.  And that's, and I think artists have a responsibility to talk about, to sing about, to write about the problems that are going on today.  It's not just all about bling bling and booty calls.  You know, there's got to be--and it's not all about just talking about I want to get you in bed, or love on the basic sense.  There are other levels of love, you know.  And the responsibility of that--talking about what's going on in Darfur [Sudan], or what's going on in certain other areas of this country.  You know, you name it.  There's enough to write about.  There're other things to write about besides love songs.  You know, and I wrote a song called 'Love Songs.'  Isn't there anything else?  Where are all the poets?  Where are all the guys that have other things to say?  That's why I started like spo- really getting into spoken word.  And I found a lot of the young artists, they're really, they're really writing about something here, you know, that maybe some of the songs should be written around what they're writing.  Or some of us that are writers, rather than just regurgitating what has come before--you know, because there are so many remakes now.  All the musicians are playing the songs from the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  It's wonderful.  Where are all the new writers?  Isn't there anything else to write about?  There's nothing going on?  Well, I refuse to believe that.  So my new album for example, 'Dukey Treats,' that's what it's about.  It's about, you know, music and life should be like a candy box.  Open it up, you get--this chocolate tastes a little different than that one.  You know, you have dark chocolate, light chocolate, and maybe chocolate with the nuts.  And it should be, music should be like that.  It's an experience, it's a journey.  And so, I think it's incumbent upon us artists to reflect that.  And it's always been like that through history.  We've reflected on what's going on in society in general, comment on it, and maybe make an opinion from time to time.
Speaker 1: Now this, this, you were saying before that in the past, I mean when you first started, you would write the music and then try to put a lyric to it, just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wouldn't even matter.
Speaker 1: But now, are you saying now that the lyric influences actually the sound of the music now?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely it can, yeah.  Well, I decided when I wrote the song "Sudan," that I was going to write a song about Sudan.  And I won't say the lyric came first, but the idea and the general tone of it came first.  I didn't have all the lyrics exactly, but I had the tone of what the lyric would be, and I made the music reflect that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a song called "Somebody Laid It on Us," which is you know simply, you know, somebody laid it us and told us that there's only one way; told us that we must fight each other, you know; that's the only way to win, so forth and so on, you know.  And you know, I'm not saying--I don't know how, where, or when, but somebody laid it us.  And it's a whole bunch of other people that follow this liar, this guy, and all of a sudden greed and envy--the whole--you know, I started talking about those kinds of subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And where does all that come from?  You know, is it natural to carry a gun?  You know, I mean, I'm throwing questions out there.  Even on the terms of love--I came up with this song called "No Rhyme, No Reason," which became very popular, you know.  And so I can't get off the stage without doing it, you know.  And I basically--it's a question, you know.  So, I like questions in songs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let people come up with their own answer.
Story_ID: 473667
Speaker 1: Now you've scored a couple movies, too, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What are the movies?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The first movie I scored was called 'Heavenly Kid' ['The Heavenly Kid'], which, which was probably, from what I understand, the dog of the year.  I think they said it was the worst, or one of the worst movies ever made.  You know, but the music was pretty cool.  The music was pretty nice.  I had Debra Laws in there singing and some other people.  It was, it was cool.  But more recently, the last movie I did was 'Never Die Alone,' which was a Ernest Dickerson film; he actually directed it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the videographer for Spike Lee--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for many years, and the director of photography.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  And I started working with him.  We did several films together, that one which was--
Speaker 1: A filmographer.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, cinematographer.
Speaker 1: Cinematographer.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There you go (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, someone with one of those long titles.
Speaker 1: I finally got it right.  So, cinematographer for Spike Lee.
Speaker 2: Well, I like--we came over and we developed a friendship.  I met him through a friend of mine, and she introduced me to him.  And I was like--yeah, we developed a friendship.  And you know, he likes music, and we just started talking.  He was aware of my work, and I was aware of his work.  And so we did this film called 'Never Die Alone,' and also [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg and [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover film called 'Good Fences.'  And I worked on 'The Five Heartbeats' with Stanley Clarke; I produced all the songs.  And that was really a song film, you know, it was a Robert Townsend film.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That was the--now that must have been--well, that must have been quite an experience working on that.  Because--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the songs carried them--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the movie.  I mean, that's what it's about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's a, that's a movie of songs, which is very similar to the Steve Martin film, 'Leap of Faith,' which is all songs, all gospel songs.  I produced all those songs and worked on it with Edwin Hawkins, you know, who did the choral arrangements, and so forth and so on.  So I've done a few.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's quite a few.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, well, not many.  But I don't--
Speaker 1: 'The Five Heartbeats' I know is a very significant movie in the black community.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It should have done a lot better than it did.  I mean I was surprised.
Speaker 1: I think it's going to have a life beyond, way beyond--
Speaker 2: I think so too.
Speaker 1: --the time period.
Speaker 2: And very true, too, a lot of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's what I hear.  So--
Speaker 2: And DMX [Earl Simmons] was a trip to work on--DMX was in the you--'Never Die Alone' film.  And he was a trip.  Because I can remember going to meet him, you know.  Because he was involved--he wanted me to work with his guy who does music.  And so essentially I did the score, and then his guy came in and put a couple of rap, a couple of beats underneath a couple of things.  And he was good, too.  Guy was good, no doubt about it, you know.  But that gave me a chance to--it was a dark, gothic almost kind of film, and about a serious subject matter, which actually I guess it is fairly autobiographical.  I mean you know, it was kind of a deep book ['Never Die Alone,' Donald Goines], you know.  But a very dark film.  It gave me a chance to write some gothic kind of music, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Good Fences' was a little different, though that was dark too, in spots.
Story_ID: 473668
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I did a lot of things for Disney [Walt Disney Records], you know, a lot of television stuff, a lot of theme songs, all those kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Now, what for Disney?  Now, you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: --music director for some- for a project.  I know that's the reason for the world hunger project or something?
Speaker 1: Well, I did Pediatric AIDS [Foundation for Pediatric AIDS], which was an album we did for kids ['For Our Children: The Concert'], which was a great thing.  And we did an album with a lot of--Geraldo [ph.], Geraldo--a bunch of those stars from back in the day.  That was interesting.  But I've also done some various things for, a lot of shows for Don Cornelius, you know, the Soul Train Awards show [Soul Train Music Awards] plus the regular show, along with some other kinds of benefit shows, you know, including the Mandela show [Nelson Mandela: An International Tribute for a Free South Africa], which after he [Nelson Mandela] got out of jail, before a hundred thousand people out in Wembley Stadium [London, England], I was the music director for about a third of that show, which involved Anita Baker as well, and Natalie Cole and Bonnie Raitt.  So, that was a lot of fun.  I got a chance to play a few tunes, yeah, and so forth and so on.  You know, what's that other thing?  The [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg ['Good Fences']--and I did a few of those as music director as well, the, the one they used to do on the, on HBO.  I can't think of the name.  Now I'm brain dead.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, all right.  I'm not sure exactly which one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anyway, yeah, I've done a few television shows.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Along with theme songs.  'Malcolm and Eddie,' did that theme song when it was on.  As a matter of fact, he was over here the other day.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Plays bass now, you know, Malcolm-Jamal, Jamal Warner [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner].  He's not Theo [Theo Huxtable] from 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] anymore.  (Laughter) The guy can really play.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Does spoken word and plays.
Speaker 2: So, you're involved in a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: And is it the diversity that's been, you know, the central to your success, you think?
Speaker 1: It keeps my juices flowing.  Man, if it wasn't for that, to me it would be like eating pasta every day.  I love pasta.  You say what's my favorite food?  Yeah, I like--well, I could have said greens.  I like greens too, you know.  But anyway, collard greens, whew, Lord have mercy.  Okay.  But no, I love pasta, but I wouldn't want to eat it every day.  I just, I'd--because I'd become bored.  I feel the same way about music.  I don't want to, you know, I can't listen to the same thing or play it the same way every time because I'll become bored and the music will become stale and cease to be alive.  I think in order for jazz to survive and remain vital, it needs to remain alive.  And that, so the spontaneity is a big part of that--
Story_ID: 473669
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about today's music?  I know it's mostly dominated by rap in the black community.  Do you have any thoughts about, about today's music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that--you know, it's funny.  I did an interview on My Jazz Network for (unclear) 'Dukey's Den' [ph.].  I had my band, and we were talking about that very subject.  And there were a lot of ideas about it.  My take on it is that there's certain aspects of the whole, the rap thing that I like, you know.  For me there's not enough music in it to keep my interest; music, I mean with changes.  I mean the same beat over and over again for four minutes, it's the same way I feel about pasta.  I get tired.  Can't you change it a little bit?  Or what about a different chord change?  Or what about--you know, I'm looking for a little more sophistication on the music side.  It doesn't mean all of it.  It just means a lot of it bothers me because there's just not enough meat in the music for me to grab on to, to hold my interest.  But I, but the rhyming part of it, except for the negativity, I can get with that because I know that takes some talent to do that, and I like what they're doing.  Some of the subject matter I don't, I'm not with.  I prefer music which--you know, I'm not saying it's not keeping it real, but there's other ways of saying certain things and keeping a positive spin on what you're talking about.  And I prefer music that's positive, but still keeping it real.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Without being degrading.  And I think that's the, that's the main thing.  But in terms of jazz, jazz could--well, this whole movement has become smooth jazz, which I'm not kind of with.  Now, and I'll be quick with this.  I mean the whole smooth jazz thing has become--they took a small part of what David Sanborn, me, Earl Klugh, a whole bunch of other--Grover Washington [Grover Washington, Jr.]--you know, you name it--some things that we did and made a format out of it, and then kind of took us out of it.  And then there was a whole group of musicians that came up, that that's all they do.  So that, that's what they do.  They don't go much deeper than that.  While the other musicians--myself, David Sanborn a few other people, you know, they, we can go a lot deeper than that.  And so it's almost like we look at that and say, well, what, that's kind of surface, you know, it's not deep enough for us.  It's almost like the whole thing with certain rap music not being deep enough musically for me to sink my teeth into.  I can't sink my teeth into that, because it sounds like glorified elevator music.  You know, it's a little better than elevator music, but it's soft, it's meant to relax people, which is fine.  It's nice to have music that relaxes people.  But see, I look at Miles Davis, 'Kind of Blue.'  That's relaxing to me, and the music is much more sophisticated than what I'm hearing generally on smooth jazz radio.  Now, smooth jazz radio is beginning to die out at this point, which, you know, which--so be it, you know.  But I think they kind of--just like the record labels are kind of dying out at this point.  I think they laid their own bed.  They made their own bed and their own grave, you know.  And I won't go too deep into that.  But I think a lot, there are some jazz musicians out there quote, unquote jazz players that are really trying to push the envelope.  Young players that I've heard in schools--I'm doing a lot of teaching in schools and artist-in-residence things--man, these guys are ready to play, and they're no joke.  And they are there, so I look at the glass as being half full.  And I think if they get the--the balance is what's needed.  It's okay to have that, but you need this other thing, because there're a lot of people not being serviced.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Their souls are not being serviced.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the new voices (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you wouldn't know them.  I mean they're in school.  A lot of people that I've heard are in school.  I think there are some young artists like Ledisi, for example, who I think she started out doing this one thing, and she sounds like--musically she's doing kind of a step to the left of Jill Scott, somewhere in there, which is cool.  Because that's kind of, that's got some music in it.  But she is capable and has the talent, along with Rachelle Ferrell and some others that I know of, going way beyond that.  And I just hope that she's allowed to display it.  So, it's really up to the people in p- or, she's got to have the hutzpah to go in and say, "Hey, you know what?  Okay, cool, I like that.  But I'm going to do this."  And it's going to take--artists are the ones that are going to have to do it.  And hopefully the Internet is a great equalizer, and allow artists to be able to make music that comes from their heart as opposed to what they think radio will play.  That's where the problem is.  It's that people are making music for radio formats instead of making music from their soul, what they feel like they have to make.  And the only music that's worth anything is the music that you have to make because you have to make it.  It's got nothing to do with money.
Story_ID: 473670
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a good question.  Probably not, probably not.  I mean, it's maybe eat a little less pasta (laughter) so I could be thin like you, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now that's a joke.  If people could see me, I'm too far from you, I think (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Makes sounds) If you could see me now, yeah.  No, I think things happened the way they're supposed to happen, you know.  And the choices--I've been fortunate to make some decent choices.  I've made some bad choices too, but overall the balance I think is okay.  That's, that's the one gift I think that God gave us, is the ability to choose.  And I think it's a very important, very important aspect of this whole thing, is our ability to choose right and wrong, good, bad, you know.  And I subscribe to the Duke Ellington philosophy, there's only two kinds of music: good and bad.  So style is irrelevant, you know.  People--style--putting a category on something is for selling music, and for categorizing it and putting it in a certain area to be able to find it later.  It's a library thing, you know.  It's got nothing to do with art.  It should have nothing to do with creativity.  And artists should create.  If you have the ability to create, you should be allowed to create.  And so, hopefully that's what will happen in the future.
Story_ID: 473671
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back over your career, what today--and you still have a lot more to do.
Speaker 2: I hope so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm a nice guy that tried to treat people right, you know.  You know, I try to meet people halfway.  That's the main thing.  And I think if I had to say how would I like to be remembered, I think that's up to them to decide.  I wouldn't want to decide that.  But I try to be, try to meet people halfway, do the right thing, and make the best music I can, make people smile.  It's as simple as that.  But make them think at the same time, because you got to give them what they want.  But somewhere in there, you got to give them what they need.  Hello.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you answered that not in terms of, you know, the power in music so much as about your personality, how you treat other people, you know, that, that, you know, you answered about that being more important than the actual music.
Speaker 2: Well, the music, the music is me.  And that's me; the music represents me.  That is who I am.  If you want to know who I am, just listen to the music.  And there's a lot of craziness there, but there's a lot of seriousness there at the same time.  And so I hope people can see that balance and be able to meet me somewhere in the middle and really look at it and see it.
Story_ID: 473672
Speaker 1: You mentioned your s- I met one son.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned another.  How many children do you have, and--?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have two kids.  John [John Shiffer], who you met, is actually my stepson, who I met when he was three.  And he's the one that's in the [U.S. military] service that just came back from Iraq.  My other son, Rashid [Rashid Duke], is younger, and he's a musician.  He has his own band with Flora Purim's daughter and Airto's [Airto Moreira] daughter [Diana Moreira Booker].  And Walter Booker, who's a bass player with Cannonball Adderley--his son [Krishna Booker] is a rapper in the band.  And they got kind of a ja- kind of a Brazilian hip-hop jazz band with a live drummer and everything.  And it's a good band.  They got a record they just finished.  The name of group is called Eyedentity, with an eye, like E-Y-E-dentity.  And so he, he's my son.  'Course I have my wife, Corine [Corine Duke], we've been married for thirty-six years.  And we've been, we've been through some interesting times.  I've had some, written some songs (laughter) about our relationship through the years.  But we're still here, and we're doing well.
Story_ID: 473673
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, there's always something.  But, you know, I might be brain dead now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question, you already addressed it some ways, but I'm going to ask it anyway.  It's similar to legacy, but we always ask people, how would you like to be remembered, Sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I think that's for other people to decide.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you.  I know I'll always remember you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you for doing this interview.
Speaker 2: All right, you're very welcome, Larry [Larry Crowe] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 473674
Speaker 1: That's me, [HistoryMaker] George Duke.  And what age was I there?  What did you say it was?  Five?  What did you say?  You say I had the same outfit on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, five.
Speaker 1: About five years old?  I look kind of studious.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is like a bit earlier.
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord Jesus, what is this?  Oh, my god.  Is that me?
Speaker 1: I think so.  I'm pretty sure it's you.  It looks like you.  It's on a porch.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, that's definitely the porch where I lived in Marin City [California].  And I don't remember the number of the apartment that we had.  But I--if that's me (laughter).  I can't tell if that's me.  Well--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You said you were an only child.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.  But there were other kids.  There were five units.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It could be somebody else.  You know, that's terrible, I can't tell.  But I can't tell--
Speaker 1: It might be you.
Speaker 2: --if it's me, I look like I'm about what?  Three?  Is there anything--nothing written on there on the back?  Nothing?
Speaker 1: Eleven months old.
Speaker 2: Eleven months old.   Well, maybe it is me.  If she didn't put any name on there, it's probably me.  My lord.  What's wrong with my hair (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  What's this one?
Speaker 2: Okay.  What does it say there?  It just says--my mom used to call me Mac.  So, George Mac.  I look like I'm about, I'm a teenager there, looks like to me.  Looks like I may be around sixteen.  That's what it looks like.  I can't tell where it is, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Ah, well, this is my mom and dad.  That's my mom, Beatrice [Beatrice Burrell Duke], and my dad, Thaddeus [Thaddeus Duke].  And this looks like it's, it doesn't look like Marin City.  That looks like Texas to me, but I could be wrong.  It looks like an early picture.  But it could be in Marin City, I just can't quite tell.  But it looks a little earlier than that.  Is there anything on the back of that?
Speaker 1: No, just one hundred, I don't know what that--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Studio, name of the studio.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is--
Speaker 1: Texas.  This is, yeah, this is--
Speaker 2: That's in Texas?
Speaker 1: Longview, Texas.
Speaker 2: Longview.  Yeah, it looked like, it didn't look like Marin City.  Okay, this one is, this is the boys club.  We had a club.  It was Jeffrey Osborne--from left to right, Jeffrey Osborne; next Howard Hewett; then myself, George Duke; then Stanley Clarke.  And we had a boys club where we used to hang out, and one day a week we'd all go out and do something together.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About what year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wyatt [Donn Wyatt] broke it up.  Wyatt said okay, that's--that lasted about two, three months.
Speaker 1: Is it the late '70s [1970s] or early--
Speaker 2: That was, yeah, in the '80s [1980s] I think.  In the '80s [1980s], I'd say.  Howard still had some hair (laughter).
Speaker 1: The early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Oh, my lord, I have no idea what this is.  It says 1948, that's what it looks like.  It says Marin City Nursery, October '48 [1948].  So, oh there's some names in there.  See, I can't tell which one I am.  I look like the one with that little hat.  Wait a minute, where am I?
Speaker 1: Is that you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  Let's see.
Speaker 2: I think that's me with that hat.
Speaker 1: Right there?
Speaker 2: I think that's me, yeah.  She didn't write it down, huh?  Anyway, that's, I guess that's my nursery.  I haven't seen that picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I'd have to look at it longer.  But I think that's it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (unclear) next.
Speaker 2: Ah.  Okay.  This is the first year that I joined Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention.  And--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Starting left to right, if I can remember who's there.  That's Mark Volman, who was the lead singer in the band.  Behind him is Aynsley Dunbar, who was the drummer.  And then it looks like Jeff Simmons on--he was the bass player.  Next to him is Ian Underwood, who was the keyboard player.  And then next to him is Howard Kaylan, who was also a lead singer.  They were formerly with The Turtles.  Sitting down in the chair is Frank Zappa, and then of course me sitting down next to Frank.  That was the original 1970 Mothers of Invention.
Speaker 1: I thought The Turtles were happy together, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, but they joined, were happy with Frank after that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Ah.  Okay.  This picture looks like it was taken when I was working with the--Raul de Souza, who's a trombonist.  It was the first album that I did ['Sweet Lucy'], and this looks like it's from that same session.  And that would have been probably around 1973 maybe, or maybe a little before.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: It could be a little earlier than that.  Ah.  That's me and Milton Nascimento.  Milton Nascimento's a Brazilian artist.  I went to Brazil in 1979, '80 [1980] and did a Brazilian album ['A Brazilian Love Affair'], and that's when this was photographed in Brazil.
Speaker 1: I had no idea you were associated with his music.  I'm just amazed at all the people that I listen to that you had something to do with.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Watch the center on the photos.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is my very first band when I was in high school [Tamalpais High School, Mill Valley, California].  From left to right is Al Pimentel on drums; Nat Johnson [Nathaniel Johnson] was the bass player; and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Ah.  Well, I don't know when this was taken, but this is myself and Jeffrey Osborne, I guess when he got his first Gold record.  And this was probably 'On the Wings of Love,' I can't see it from here.  Can't tell what it says.  Oh, wait a minute.  No, it's, oh, J.O., I see.  That's a--yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is myself and Stanley Clarke from the first album we did together, which was 'Clarke/Duke Project I' ['The Clarke/Duke Project'].  And, you know, I don't even need to say it; it's right on there (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, (unclear) next.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Okay, I used to wear capes.  This is myself with the Dukey stick, which is just about to go off, which is about to ignite what we call the Dukey ball.  And I used to have an instrument in there.  It was a big globe kind of thing, and that's about it.  That's me with the Dukey stick, complete with cape.  That was part of the show that we had during the 1980s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: This is 1981 right here.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1981.  That's myself, left to right Jeffrey Osborne, and a funny little mascot that we used to have in the studio here [Los Angeles, California] that Stanley Clarke gave me one Christmas.  He's now retired, in Malacca [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: The first act that I produced in the United States was with this guy.  His name is Raul de Souza, and he's a trombo- Brazilian trombonist extraordinaire.  And see me there with a (unclear), it's like I'm getting ready to do some damage on his album.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is myself, left to right, George Duke.  Then we got Rodney Franklin in the center, and [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock on the right.  This looks like it might have been taken backstage at one of the Newport festivals [Newport Jazz Festival] or Playboy festivals [Playboy Jazz Festival].  Date?  Looking at the collar, that had to be, shoot, early '70s [1970s] with a collar like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '70s [1970s], that's '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: That wide--
Speaker 1: Maybe mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Mid-'70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, more than likely mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the big glasses look came out around (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is the club that I worked at in San Francisco [California] with Al Jarreau all those years.  This is Carmen McRae and myself.  Carmen used to stop by when she was in town, in the San Francisco Bay Area [California], and sit in.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Barbara McNair.
Speaker 2: Same setting, from the Half Note club on Divisadero Street in San Francisco.  Barbara McNair with the George Duke Trio.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: And this is my old funk band.  We used to go out and tour when 'Reach For It' became a hit.  From left to right, you got Ndugu Chancler [Leon "Ndugu" Chancler], who's the drummer.  Right next to him, right in front of him sort of, is Josie James who's now with Burt Bacharach, got Byron Miller, who for many years worked with Luther Vandross on bass.  Then Muffy, Muffy Hendrix [Sharon Hendrix] below that, who was in the band for a while, she's a singer.  Then we have myself, and then on the right, the only white guy in there is Charles "Icarus" Johnson, and then we got Sheila E. [Sheila Escovedo].  It's an interesting story about Charles "Icarus" Johnson.  I heard he has the biggest right wing site on the Internet that you can find out he's a totally different kind of cat than he was back then.  Anyway, and Sheila E., the last one there.  And then Donald Dugg [ph.], he didn't play in the band.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Did you all say something to him?
Speaker 1: No.  I tried to get him to play on this album ['Dukey Treats'], but you know, he kind of--.  Okay, this was done at a session that I did for the 'Illusions' CD, which was on Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Records, Inc.].  From left to right we got Ray Brown, the incredible bassist; my cousin [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves; myself; [HistoryMaker] Terri Lyne Carrington, who's a drummer; and Kirk Fra- (laughter) Kirk Franklin--Kirk Whalum on saxophone.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: They sent us something.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a clipping from an article that was written on my mom when she was kind of angry at the Sausalito School District [Sausalito Marin City School District].  So this is my mom, Beatrice Lucile Duke, and (laughter) with a pose that's probably not quite flattering.  But she was, she was pissed off.
