Story_ID: 87578
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, I feel like I'm--did something wrong.  It's Dr. Sampson Davis, S-A-M-P-S-O-N, Davis, D-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a middle name or nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: Middle name is Marshall, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 19th, 1973, Newark, New Jersey is the place and born in the same hospital that I currently work in now, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Emergency Medicine Physician.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June the 16th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now, we're in the home that I reside in, as well as run the Foundation out of, so, 60--, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't have to give us the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, that's why I held back (laughter).
Story_ID: 87579
Speaker 1: All right.  Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It just requires a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue, yeah, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Um, not really, not really.  I've been to so many places and each one I find something that I like there. I think the last trip I took to Brussels [Belgium], I enjoyed the most, so far.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Um, I have a few.  One is, something like the Nike slogan, "Just make it happen".  I often use the three "D's" in comparison to what we're about, when I'm about and that's, "Dedication, Determination, and Discipline" and with those three "D's", is my thought that you can accomplish anything at hand.
Story_ID: 87580
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you about your family history, I mean, how far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: My immediate family, I can go back as far as, you know, to childhood, something to remember as far as the generations that separate us, my grandparents--my parents [Kenneth O'Neal Davis and Ruthener Lawson Davis] were pretty much older when they had me so I didn't really have an opportunity to meet any of my grandparents.  One was still alive and she passed away when I was around four, so I have vague memories of my grandparents.  I have uncles and aunts I'm able to trace back but I don't have the lineage of the Davis family and the Lawson family which is my mother's maiden name.  I pretty much can go one or two generations and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, are there any stories passed down through the family about ancestors of long ago in slavery or free or in reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother shared stories with me often about her father in which I didn't have an opportunity to meet and how he used to man the farm and how she had to stop school at her early age.  She was brought up in South Carolina, Longwood, South Carolina, and she had to stop school when she was around seven, eight years old because her mother had passed away and she had to go and help on the farm.  And when I was young, I just didn't understand the concept because, they say, well, you mean you had to quit school and I thought that was like the best thing, you know, quit school at the time 'cause every kid sometimes don't want to be going to school, getting up early in the morning, but as I got older, the story just became more rich to me.  And she explained to me how she stopped school and she wasn't afforded an education because she had to stay at home and help take care of the brothers and the sisters and help on the farm.  So, back then, the concept during the 1930s, 1940s, when my mother was born, was pretty much everything dealt with the farm, being that she was from South Carolina, and everything sort of centered around that agriculture there and sort of growing the tobacco and the cotton and sort of bringing in the crops at the end of the years to make money.  So, she shared those stories with me.  She tells me often about my uncle, who I'm named after, and I've never had an opportunity to meet, whose life was cut short as well in his 20s and she reminds me of stories similar to that.  As far as my father, he tells me stories about his mother and the ways that she used to sort of raise them and it just--it's almost like--
Story_ID: 87581
Speaker 1: Yeah he's [Davis' father, Kenneth O'Neal Davis] with me and he tells me about his mother and how she helped to raise him and his brothers and sisters and it's almost like night and day in comparison when talking to them compared to now, versus then, and some of the luxuries that we have as far as technology is concerned and some of the struggles they had to overcome in this country alone and expressing their voices and how they sacrifice so much just to--so that we can have what we have today.  And it's always a--it's a nostalgic feeling, almost, just sometimes to sit back and listen to these stories over the fireplace.
Story_ID: 87582
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your father's name, full name, and spell it for us and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His full name is Kenneth O'Neal Davis, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, O'Neal, O-N-E-A-L, "O" hyphen [sic, apostrophe] N-E-A-L, Davis, D-A-V-I-S.  He was born in Hemingway, South Carolina, 19--December 12th, 1926.  And my mother, oh, something's wrong?
Speaker 1: I'll ask about your mother too.  We start with one--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then go to the other--
Speaker 2: --and go to the other, that's fine.
Speaker 1: --but, tell us about your father.  Like what was he like, you know, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was--he joined--he was born in South Carolina.  He joined the [U.S] Army and him and my mother [Ruthener Lawson Davis] married when he was 17, I believe she was 15.  Actually, he was a little bit older.  She was 15 and I think he was around maybe 20, 21, something like that.  And they married and she--they went on.  He went into the Service, the Armed Services, and she stayed home with his family.  And that was pretty much the common in those days, sort of to have that type of lifestyle.  And he went into the Army and he shows me pictures of when he was in Japan and traveling to different parts while serving in the Army.
Speaker 1: Did he serve in World War Two?
Speaker 2: He had some affiliations.  I don't know the exact extent but he shows me pictures of when he was on a ship and different affiliations during the World War.  He returned home to South Carolina and then they moved from South Carolina to New Jersey in, around 1950s, but during the time in South Carolina he picked up odd trade jobs and he was told to come to Jersey because of the better lifestyle, the better living.  So he came to New Jersey and, once again, he worked odd jobs and he finally landed his career path which was at the airport.  He was an airplane fueler.  He drove the gas trucks and fueled the airplanes and he spent thirty-five plus years doing it--doing that and retired about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now what kind of person is he, I mean, what did he--
Speaker 2: He's--he's--his enjoyment centered around music.  He plays the bass guitar.  He had several groups that he took part in playing a guitar throughout his life and he loves jazz and blues and if some guy's out there, he often gets their CDs, well not CDs, back then it was all vinyl or eight tracks and he would get the record, pretty much play to the beat of the record, and that was sort of his enjoyment.  As far as his personality, he's very quiet, very serious.  He does have a soft side, like this emotional side, but he doesn't often show that and I don't know how much of that was this--due to his upbringing but he was pretty much about business.  And he reared his family and, you know, prior to him and my mother separating, he was--he went to work every day, came home every day, sort of a traditional American family but he--he was a hard worker.  He really stayed committed to his job and stayed and provided for the family.
Story_ID: 87583
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her full name and date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her full name is Ruthener Davis, maiden name is Lawson, R-U-T-H-E-N-E-R, L-A-W-S-O-N, Davis, D-A-V-I-S.  She was born June the 5th, 1932 from Longwood, South Carolina and--
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, well, what is she like and what does she do?
Speaker 2: She--she--well, she pretty much--she was a housewife for all her life.  And it's funny that traditional paths, at least from what I understood from where they came from, the man met the woman and pretty much the man was the provider for the family.  And the woman would stay home and be the nurturer, take care of the children and sort of take care of the house and that's sort of the concept that they came under in the 1940s when they met.  And she pretty much never explored beyond that and she stayed home and took care of us and that was her goal and that's really what she lived for was for her children she often says.  And when my father [Kenneth O'Neal Davis] left, about 15, 20 years ago now, she--she was forced to go on public assistance because she didn't have a marketable trade.  She never was afforded the education after her mother passed away when she was seven.  So, there was not much she can do.  So she pretty much spends her time within the home, taking care of the home, taking care of the children, and that was her duties day-in and day-out.  And when she tried to--she did work for a little while when she was younger.  She would pick up odd jobs and work in factories, but since her education was limited, she never had opportunity to branch beyond some of the odd jobs that she picked up doing during the days while she was younger.
Story_ID: 87584
Speaker 1: Okay, so, your parents split up.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How old were you when they split up?
Speaker 2: It had to be, I want to say maybe around ten or eleven, so--
Speaker 1: It seems that your--your parents are--were older--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I guess, well--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Very cultural, very traditional Southerners when it came down to it.  Believed in working hard and sort of followed the--the traits that were instilled in them at an early age.
Speaker 1: Now you had like six--six brothers and sisters or five?
Speaker 2: It's a total of six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have three brothers and two sisters and I'm the fifth one out of six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 87585
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up and--first of all, tell us what the neighborhood was like--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean growing up--I grew up in Newark, New Jersey and Newark is just like any other inner-city neighborhood across the country.  Just a lot of emptiness, a lot of gun-toting people on the corners hustling every day, people robbing each other.  Just a lot of hopelessness and despair.  And growing up underneath those sort of--that sort of backdrop, just kind of leave you feeling the same way.  And just like any other kid, I came home, I was born in--I didn't know any different, I thought I was the richest, most wealthiest, most, you name it, I thought I had it all and as I started to come of age and saw all that surrounded me, a lot of my hopes and aspirations started to just disappear just because I didn't have anything there to cultivate it, to develop it.  So, I found myself often, sometimes, being geared or moving towards some of the negative temptations and often found myself trying to find a good in situations but it just wasn't too much good walking in my streets.  I didn't see a doctor, I didn't see a lawyer, an architect, a writer, teacher, none of those images walking my blocks on a daily basis.  So, it often left me saying, well, what am I going to do in my life?  And when people ask me, do I have goals, sure I had goals but I didn't believe in any of it to be true.  I thought it was all fantasy, they felt like fantasy.  A lot of it felt like dreams because I had--there was not one person I really could go to sort of tap as a resource to develop some of my dreams and if I were to--stayed at McDonald's all my life as a worker, that would have been fine and expected and accepted by my community.  And there's nothing wrong with that type of employment but at the same time when it came to dreaming, the dreams were not fulfilled.  Almost like a raisin in the sun, you know, it just never developed.  And that's where I think a lot of what I am today pretty much stems from a lot of negative upbringing, a lot of negative roots and temptations.  I just saw the bad in that and tried to aim for something different but it was almost like a needle in a haystack, it just--it wasn't no target that I can really lean on or depend on to show me the way.  And that was Newark.  That was Newark and that's just like Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], Atlanta [Georgia], you name it, it's similar to those other inner-cities where some of it often says, is it done intentionally because I'm riding up the street today, actually, you could see a billboard for, you know, the name brand malt liquor but where's the billboard for the educators or something that's positive that's going to send that subliminal message to that child, who's coming of age like myself, who wants to dream, who wants to grow into something, who wants to be the next CEO of Ford or, you name it, wants to be the next leader of tomorrow.  Where is that nurturing at?  And it's a--it's a lack thereof--it's a lack within a lot of our streets and part of my effort is to make a difference.  How I overcame it?  Ah, man, you know, there are so many different facets to that.  My--my--
Story_ID: 87586
Speaker 1: Well let's--let me just ask you, what kind of a kid were you growing up?  I mean, what were you thinking about and what were your personality like?
Speaker 2: Right, I mean growing up I felt often--I felt like I was a good kid in a bad situation.  That's probably the best way to describe it.  And I felt that I was becoming bad and I felt like I was soon going to be out of control.
Speaker 1: Did you find yourself doing things that you didn't agree with, I mean, I wouldn't have ordinarily done because of peer pressure and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and how much of it--you see there's a thin line between peer pressure and doing it because that's all you know.  And that's what it was becoming, it was becoming something that's all I knew.  My gut used to tell me--I used to get like this wrenching feeling in my gut like this isn't right but after awhile it just became what I knew.  Everybody else was doing some of the bad things.  I was a very athletic kid coming up so playing baseball, playing basketball, playing football, being good at it, helped to protect you from the streets.  Hands down, it just kind of put you in that cool category where the other wrongdoers within the neighborhood wouldn't touch you.  So I was able to do that.  But as I started to embark upon my teenage years, I was reaching that point where I was able to be a soldier, per se, on that corner, just like the rest of the teenagers that were standing out there and I was expected to do bad.  I would get a pat on the back if I did bad but I wouldn't get any acknowledgment if I did good.  So it left me in this limbo feeling because I would go to school and I just--I had the gift of insight and I think God blessed each one of us with a certain gift and a certain skill and mine was insight.  I was able to see things and like, wow, how many sixty-five year old drug dealers do you see with a pension plan and a 401(k) and a Roth IRA, you just don't see these images.  So I was able always to sort of navigate that in my mind but at the same time I didn't have any other options as an outlet, at least what was perceived to me at first.  My reality within my box was I was next in line to go on that corner and hustle.  That's what was expected of me.  So, I played sports for a while and after reality that, just like many of our other youths have, that I wasn't going to make it pro, you know, there wasn't nothing else left for me really to aim for.  To be a doctor, please, please, how--that's as farfetched as winning the lottery, at that time to me.  I had a better chance of winning the lottery.  So I was an energetic kid, I was joyful, playful, had a sense of humor but I started to embark upon this (unclear) of limbo which left me feeling almost like a schizophrenic in a sense because I wanted to do right but so much was being--so much wrong was happening around me that eventually I found myself doing wrong.  I was able to maintain my grades but I never was able to share my grades with my friends because of the ridicule--because of the teasing that I would sustain from doing that.  So it left me feeling like, almost like the real me never had the chance to develop.
Story_ID: 87587
Speaker 1: And I never felt like, to a certain degree, that my childhood was even filled with certain childhood images like cartoons and toys and things like that because once my father left, I had to start taking care of myself at age 11 and 12, trying to make ends meet.
Speaker 2: Did you see your father [Kenneth O'Neal Davis] on a regular basis?
Speaker 1: He came by.  Yeah, he came by and the one thing that I must admit that, you know, really helped lift my head up and keep me going, like my baseball games, he always came to.  And that just meant so much to me at the time like, you know, it's--it's hard 'cause often mothers and fathers may go through divorce and splits and what can you do but just as a father, especially, if--if you're the sole caregiver or the mother--whoever is the sole caregiver, the person who's playing the peripheral--periphery, has to come in and do things and going to events and him being at my baseball games and coming to my graduations, I mean, that right there you just can't replace it, you know.  So, I'm happy to see that he did that but financially it just was hard.  It was hard and going on welfare and trying to make $400 a month stretch for the family is--it's unrealistic.  You know, 400 bucks a month, you do the math, it's--it's nothing for one person and to have mouths to feed, it's just really that much of a strain.  So at age 11, 12, I was finding ways to sort of stay above and make money.  I would do creative things like clean up around people's homes and get money for that.  I would collect cans and sell aluminum cans for money.  I would lend--everyone has that uncle or aunt in their family that blows their checks every time they get it that Friday so I'd lend that uncle money on Tuesday and he would pay me back double on Fridays.  So, I came up with creative ways to, for all intents and purposes, to hustle, then when I realized that wasn't really making ends meet.  Then I picked up a side job at McDonald's when I was fifteen.  I lied and told them--well, I don't want to say lie, creatively said I was sixteen at the times because I needed money and I was fifteen I started working at a McDonald's and that wasn't cutting it and I wanted to be in line and in fact show everybody else so I started doing what I had to do to make those ends meet, you know.  And those are the choices I had to choose from.
Speaker 2: What kind of stuff?  Was it illegal?
Speaker 1: Well it's not--some of it is somewhat illegal, I guess, in a sense.  It's just things that I wouldn't have--put it like this, you have a multiple choice test and these are your choices:  A, sell drugs, B, rob people, C, break in people's homes, the same thing as robbing people, stick up banks, whatever, but these are your four choices you have to do--deal with.  So which one are you going to choose from?  I tried the selling drug game, it wasn't me.  It just was something that I didn't like the whole idea of someone being able to pull up and rob me on a corner or shoot me over a vial of drug, it just wasn't something that I was into.
Story_ID: 87588
Speaker 1: I got caught up in a robbery game for a little while as well and, you know, once again, I started to lose friends.  I started to see people dying, you know, and even when I--I speak about it in the book [The Pact: Three Young Men Make A Promise and Fulfill A Dream] that we [Davis, HM Rameck Hunt, and HM George Jenkins] wrote about, being arrested for armed robbery as a juvenile and how that pivotal point right there served as the turning point in my life.  And sometimes something bad really has to happen to you in order for you to turn your life around.  But the guys that I was involved with that two of them are dead now, you know.  So there's four of us, so two are dead.  And that's just--that could have easily been me, hands down, could easily have been me.  And I'm not proud of it and even with revealing some of it is somewhat a fear factor attached to it but I realize there are other people in my situations, and if you're not in my situations, there are other people who have struggles that they're dealing with in life.  And that's the point about it.  We--I don't care how you fix it.  I don't care where you're from.  I don't care what your family may have or what they may not have.  I don't care how much love in your family and how much love there isn't, there's always going to be challenges and obstacles that you have to face as an individual and those are called life experiences.  And some of us navigate them quite well and some of us don't.  But the point is to be there for each other while going through it.  The point is to be a support system and to lend that helping hand to your fellow man, your fellow woman, while you're going through these different struggles.  That's the main ingredient.  And my upbringing and my decisions that I made as a juvenile or as a youngster, I don't make any excuses for, but I know for sure I would have choose differently if that multiple choice would have had some other options on there, but it didn't.
Speaker 2: Oh sure, I mean, you know, it's a tough time to grow up in a, you know, in a time when, you know, when people of a generation ago had a mixed community, you know, before integration.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And all of the people with means left the community.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: And at that time, the crack epidemic was starting to come about.  It's just--I don't know, I look back at it now and I'm just--sometimes I have to pinch myself because one, I can't believe I made it out of there.  Literally, I've lost more than a handful of friends from the drug game, from the gun violence, from HIV/AIDS, which has really destroyed our nation, and I don't know.  Like sometimes I sit back and people are like, man, how can you keep so much inspiration and stay so motivated.  And if I sit back and I think about it, I don't know how 'cause if I really break it down to the pure entity of what it all means, it's--it's this hopeless, it really is.
Story_ID: 87589
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Dayton Street Grammar School [Dayton Street Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Dayton Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  And that was--
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in the community, it's called (unclear) Home Projects and they was called, a.k.a., Dayton Street Projects because it was on Dayton Street.  And it was one of the high-rise projects in the City of Newark [New Jersey].  They all have since been destroyed.  And Dayton Street was known, man, it was--within the neighborhood, there were certain projects like Dayton Street, Prince Street, Seventh Avenue Projects and all these projects had a reputation, pretty much that they protected and if you weren't from that part of the neighborhood, you better not find yourself in that part of the neighborhood unless you had some sort of an affiliation with somebody who lived there.  We had a skating rink, which was pretty well-known for--it was Twin City Skating Rink.  Now I lived within the community of Dayton Street.  It was a home right across the street from the projects but it was pretty much I lived in the projects, if you want to break it down, 'cause it was just literally fifty yards away and that's where I was every day, that's where I hung out every day as much as my mother [Ruthener Lawson Davis] tried to keep me on the straight and narrow when the streets are tempting you and lurking you in every different direction from a simple walk, from my home, to the Dayton Street School, which is probably two blocks, you can be solicited many times by different people who want you to sell drugs, steal cars, rob people, so you could learn those traits quite well.  So, Dayton Street was a--it's--it had teachers--yeah, some teachers there who cares, like my fifth grade and my sixth grade teacher and my third grade teacher, are three teachers that come to mind that really stand out as taking the extra time out with me but then there are other teachers who just didn't seem to care and--
Speaker 1: What were the names of those teachers that seem to care and what did they do to inspire you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well my third grade teacher, Ms. Davis, who recently came to the hospital to see me, she just, I don't know, she just made me feel like I was smart, like she made me feel like if I applied myself and do my work that I can go on to achieve great things but she made me feel that way.  Still, I think some of the excuses that, at least I think of sometime, is that it was hard for her to kind of combat the voices that was my reality, at the time.  So I was able to dream with her.  I was able to sort of step outside of my box and see what she was saying, but after the third grade, I moved on to my fourth grade.  My fifth grade teacher was a Mrs. Spates [ph.] who was really--she believed in that kind of hard loving type of ritual and she was hard on us and she--especially on the boys, she would just expect excellence for us and if we misbehave in class, she had no problem with pulling out the paddle and giving you some extra lovin'.  And my sixth grade teacher, Ms. Schimmel [ph.], was the one who just saw the intelligence that I have, the academic excellence and geared me towards University High School.  If it was not for her, the whole pact, the whole doctor, the whole path probably would have never developed.
Story_ID: 87590
Speaker 1: Okay, now, University High School, is that a special high school?
Speaker 2: It's one of the magnet schools in Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a magnet high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: It's geared towards gifted and talented students and they're from all different local schools in Newark.  You've got to apply to take a test to get in to get accepted.  It goes from the seventh grade to the twelfth grade but you can gain entry in the ninth grade as well.
Speaker 1: Did you enter in the ninth grade or--
Speaker 2: The seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  So I came in in the seventh grade in 19--I think '85' [1985] it was, and that's where I met George, [HM] George Jenkins.
Speaker 1: So you were making pretty good grades then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always did well I was in school but I never--I camouflaged it.  So that's--that's part of the whole thing.  I mean, I just--I was able to do well.  I was smart.
Story_ID: 89302
Speaker 1: So, what happened at University High School [Newark, New Jersey]?  I mean, how did--so you met [HM] George [Jenkins] there--
Speaker 2: Right, well I met George--
Speaker 1: --George Jenkins, Dr. George Jenkins, there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. George Jenkins, in the seventh grade and I met [HM] Dr. Rameck Hunt in the ninth grade.  So, our--people--I mean a whole hoopla, of who we are now and what we're doing, is the fact that we're blazing a new trail and we're not doing anything that hasn't been done before but we're trying to give it some immediate attention and try to put it high on the pedestal, we're spreading this humanity--the fact that we're trying to do here.  But I met--we met there and we were friends, just like any other young guys or young girls that come together, were friends and it was based upon just the similarities we've seen in each from the style, from dressing, to the music we listen to, to the video games we play to the--to playing cards at lunchtime, to playing sports at lunchtime and to have a lunch together during the school hours.  And that's what it really was based upon, just the whole friendship.  Within those two individuals, and within myself, there was something that magnified, not only the intelligence but that something that we wanted to be something more, than what was surrounding us.  The problem is, there wasn't nothing to aim for.  You can't aim for what you can't see.  How can you aim for something and visualize yourself doing it, if it's not there.  If the concrete image isn't there, it's just as far--it's as much as somebody telling me why don't you go and start a, you know, a--I say medical clinic now because I'm a physician and it's something that's a little bit more attainable but why don't you go ahead and become an astronaut?  I don't know where the first place to start to become an astronaut.  I don't even know where to go.  Is there an astronaut school?  What's the course?  I could research it.  I could look into it but how easy it would be if somebody in my neighborhood was an astronaut--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --or how easy it would be in--
Speaker 1: A relative or something or somebody there.
Speaker 2: How easy would it be?  And that's where a lot of what we were going through so we didn't have those images.  We didn't have those concrete figures.  And we bonded together and it sort of became almost like this, a Robin Hood effect, where we were brothers, for all intents and purposes, we were brothers and we'd watch each other's back and we took on and developed throughout high school and got into more trouble throughout high school and finally college presented itself as an opportunity and I sat back and I scratched my head and I said, "College."  Here I am, finishing up my junior year, and I never gave college a thought.  I never gave it a thought.  I thought I would just work side jobs, like my father [Kenneth O'Neal Davis] and mother [Ruthener Lawson Davis] had done, you know, and make ends meet that way.  And whatever opportunity presented itself, I would just try to jump on that board.
Story_ID: 89303
Speaker 1: But when college finally came to me, and they say, well this is an opportunity for you to go to college--
Speaker 2: How did it come to you?  I mean, who told you you were college material?  How did you find out?
Speaker 1: Well, the way that it happened is that the three of us, [HM] Dr. [Rameck] Hunt and [HM] Dr. [George] Jenkins and myself, the way that "the pact" came about, we were cutting class, okay.  We were cutting class and we were running through the hallways, making our way to the gym.  Security comes out of nowhere and said, "Hey, come here."  He started chasing us.  And they knew our routine, they knew our second period and that we shouldn't be in the hallways and that we probably had a substitute and we were on our way to the gym.  So they're chasing behind us, and as sort of a last ditch effort not to surrender to the Security Officers, we dodged into the library and it just so happened it was a seminar on going about careers in medicine.  So, I immediately--I went to sleep (laughter).  Dr. Hunt tells the story about how he bought into the concept instantly, as soon as the ladies started talking about it, because he always saw himself as helping people, just like the rest of us did, but that was the connection for him.  And Dr. Jenkins, who was the dentist of the group, always wanted to be a dentist because of an experience he had as a child when some dental resident was placing den--braces on his teeth.  So he found that as his outlet to sort of say, okay, this is the way I want to become a dentist.  After the end of the seminar, I'm waking up, stretching and making my way out of the--the library, and George is like--Dr. Jenkins is like, "Yeah, we should all become doctors."  And I was like, doctors, I like, "Okay, how long is that?  Is that a year?  Is that two years?"  And he said, "Didn't you hear the lady, she said it's eight years" (laughter).  And I was like, "Eight years.  I'm like, we're going to be old in eight years."  So, he said, well look, you know, she said the magical word, she said it was free.  And at the time Seton Hall University [South Orange, New Jersey] had a program at their institution for minorities in the healthcare field and how they would provide scholarship money and arrange for them to go to medical school and dental school if they did well in college.  So we applied and we enrolled in it but we later found out, and I could get into it, but it wasn't a free program back then.  We had to actually work to pay some of the expenses in order to make it throughout the program.  But that's pretty much how college was introduced to me and I still wasn't really focused on going to college.  It was something that was like, man, eight years is a long, long time.  Oh, yeah, I just can't see myself doing it plus, what does a doctor do?  You know, I see some of them on television.  It looks like they give shots and they do check-ups and stuff.  I don't know if I want to do that.  So, I don't know.  But I like helping people, yeah, I really like helping people but, man, can I do it without going eight years of school?  And forget the residency part, you know, that's another three and four years on top of becoming a doctor.  You have to do a training program in sort of a specialty.  So, at the time, I was a little intimidated by the program and I still didn't know what the big deal of college was about.  But, the one thing is, I saw my friends doing it and they were moving forward.
Story_ID: 89304
Speaker 1: So George, [HM] Dr. [George] Jenkins, the way that he was instilled, the whole vision about dentistry is that he had braces put on as a child.  And this is where the concept of giving back to the--came into place because the dental resident took five minutes of his time just teaching George the different teeth in the mouth.  The central incisors, the canines, the molars and then he would come back for a follow-up visit and he would say, okay, which tooth is tooth number eight?  He said, oh, that's the central incisor, that's easy.  Okay, tooth number one is what?  The molar.  So, it just--there were things that sort of played in his mind but it established that concrete reality.  So as a result of him taking five minutes of his time, indirectly, he changed three people's lives, you know, and it's amazing, you know, the things and how you play in your mind what you can do, but it's a kind word, a kind thought, something that you just do throughout your day that you don't have to really alter your day, that can serve as a catalyst to change someone's life.  So--
Speaker 2: Being a doctor is not an easy thing to do--
Speaker 1: Hum.
Speaker 2: --but yet it seems that when the three of you all got together, you had the least amount of vision about being a doctor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean, you wanted to be successful but you didn't know what being a doctor was about.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The other two seemed to have more--be more focused at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What--what made you tune in, you know?
Speaker 1: That made it the hardest.  So it's like not being--I didn't want to be a doctor because I didn't see myself as a doctor.  I was good with numbers so I thought of myself more as a business man and brokering deals and I liked helping people and I felt I could help people by doing something like that.  I bought into the concept because we did it together.  We did it together.  So I went four years of college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey].  I went four years in medical school [Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, New Jersey].  I never wanted to be a doctor.  So, and that's a huge sacrifice but at the same time what was my alternative?  To stay home in my neighborhood and, you know, become a statistic, I guess? Or--
Speaker 2: --Right--
Story_ID: 89305
Speaker 1: Was there any point during the process that you said, "Well, being a doctor seems like a good idea?"
Speaker 2: It was points where, I was like man, this is still the worst idea of--the worst process of a plan I've ever embarked upon.  I mean there would be little moments like, that reminded me, that I was on the right track and if I was home, 'cause I would get phone calls, I still kept a close tie to the street.  So, I would go home and somebody I grew up with was locked up over the weekend or something crazy happened to them and it reminded me of myself of like, I'm fortunate to be in a position I'm in because if I wasn't, there are chances are I would be with them this weekend and so it was--and if something would have went wrong, and I probably would have been the victim there.  So it was always these constant reminders that made me realize I was in a good position, although I didn't want to be a doctor.  When I came back and--and finally took on this position as an ER resident [at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, New Jersey], that's when it came full circle.  That's when the, "Why am I doing this?" sort of came to me.  That's the whole four years of college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey], the four years of sacrifice through medical school [Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, New Jersey], the countless hours of studying, the "why" to that question came full circle when I stepped into the same hospital that I was born in as an Emergency Medicine resident at the time.  And it was almost like pins and needles in which, for the first time in a long time, I felt like this was the right thing.  It was so revealing that, I mean, it--it almost--I can smell it and taste it, that's how much realness was attached to me coming back home and practicing Emergency Medicine.  Everything just fell into place.  My sense of ownership, where I belong, how I can help people, seeing friends that I grew up with, taking care of their loved ones, taking care of them, serving as that concrete image, giving that helping hand, delivering medical care, giving spiritual healing, all that stuff came full circle and--and I was like, "wow", if I just could imagine a little bit of this when I was going through some of the struggles, I probably would have bought into the concept more.  But initially I did the four years of college, the four years of med school because we were a team.  We were a team and, you know, maybe I'm not going to be the point guard on a team or the homerun hitter, but, you know, I've come in and throw down a few bunts and run a few passes on the sideline, whatever it may be, but I did it because I didn't want to be the first one to give up on us.  I didn't want to be the one that didn't complete the whole project, although I came close many times of quitting.  I didn't want to be the one to be blamed for letting "the pact" down, and we didn't have a name, but letting the group down at the time.  You know, I didn't want to be that one that gave up first just because of the competitiveness that I have within myself not to be a quitter and I wasn't going to quit regardless of why I didn't see you--I should be doing this or where I belong in the field of medicine.  I mean, shoot, for the first time I saw a surgery, I was like, queasy and, you know, retching my guts and, I'm just like, man, that's gotta hurt (laughter).  And I'm like, I don't want to do this, you know, and now it's like night and day.  I mean I can eat lunch and go save a person's life and not have a problem with it but you grow into it.  See, that's the thing, you don't--we often take the path of least resistance.  We often travel this road because we feel that we have a niche for it.  But I didn't have a niche for medicine.  Or maybe I did have a niche for medicine and it just was unknown to me at the time.
Story_ID: 89306
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: I just want to know why people--you got like five brothers and sisters--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and, you know, your mother's [Ruthener Lawson Davis] at home, you see your father [Kenneth O'Neal Davis] from time to time, did your family play any role in this at all?  I mean, did they give you any encouragement once they found out what you were trying to do?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, this is funny 'cause some of the stuff, like, I never really thought of deep and right now just really think of it in a different way.  I mean, of course, I mean they supported me.  They realized that I was embarking upon something that had never been done within the family and I was the first one ever to even go to college, and you know, finish high school.  Some of my brothers and sisters didn't finish and I was the first one to go to college.  But it was difficult sometimes communicating because they didn't know what I was going through.  You know, when I would go home and like, "Oh, man, you know, they're about to kick me out of college this semester because my, you know, financial grant didn't come through and I owe $4,000 and I don't have it and the Bursar told me I can't register so I want to get kicked out this semester and I have to work this summer or I have to work two times this summer."  They didn't understand why I was doing all of that.  They would say, well, take a semester off.  But, no, I can't take a semester off.  They say, well, start working two jobs if you're tired.  No, I can't do that either.  I have to complete this.  I have to make this happen.  Well, why do you study so much?  I have to.  So, you know, some of the concepts they couldn't grasp and I don't blame them for that.  It's just the dichotomy I lived in.  It's just the two worlds I had to straddle.  Some people didn't have that, you know.  I would sit back and the kids would share with me stories about how they spent their Spring break at Cancun [Mexico] or the whatever island of choice and my Spring break was spent trying to work three and four different part-time jobs so that I can have some funds in my pocket.  Looking back at it now, it's--it's definitely--I sometimes--I'm "wowed" by it.  I'm wowed by it but at the same time I'm like, well, you know, it's just--it was rough.  It was rough and I had to really make ends meet and do what I had to do as far as the workload is concerned and taking 16 and 20 credits at a time and working a part-time job and long days, short nights because I had to do what I had to do.  And the family was like, "Yeah, you know, keep on doing it.  Keep making it."  And if I would have quit right then and there, they would have been happy because I already had accomplished way more than their visions and their limitations could go.  You know, they--sometimes we have to step outside of the box but they were, for all intents and purposes, living in that box and they couldn't see beyond that.  So I needed more than just, "go for it and do it", I needed some money, I needed some-"I could understand what you're going through," some sort of, tutoring abilities, I needed something and I couldn't get that from them.  And I don't--like I said, it's hard to explain.  Like they supported me and they gave me everything that I needed as far as the love and the support to go for it but sometimes I just needed somebody who understood what I was going through and I found that in my boys but, you know, it's just my family wasn't able to give that to me, not to the level that I needed at the time.
Story_ID: 89307
Speaker 1: That's really something that you all [Davis, HM Dr. George Jenkins, and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] stayed friends, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --tight through all of this.  Was there--was there--is there a specific time when you thought that you were just going to give up?
Speaker 2: When I say, college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey] wasn't as bad as medical school [Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, New Jersey], med school I had a lot of fun.  I mean, looking at college, where else can you go and get your own room, you get cable, you get air conditioning, you get a meal plan and you can come in any time of night that you want to come in.  I mean, where else can you go and have that ability at 18, 19 years old, so, I had a great time in college.  In med school, there was just so much that you had to accumulate in a short period of time.  And I'm dealing with that whole thought once again, I really didn't want to be a doctor.  I never thought of myself as a physician.  So, why am I putting myself through this?  So, I used to quit every single day.  And it came--I mean it came as close for me quitting that I would go and look into other types of schools.  MBA [Master of Business Administration], I was looking into.  I was thinking about taking a job with this health insurance company.  I went out and interviewed and did everything to try to see if I could make that happen.  I--but I didn't want to be the one, once again, that quit.  I didn't want to be the one that just gave up on my two boys and sort of had them walk across the stage at graduation day and not have my name called and, you know, at least if it wasn't for my selfish reasons of quitting, you know, at least let me be selfless and not take away that--that--we started this together feeling.  You know, we started this together and even if I never practice medicine a day in my life, we was going to finish it together.  And it brought me close.  Sometimes I would feel ill and not feel myself because of the temptations of wanting to quit.  I just didn't see myself as a--as being a doctor.
Story_ID: 89308
Speaker 1: And some of the stuff came full circle too because I would go into--day one is started where Microbiology and I'm in the--in the classroom doing the, what is that called, the lab, we're doing the lab and the professor's talking about taking a petri dish and within the petri dish, there's this agar, you're going to take it and you're going to see if you could grow a gram positive and gram negative streptococcus and see if the bacteria is resistant to any of these antibiotics and I'm sitting back quietly, what is the--what the heck is he talking about?  I am about as lost as they come.  I mean, he's talking about the petri dish like it's, you know, a cup of water (laughter), you know.  I don't know what the heck he's talking about.  And then, I'm sort of looking around the room, I realized I was the only one who looked lost.  Everyone else was just going about their business and I was like, man, it's so--I felt like I had to work almost like two times, three times as hard and not only to just get the sort of complexities of it but just the basics.  I had to just pick up on some of their basics and then I'd jump on the elevator and there's this neurologist on the elevator talking to the urologist about how he spent this weekend teaching his six year old how to use a stethoscope and an otoscope and an ophthalmoscope, and I say to myself, that's why.  That's the reason why.  I could tell you everything about stealing a car but I can't tell you how to use a stethoscope, you know.  And that's what--that's where it sort of played in that my disadvantage, per se, played into a role.  But my three "D's" of the "Dedication, Determination and Discipline", is where it just kicked in.  And, I mean, I would push myself to the outer limits to try to catch up but the mountain that I had to climb was this steep and, you know, I wasn't trying to go up a hill, it was this--literally, a mountain that just went straight up without no sort of angle to it at all and I had to do it and I pulled together all the resources that I could to make it happen but by far the reason why I didn't quit was just the collaboration, unwritten agreement, that I had with my two boys [HM Dr. George Jenkins and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] because the odds were against us from day one when we stepped into Seton Hall University [South Orange, New Jersey], out of 135 biology majors, only 40 went on to complete their degree in biology.  So over 80, 90, dropped out and changed their majors.  And out of those 48 went onto professional school and we were three of those.  So I mean, the three of us, by far, was counted out in the beginning, you know, and not by--if not by others, by ourselves probably because people would tell us that you guys don't have what it takes to become doctors and it's a--it's a huge goal for those who have all the resources and you guys don't have anything.  How are you going to pay your--how are you going to pay your tuition next semester?  Do you know what classes you're supposed to take next semester?  Have you ever taken a biology class?  Do you know calculus?  I mean, all this stuff was--forget the subject matter.  I didn't even know I had to take it, you know, yet alone, so my biology course, what is biology?  What is anatomy or physiology?  What is chemistry?
Speaker 2: Did you not have any of this in high school [University High School in Newark, New Jersey], at all?  Or biology?  Or--did you find your high school education was kind of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was lacking?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my--it was--it really was.  And I--how much of that--it's a combination effect, it's not one problem, it's multiple problems.  Of course the teacher could sit there in front of the board and write all the chemistry formulas out that she could think of, tell me the element figures for iron and silver and the symbols and all the hundred plus elements in the world.  It didn't matter because outside of that classroom, I had to deal with survival.  I had to walk my streets everyday in my neighborhood and I had to find a way to feed myself and in my neighborhood everything kind of dealt upon the premise of respect.  If you didn't have respect from the streets, then your chance of survival went down.  So, I mean, you try and do a chemistry problem that night, it's not as important as it is trying to learn how to survive or it's not important as it is as surviving the next day.  And that's what my--my reality, oh, that stuff kind of sounded good at the time, in the moment, in the classroom, but easily faded away.  And why was I doing all this work in the classrooms anyway because half the people don't even finish high school and the other half that don't--that do finish high school, what becomes of them?  I didn't know any college students when I was going to grammar school.  Shoot, some of my brothers and sisters didn't even finish high school.  So, why would I--why should I invest in that?
Story_ID: 89309
Speaker 1: Well, how did--how did it feel when you knew you were going to graduate from medical school [Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: I probably was the saddest person at graduation (laughter), by far.  Everybody else was happy but I was probably about as sad as they--as they come.  For a few reasons was, I wanted to do ER medicine and I'm an ER physician now, but there's a match process that you go through for Emergency Medicine for every specialty and I didn't match.  At the time of graduation, I was unsure about my future.  I found the program at Beth Israel [Medical Center in Newark, New Jersey] just through some creative determination.  Just really going on the computer, looking at other options and somehow, someway, I stumbled onto this program that was not in none of the manuals for Emergency Medicine.  So I called them up and I was like, "Wow, you know to go back home, I never thought about going back home."  None of this was planned.  That's why often with my story is somewhat of a divine attachment to it.  There's somewhat of, this is God just stepping in and literally putting his hands on our shoulders and saying, "No, son, you really need to make a right here."  "I know you think you want to go left, and you're making all the plans and all the adjustments to go left, but you really need to go right."  And I applied over 40 programs and got over 30 plus interviews but something with my "mojo", I don't know, something didn't match up with those other programs so I didn't get accepted.  I had the grades to be accepted.  I had the scores to get accepted but I didn't get picked as one of their residents.  So, I was forced to take a position doing internal medicine, which I didn't want to do at University of Maryland [Medical Center in Baltimore, Maryland], which is a respectful program and well-known throughout the country as one of the top programs in everything, pretty much, University of Maryland, that is.  But I didn't want to do internal medicine.  So, here I am, at graduation day, about to become an Internist and never wanted to do that.  And at the same time I had an opportunity to do several interviews at Beth Israel in Newark to do ER Medicine but their program was going through some adjustments, they were new, they were only two years in existence and everybody I talked to say, "Listen, whatever you do, do not take that position at Beth Israel."  It was only, maybe, one or two people who really knew who I was, who said, "If it's in your heart, go for it, follow your heart."  "I'm not going to tell you to go to the University of Maryland, I'm not going to tell you to go Newark Beth Israel, follow your heart".  And maybe two or three days before graduation I made the decision to go with Newark Beth Israel, against everybody's advice.  I called up the University of Maryland and told them I wasn't coming which several people told me not to do because of the whole potential of the backlashing they get from that.  And when I told the lady the reasons, she said, "Well, we're going to let you go but realize you will never work for the University of Maryland in your life".  So I said, that's fine and I could live with that because if I went down to the University of Maryland at that time, I wouldn't have survived because it was something I totally didn't want to do.  You know, you've got to realize I didn't want to be a doctor and here I am going to the University of Maryland to do something I don't want to do, please?
Story_ID: 89310
Speaker 1: So I took the position in ER [Emergency Room] Medicine [at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, New Jersey] and I was still unsure and I got there and the program was going through some complications but then, you know, things happen for a reason and God is good.  The program finished the problems--whatever problems they were having as far as its accreditation and things got resolved and it was granted accreditation and I went through the program and I went and I--and I went to score some of the highest grades.  So on my examinations for--in Emergency Medicine, and it's--it kind of made me want to smile on those who didn't believe in me and kind of say, you know, "your loss" because people had an opportunity to take me as an ER resident but they--whatever they didn't see me fitting in their program, whatever the reason was, but here I am scoring like honors on my exams in Emergency Medicine, you know, and it just like you just can't, you know, people need a little helping hand and I don't hold anybody accountable, you know, for not necessarily extending their hand and all, but I'm glad that it happened the way it did.  I traveled all over the country interviewing in all these different places where the answer to my place where I needed to do training was right in my own backyard, where I grew up at.  And the fact that I returned home, it plays a part.  I mean, being back home and in the same backyard that I grew up in, kind of helped me take the attachment of what I grew up, the complexities of the experiences I have of growing up, attach it to some of the challenges I had in the medical field in the beginning and trying to find--and part of the big reason in medical school was I didn't feel like I belonged because there was a lot of my needs went unmet.  A lot of what I was going through and some of the things that I needed to sort of cultivate and develop me wasn't there, through no fault of nobody else's, it's just that I was not in the majority, I was in the minority and it just--when you look at a room full of 150 students, you're going to take care--you're going to try your best to take care of 150 but realistically you can't address everybody's else--everyone's issues just because there are so many bodies there.  So I took what I learned in med school.  I took what was in my old neighborhood and brought it together and I found myself.  And that limbo that I once lived in--that dichotomy I still live in but now know how to navigate it and I know what other kids are going through and I'm able to help them navigate it.
Speaker 2: Did you have more of a sense of purpose, you know, working in your own neighborhood, you know, as an intern?
Speaker 1: This--this--I am as much as my old neighborhood, my old neighborhood has made me who I am.  Absolutely, if I have a sense of purpose.  That's why I work twenty plus hours a day because of that.  I mean, it defines everything that I'm about, you know, it really sustains me.  It--it's my petrol, it's my fuel.  It's what drives me.  It's what keeps me going.  To have a kid look at you with that look of innocence and that look of, "I need guidance, I just need someone to show me how to get there and I'm willing to put the work in."  To have a child look at that and to see that kid--and to see that I could serve as a purpose to do that, and I could serve as a catalyst to do that, instead of seeing that child just eventually five or ten years, where you go back and look in that kid's eye, you don't see nothing but cold and hate because they got--someone gave up on them.  No one was there.  And there's kids all over the country, from all walks of life, who have that struggle.
Story_ID: 87355
Speaker 1: So your internship [at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, New Jersey], you really got into.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Your internship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, just you know, being home and you sort of touched on before, just being home and being back, you know, in the old neighborhood and delivering medical care but it's also that component of the familiarity of the old neighborhood and some of the people that comes into the emergency department that I grew up with and taking care of their parents, their uncles, their nieces, their children, their fathers and mothers, and it's more than medicine, it really is.  It's more than the physical aspect of medicine, it's that spiritual sort of connection, it's that visual concept of seeing me there and maybe taking five minutes and showing a six-year old what an X-ray looks like or showing a ten-year old how to use a stethoscope or just being there so that the parent can say, "Look, you know, you can become that."  Making that connection of taking that kid's dream and now giving that concrete image to it.  That's so, you know, yeah, I deliver medicine.  I write orders and I save lives and there's not a day that goes by that I don't do that, and I do it well.  But then it's the other side of the coin where it's that priceless entity where I'm that answer to a lot of parents' questions to a lot of educators' questions.  Like, "How can you sort of take this dream and now give it some sort of feel?  How can they taste it, smell it, touch it, see it?  How can they give--how can they develop these five senses?" and that's what I'm doing.  I'm sitting there so they can smell me, they can touch me, they can taste me, they can see me, you know, and they can feel me.  And that makes them realize that they can do it.  And that's ultimately where I'm trying to take education and make education--  I remember growing up and everything that I liked doing was stuff that was deemed, "cool," "in style," "jazzed up".  And that's what I'm trying to do, education.  I had a blast, me and my partners [HM Dr. George Jenkins and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] had a blast, through our college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey].  And unbeknownst to a lot of people from where I came from, they used to tell me college was the hardest thing that I would ever embark upon.  And they used to tell me how I wouldn't be able to do it, I wasn't smart enough and I almost bought into it.  The only thing that made me have some sort of--the only thing that helped me not to believe in what they were saying is that the majority of them have never been to college.  So here they are telling me what I can't do and they've never been there and then having my partners, and we did it together, was definitely enticing and helped me take that initial step to step outside of my box into something that was new and unfamiliar to me.  So, once I got there and started to, you know, once again see all the riches and the fruits that was possessed in the college life, I just wanted to come back and share, like a pot of gold, almost like a leprechaun on the other side of the rainbow.  I just wanted to spread all that love and let people see the treasure of gold that I found and expose other people to it.  So, and--and, you know, being a doctor now it serves that role, it serves that role being at a--a book signing and trying to put this face out that education and having the parents say, "I'm glad this day finally came because of my ten year old reminds me one more time that The Three Doctors are going to be at Barnes and Noble, I'm gonna lose it."  You know, and that's--that right there sums it up.  That sums it up because now we're--we're at other walks comparable to music, comparable to fashion, comparable to any source of entertainment.  We just want to sort of put our mark on education and to give it a face, to give it a concrete image so that our children can aim for it.  Everybody wants to play golf now because of Tiger Woods.  Everybody wants to play hockey, Wayne Gretzky.  They want to play baseball, Barry Bonds, you name it, that's because of these images.  It's what these images do for that entity and that's what we're trying to do to education, give it that color, give it that jazz.  Let's take away the square uphill that it possess and let children, especially, even if you go on to play sports, even if you're going to be the number one singer, at least have a--a sense of education as your foundation because how are you going to negotiate your contracts?  How are you going to know if your financial advisor isn't really taking you for a ride?  How would you know these things unless you have the wherewithal to understand some of the language that exists beyond, you know, beyond--beyond sometimes my own.  But how would you know unless you take education on and set it as sort of the backdrop of what you're doing.
Story_ID: 87356
Speaker 1: What kind of effort did it take to write the book?
Speaker 2: The book.  The book.  The book itself--I often start off by thanking everyone, actually, for supporting the book because it has been on--it has received so many accolades from "New York Times" bestseller to "Essence Number One" book, to "Suze Orman" book, to recently it was adopted as--in Pennsylvania as the book of the month.
Speaker 1: Just for the record, the name of the book is?
Speaker 2: "The Pact".  P-A-C-T, "The Pact".  It's being adopted by a lot of schools across the country and what the book is, it's a blueprint on how to, I don't care what you're going to do, where you're from, there's something from this book you can kind of grab onto and apply to your life.  A lot of people maybe don't stem from the same background that I come from, they don't have the same sort of struggles that I had within my inner-city community, but the struggles that I exist in college or in med school is real for everybody, you know, who's going through those paths and there's people from different communities who have struggles within their family and you can see how we sort of navigate and transcend and made it and overcome some of these situations.  So it serves as that motivator and--and right in the book--it was funny 'cause when I started to write it, I was like, man, writing a book, this is--this is good.  You know, I'm going to be an author and you're just happy and you get a book deal and you really don't realize that you had to sit down and tell your whole life (laughter) and not once do you realize 'cause, I think somewhere in the back of your mind there's this sort of subliminal thought that nobody's ever going to buy the book, nobody's going to buy the rights, can't even find an agent, we can't find a ghostwriter or nothing.  And then, what happened?  I run into Terry Williams, who's a big guru publicist out of New York, who attached me to Joann Davis, who's a literary agent, who then, take Lisa Frazier Page, who did an article on us for "The Washington Post" and we had the team ready, with the three of us [Davis, HM Dr. George Jenkins, and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] to write a book.  We take it to nine different book companies and they--it's like there's sort of a tournament in which they're bidding for the rights of the book and it goes four or five rounds and we land with Penguin and Putnam [Penguin Putnam, Inc., now Penguin Random House], Riverhead Division [Riverhead Books], and we're ready to write the book.  So, I said, okay, cool, you know, I never thought it would happen.  Okay, let's sit down and I'll start writing and I'm like, "Hum, okay, what do I write about?"  So then Lisa, who's the--our ghostwriter, she started getting into details about my life and I'm like, "I'm not telling that.  I'm not going to talk about, you know, some of the experiences I had and being in juvenile detention and being on welfare, I'm not telling that," you know.  And then--and then I was like, "Well, I am telling it.  I am because it's going to help somebody else by me sharing that struggle that I've been through and the reason, the truth be told, that they're even doing a book on us because there is a sense of drama there attached to it.  There is a sense of overcoming."  So it was therapeutic for me in a lot of ways because a lot of the stuff that I had dealt with prior, I just pretty much put in this invisible box in the back of my mind and just shut the door and never revisited it.  So to sort of visit it again and to kind of talk about it and to write it down on paper, was definitely therapeutic and it made me--it made me realize that this one entity that I'm sharing, hopefully, will help change someone's life, to help them realize you're not the only one that's going through this, that you're not the only one who's being faced with trying to do well in high school and maybe being teased by your peers or trying to see when, you know, dad is coming home.  He's never coming home.  And trying to spend more time with your parents and they're not around.  Whatever your situation may be, it helped me to put it out there and hopefully will help someone else understand or realize they're not the only one that's going through this.  And that's the reason why I share some of those dark secrets.  And I'm proud of them because honestly, if I didn't go through a lot of those challenges, I wouldn't be as hungry and passionate about this right now.
Story_ID: 87357
Speaker 1: Were you inspired by biographies of other people when you were coming up?  And did you read any of--
Speaker 2: I read--I read a lot of different books.  I wasn't a big reader. I read a lot of books now but back then, in med school [Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, New Jersey] and college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey], it was always the text, but when I was younger I read like Malcolm X and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, [Jr.] books like that.  That sort of helped inspire me but--
Speaker 1: Sometimes the Malcolm X stories (unclear), you know, you would think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I bought into that one.  Yeah, the Malcolm X, the "Autobiography of Malcolm X," by far was it, 'cause I felt just like Malcolm (laughter). I felt like him but at the time when I was reading it, I wasn't--I didn't make that transition as of yet so I didn't see the--I saw the sense of how he stands strong.  He was really a leader and really stood up for what he believed but at the same time, I just didn't see how like, how can I make that--how could I do like Malcolm did it?  You know, when is my window of opportunity going to present itself?  I never--I never saw it like that.  And even this now, I mean, my whole plan was to go on to become a doctor, even though I don't want to be a doctor, but the whole plan was to go onto to become a doctor and once I did that and realize ER was for me and I found a place that would help me to cultivate and develop that and came full circle, I realized medicine was it for me.
Story_ID: 87358
Speaker 1: My whole plan was to practice medicine and keep doing the community work that I have done.  I never expected it to grow into this national monster that it has.
Speaker 2: It's, you know, being a physician in the United States and probably most other countries, is--is the most--probably the most respected--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --of professions, you know--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --of--
Speaker 1: It doesn't--it doesn't--
Speaker 2: To have that respect in the black community, you know, in the real underclass black community, is something--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it doesn't come without a cost.  I mean the--the sacrifice that you put behind it and since you know it's placed on the shelf as one of the most honorable professions out there, it--but that in mind, it demands a lot, you know, it demands a lot of attention and I give it to it.  I give it the hours that is dedicated to it.  And--but at the same time I want it--the thing that I'm trying to add to medicine, right now, is this whole humanity concept of stepping outside the offices and stepping outside of the hospital doors and going into your community, you know.  And some doctors parallel it with doing house calls but it's more than just that.  It's spending some time in some of these after school programs and trying to get to the children before the mistakes happen, before they end up a wheelchair, before they're paralyzed from the waist down because of some ignorance, before they're in a drunk driving situation, before they blow up a school, or whatever the situation may be.  It's reaching the kids and reaching the adults before all of this happens.  I mean, that's what doctors--doctors are healers.  That's the whole concept of medicine.  That's the oath that we take to heal but let's heal and let's do some healing before some of these situations take place.  And it's starting from day one.  It's starting now.  It's starting yesterday to do these deeds and that's what I'm trying to help develop that concept and attach to medicine because often I see patients who come in after the fact and I sit down and I try to take care of them and I could do some stuff to help their life but I could have did a heck of a lot more if I would have caught them before that happened, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 87359
Speaker 1: What is some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Man, statistics scares me.  I look at statistics and realize that the black male especially have a better chance of going to jail.  The black female has a better chance of having HIV-- (phone rings) Concerns, as far as the black community is concerned, it stems from the statistical information that's out there and I review it and I see that it's--it's just deadly, it's deadly.  In New Jersey alone, there's 24,000 prisoners and 20,000 is African American, you know.  You have a better chance of going to jail than you do going to college, yet alone, completing high school.  I mean, over 50 percent of the students in the City of Newark [New Jersey], don't complete high school, you know.  You have a better chance at becoming a teenage mother, unwed, on welfare.  You have a better chance of dying from AIDS/HIV, homicide, then you do with going to college as a black male, as a black female.  It's--it's scary, it's scary 'cause it's--it's happening and we don't even realize it sometimes.  I think the statistics is the only objective information that make it come full circle that you realize this is--this is for real, it's--it's serious.  And it's a lot of untapped talent being lost.  How many guys we grew up with that can dribble a ball?  How many guys that we grew up with that can fix anything that you name as far as carpentry or electrician or how many guys who grew up who's just as brilliant?  Now how many of those who went on to really develop--they become a leader in what they're doing?  I can name a whole lot who didn't but it's not so many that I can name who did and that to me is one hundred percent unacceptable.  College should be the norm.  It should be just like, into the eighth grade to the ninth grade.  It should be the thirteenth grade graduating from the twelfth grade.  And that's how it has to be posed to our community.  That's how it has to be positioned to our community.  My nephew said to me one time, he was in his early twenties and I was in college, and me and my nephew, we differ in age by a year and he said to me, he just calls me "Unc", he said "Unc, I want to go to college now, how do you go about doing that?"  And I sat down and I tried--and I explained to him, and I was going through it at the same time, so I was trying to give him a helping hand, but I just could see the sense of like this is--there's no way I could do this.  It's just so much.  It's overbearing.  And I could see how he was fearing it and how--what he has grown to know as the "street life" was easier for him to position himself in because he has known it all his life.  And I could see how regards to what I tried to do to urge him that it was too late.  It was too late.  So, I mean, our community as a whole, there are those who are doing well but those who are doing well within the black community need to come back and give to those and show those who aren't doing so well.  Those who aren't doing so well needs to be open to that.  They need to realize the benefit of having someone sacrifice their time and efforts to lend a helping hand, a word of encouragement.  We have to give education.  We have to give how parents give leadership.  We have to give mentoring the praises that it deserves.  We have to give it the--we have to step it up to modern times.  We can't keep making it seem like something that--seems like an obligation as much as it is what everybody else is doing.  We have to give it that "fad", that sense of glamour in order to change some of the ways and in order to upstep the black community.
Story_ID: 87360
Speaker 1: I mean, there's patches in America where there's certain areas in which there's maybe a black community and it's doing well and that's fine, so be it.  But there's a lot of inner-city communities across this country and it's just--it's scary.  I mean, I could ride--I still live, you know--I still live in Newark [New Jersey] and I could go up and down the block and at three o'clock in the morning you see a three-year old outside in his or her Pampers.  You see a ten-year old going up and down the street in a stolen car, barely able to look over the steering wheel.  You see a twelve-year old out there hustling, selling drugs on a corner and their twenty-five year-old mother selling their body for that next fix.  That has got to change.  It just has to stop and it's just--it's just no way to live life.  It's just so much more out there.  It's just so much more that they need to see and be exposed to and we have to start taking responsibility for it.  And it's not only the black community or whatever, it's all of us taking responsibility for it--Americans taking responsibility for it.  The inner-cities are often like the third-world community.  If you really sit down and I take you to some of the trenches out here that exist, they're similar to the third-world communities out here, there really are.  I mean, people don't have running water, they're not--they don't have any electricity in their home, they sit outside on their porch all day as the summer days go by, and all that exists and their reality is walking from their front porch to their corner store and that's it.  And that's all they do all day long, nothing else.  And then they come home and they don't have any heat in the house, they don't have any air conditioning in the house.  How in the heck do we expect them to dream when they're all, you know, its--I just don't know.
Story_ID: 87361
Speaker 1: We're rolling? Okay. Tell me about the "Three Doctors Foundation?"
Speaker 2: The Three Doctors Foundation, we [Davis, HM Dr. George Jenkins, and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] established in 1999 and the purpose of the Foundation is--is sort of to give back.  A lot of Foundations embark upon like one objective whether to give scholarships or to inform people about a health ailment or to serve a certain purpose like raising funds for Multiple Sclerosis or--but our Foundation is multifaceted.  We operate on the premise of "HEELM: Health, Education, Economics, Leadership and Mentoring" and we try to bring health awareness and do health preventions within our community.  As far as education, to sort of put this face out, then education as well.  We want to focus on economics as far as economic building and investments and sort of realize the power of the dollar and how you sort of make it and how you put back into your retirement plans.  As far as leadership, we want to build the leaders of tomorrow.  We want the next generations to come out and--and not necessarily be "Generation X" but, you know, be whatever the next generation is going to be entitled but to step on it to be a leader.  And as far as mentoring, to sort of attach some of our younger ones or even adults there is with mentors to sort of show them the right road and where to go.  We have raised some funds throughout and we have had our first fundraiser recently, which we raised some financial support and we're operating--we do summer programs throughout the year.  This year [2003] alone we have a Safety Day that's coming up.  We have a "HELP" which stands for Health, Education, Leadership Program in which we talk about HIV/AIDS, asthma, lead poison and different health ailments within the community.  And we have a mentor day, as well as a positive peer pressure challenge in which we challenge kids to go out within their community to do something positive as a group.  We want to initiate this sort of project pact in which we inspire all people to sort of form pacts with one another and sort of the concept of leave no child behind where it's one hundred percent unacceptable for one child not to have an opportunity or to explore other things in life as far as positive entities are concerned.  And that's pretty much it.  We have a Foundation website, it's the "Three Doctors Foundation."  But with us practicing in this sort of role model and, you know, sometimes it's-- the difficulty I think that I have is that, you know, one is just like we're always underneath the spotlight but we're just trying to be the faces for our country in the sense that we want people to look towards us and see what we're doing.  And it's hard because, I tell you, it's sort of two-fold of thoughts.  One is, for sure I'm happy to be here within my own community, helping out my own neighborhood and sort of sharing as a guiding light but just don't pigeonhole me to that area, you know, what we're doing is--is for all communities, you know.  And sometimes I think what happened with the mind is that people often place us in that one category.  And my efforts doesn't necessarily just go to that one category.  Yeah, I can relate, yeah I've been there but, you know, America needs to understand that they have something great here and, you know, don't miss out on the opportunity to make it a national thing because whether it's The Three Doctors or the two architects or the four teachers, we need a face to health and education, whoever it may be, but don't miss the opportunity and don't, you know, sort of categorize me or turn your back because I may not be from the suburbs or grew up in there because what I'm doing now is healing.  When I break it down, you know, and I take care of a patient, I don't care what color you are, I don't care if you are male or female, I don't care where you came from or how much, what community you're from, you know, when you come in with a chest pain or you come in from a car accident, that's just what you are, you are a person who came in with chest pain.  And the ailment does not categorize itself based upon where you came from or who you are.  And that's the one thing that I'm finding the most challenging thing right now is that we often get labeled and put in a certain position where we're just trying to do the good for all communities, you know.  Yeah, I can relate from my urban streets 'cause that's where I grew up at.  You know, I'm always going to have a close tie to them and I'm always going to be there to support that but at the same time this is all about humanity, right here, and that goes throughout, you know.  And I think that sometimes is--I sit back and--it's a--it's disappointing to hear the ignorant mind or the--people sometimes sort of just see it for that because it's more--it's so much more than that.  It's so much more rich than that.
Story_ID: 87362
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, at this point, I know you're still very young, but what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That is a hard question, my legacy.  Man, I don't know.  I think when people look back at what I've done and what I'm known for is, one, is really never to take "no" as the final answer but really to-- a person who finally put some definition to their daily life, someone who sort of has picked up the torch from where the other great leaders have carried it thus far.  You know, I'm just doing the same thing that the great leaders of Malcolm X and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] have done.  I'm just carrying on that same torch and I'm trying to do it in a way that's modern day, you know, without--with dealing with modern day problems and modern day technology.  I'm trying to do it that way.  And that's pretty much what they, I think--as I consider my legacy is someone who's just trying to make a difference and trying to make a difference in a big type of way and--and have taken something that has existed but have placed it and given it it's sort of purpose amongst the other things that exist.  So I'm not doing anything that's--it's funny 'cause you say being so young and thinking about I never really thought about it so that's why I'm like fumbling around with the thoughts in my mind but it's doing something that's been there already but just sort of carrying that torch a little further and trying to bring the overall awareness to it and really serving as the--the answer, the solution to some of the questions out there that our young ones may have.
Story_ID: 87363
Speaker 1: Okay. Now there's one last question that's similar, not but quite the same but, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Um, yeah it's--how would I like to be remembered?  As someone who made a difference and as someone who really put other people-people's issues before his own and someone who worked tireless hours to try to make change.  Someone who just give, you know, without any sort of self-centered attachments.  Someone who wants to help kids, adults, fulfill their visions, their dreams and really just try to change a--ultimately someone who changed a way of thinking.  Someone who established a new fad, a new style and once we get a nation behind this fad and this style, then after that it's just like anything else.  It would go on and they would become its own self-propelled entity whereas we don't have to say, you know, what's the--it would just be like part of the whole culture when I look at it just like we eat turkey for Thanksgiving Day.  Everyone would go out and get an education and give back and practice healthy living.  And that's all I'm trying to do.  That's how I want to be remembered, someone who really cared and just took time out and really gave a damn, you know, if you really look at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
