Story_ID: 113689
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Doctor Jayfus Doswell, that's spelled J-A-Y-F-U-S, Doswell, D as in David, O-S-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Tucker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: T-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: There is a story behind Tucker, Jayfus Tucker Doswell.  So, Tucker comes from mother's maiden name and my mother [Brenda Tucker Dosewell] is a direct descendent from the first African American child born in America, 1624.  His name was William Tucker.  So, that was in the Jamestown, Virginia area.  So that's, that's the origin, pretty much of Tucker.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you know this from family tradition or is it something that the family discovered a little later own through genealogical research or something?
Speaker 2: It was family--pretty much family tradition, was passed on it was validated by historical records, then every so often the Williamsburg, Virginia has certain founders, like the ceremony of the founding of kind of like old America so when--during those celebrations my family's com--you know, asked to join in the celebrations and represent the first African American child born in America, William Tucker.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So the oldest living relative on the Tucker side, so the oldest Tucker on my--in my families side, my mother's side, is asked to, you know, celebrate, you know the--celebrate the history, or recognize William Tucker, from 1624.
Speaker 1: Sixteen twenty-four [1624], and just for the record that's William Tucker was not a slave right?
Speaker 2: William Tucker was a slave, so he was born into slavery, if I can recall.  But, what ends up happening, his parents came here as--came here to America just to explore the new world like everybody else, but the ship on which they were traveling was intercepted by Portuguese ship and then they were given different names from their original African names on the ship's manifest and then when they landed in Jamestown, Virginia, they were given as property to somebody.  So I'm thinking that it was--you know there are many Tuckers, but there was a Captain Tucker from our history books and I think William Tucker was named after someone from that line.  So, they were not, of course, thr-this-the African names weren't retained, so the names they were given were on the ship, right, just to keep property.  Then, when they were loaded off to America, the parents of William Tucker kept their names of course, but William Tucker's, Tuckers the last name was named after probably a slave master that was gonna, you know, own 'em at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now it there, is there a story behind Dos--Jayfus?
Speaker 2: There seems to be certain stories about--so, one definition of Jayfus is a famous warrior, all right, but I don't know what warrior that is.  The simple definition is that Jayfus is my father's [Ronald Jayfus Doswell] middle name.  So, I often tease a little bit (clears throat) and say, like some in computer science, that my name was a copy and paste.  Jayfus Tucker Doswell, so my moth--my first name is my father's middle name, my middle name is my mother's last name--maiden name, and then my last name, of course, is my father's surname.  So they just copied and pasted the names together and got my name, yeah, but Jayfus, there's another def--there's another interpretation of Jayfus from Japheus, J-A-P-H-E-U-S, Japheus, was Noah's first son [sic, Japheth], so maybe over time the P-H gets changed to a Y phonetically it sounds the same and then it changes, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But I thought it was unique at first, but then I went on Facebook and looked up Jayfus and there's several Jayfus (laughter) last names and first names, so.  Also, when my grandmother [Louise Doswell] named my father Jayfus, there was a doctor Jayfus who delivered my father, so, my grandmother, for some reason liked the doctor very much, such that she named my father's first name, I mean middle name Jayfus.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that there are a lot of stories like that where women name the baby after the doctor on some level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard lots of, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Even though I--in my family too.
Speaker 2: That's deep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, I don't understand--well, I never really asked my grandmother why.  I should ask her why did you name (laughter) my father's--she'd probably say, you know, I just named after the doctor, so.
Speaker 1: Well you know it's a crisis birth, is a crisis and a doctor is a re--you know until recent times, even now, medical doctors considered like the highest attainment by a lot of, you know, people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Really think medical a doctor's as high as you can go in terms of the professional attainment, so, I mean it's, it's not necessarily true but it's--it is, you know it's what people see it.
Speaker 2: Right, it's perceived to be that way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So.
Story_ID: 113690
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 24, 1972.  Place of birth is Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Occupation, President and CEO of Juxtopia, and the title, well that's the pre--president, CEO of Juxtopia, I mean occupation, entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: And you are a scientist, you're a, what would you call yourself in terms of science?  You'd be a, a?
Speaker 2: I do a lot of things so I con--I would consider myself a scientist/engineer/entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, that's what I do everyday.  Then--
Speaker 1: And your Ph.D. is in?
Speaker 2: Computer science.
Speaker 1: Computer science, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, computer science is the academic discipline, what I do on a daily basis is that, computer science and engineering.  And then, running a company is a whole 'nother mind set and skill set.  So, I often have to do both of those simultaneously, in a way.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I think it's the 17th of Jan--January 17th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at Juxtopia's facility which is located in Johns Hopkins East, in Balt--East Baltimore, Maryland.  So, 1101 East 33rd Street, Baltimore, Maryland, 21218.
Story_ID: 113691
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  I do, the favorite food for me is salmon over a bed of rice with broc--with steamed broccoli and lemon pepper seasoning on top.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite.  I could eat that every single day all day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year Christmas holidays, the holiday season, Christmas, New Year's.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wow, I don't get to take vacations that much, been around the world.  Where I haven't been or where I have been?
Speaker 1: Well where ever you think your favorite is, you know like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Like where I'd like to go, or where I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It could be either one, I guess, if you're, if--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so I can, I can answer both.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, the favorite place--vacation, that I have been in the past, I would say--oh, there was a place in California--the Netherlands was a fantastic place, Kerkrade, Netherlands.  That was a great vacation.  Where I'd like to go, I would probably like to see Sou--somewhere in South America, you know, 'cause I haven't been there.  I been--I've been to Paris [France]; Vancouver, Canada; Joensuu, Finland; Ghana, Accra, Ghana; and Kerkrade, Netherlands and some other places, but Kerkrade was interesting, it was historic, right, so I very much like that and Ghana, Accra, Ghana I liked that as well.  Egypt, that was a great place, you know, especially the Valley of the Kings, looking at the--not the pyramids, one thing that's hyped, but the Valley of the Kings where I saw Hatshepsut, you know temple and the original hieroglyphics and the colors still preserved, that was fantastic--that was a fantastic experience so.  They all have their charm, so, you know, just to kick back and relax, I was in Waikiki, Hawaii at one point, so that was, that was a nice vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the name of the place in Netherlands, I, how, how do you spell--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Kekrade. [Kerkrade]
Speaker 1: --that?
Speaker 2: It's like K-E-K--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: K-E.
Speaker 2: --R-A-D-E, Netherlands.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That may be the correct spelling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It has a lot of history.  I think, now I knew this afterwards, so Kerkrade, Netherlands is where [Adolf] Hitler's propaganda minister, [Joseph] Goebbels or whatever his name is received his Ph.D. [sic, Goebbels attended boarding school in Kerkrade, but received his Ph.D. from the University of Heidelberg in Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany].  That's what I learned after, so it has, I guess from that standpoint, that's interesting history.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, let's see, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I, I sure do.  The phra--(laughter), my, my favorite phrase is, the, the propensity for perfection.  That's one, the other one, that's my favorite one.  So when I was twenty-two years old, getting my first job at Copyserve, someone asked, how would you describe yourself and I described myself then as having the propensity for perfection, natural inclination of perfection.  These days (laughter) because we do so many different things and the life of a CEO at Juxtopia is that, "Fear is the most destructive emotion that disrupts the peace of mind."  So that's, you know, so in the absence of fear is faith, so in order to run hard and run a company and do the things that we do in Juxtopia, I often motivate my team to stay on course and to void themself of fear and try to memorize poems like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  By also having--by also maintaining a propensity for perfection.
Story_ID: 113692
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history, I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll ask separately then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yep, Brenda Tucker Doswell.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth an--well, well, it's spelled the normal way, it's just Brenda and then Tucker?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Brenda, Tucker, D--an, an Doswell, D-O-S-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: February 13th, don't know the year (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you don't, you don't remember the year.
Speaker 2: Don't remember the--I think it's 1942, '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: That's close, that gets us in the ballpark.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where was your mother--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well I can tell right--well she--we can do the math, so she, she's exactly thirty years older than I am, so she must be seventy, so yep, so it's--calculate the math on that, my father [Ronald Doswell] is sixty-nine, his birth--now his birthday's a little hard for me to recall, so it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I'll, I'll ask about him in a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just want to do her side first and then we'll go over to him.
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: Okay so she was born where?
Speaker 2: She was born in Newport News, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Newport, News, okay, an--so what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you--well, you already told us on some level, back to 1624--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Twenty-four, yep
Speaker 1: --right.  An, so what are the stories from that side, you know, beginning I guess with your ancestor, William Tucker.
Speaker 2: Well, what I do recall hearing stories from my mother and my grandfather and listening to my mother's siblings, is that--well, for one, everyone stayed in the same area, the Newport News area, so from Ja--some reason the migration went from Jamestown, Williamsburg, Virginia to Newport News which is not that far away in driving distance.  So, the migration through all the modes of transportation, you know, took them to Newport News.  I knew my grandfather was an entrepreneur so he owned a produce company and also a dry cleaning business.  And, the produce, of course, was seasonal; the dry cleaning business was year-round.  And he took care of six children and a wife, and during the Depression he also used to employ whites at some point.  So, even though during that time, of course, there was high Jim Crow area, it was a, you know, during that era, but he, he actually maintained some kind of a humanitarian spirit during those rough times for Americans.  And his father was an entrepreneur so it seems that in order to survive in America during those rough times most of the men in my family where--were entrepreneurs, legitimately so.  And it was a--I don't know if you can necessarily call entrepreneurship a genetic trait necessarily, but temperament is a genetic trait, right, it gives you grit or not, or something else but one--but most of the men on the Tucker side of the family are entrepreneurs, you know that's still that tradition remains.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a--any story about the--about emancipation from slavery and how that took place?  On, on that side?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall, yeah, my mother's here, she probably can tell you a little bit more--my father's here he could probably tell you even more about that as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: But what you're saying is that there's been a culture of entrepreneurism passed down on that side of the family, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 113693
Speaker 1: And were the families basically stable on, on that side [Doswell's maternal family]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were basically stable on that side, so I guess Chestnut Avenue is where they used to live.  Specifically in Newport News [Virginia] and on Chestnut Avenue my Uncle Emanuel [ph.] had, like a corner store and the family members used to go to that store to get treats, you know, things we do today, getting, you know, snacks or a beverage from a corner store, so Uncle Emanuel's store, that's where my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] used to go so, I guess we considered during those times they were pretty much self-sufficient because it was still segregation but they are--they were pretty self-sufficient.  My mother didn't experience what she thought was poverty even though they may have not have been extremely wealthy, they were self-sufficient in terms of the economics because the men on that side of the family made that so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a Mason, my grandmother was a, whatchacallit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Eastern Star?
Speaker 2: --Eastern Star.  My gran--my grandfather wanted my mother to run the business but she wanted to go to college so among all her siblings, she was the only one--she was the first one to go and get a four-year degree, from Hampton University [then Hampton Institute in Hampton, Virginia].  So she actually stayed in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she went to Hampton?
Speaker 2: (Nods) she went to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Loved the campus so much she, she got married on the actually--right, right there, the chapel, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now, what did your mother--did she achieve her career goal about going to Hampton, I mean did she want to be a teacher, a nurse or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She wanted to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: --teacher, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well, originally--so here's an interesting story.  So my mother has a fantastic voice so she's--she used to be--her occupation was in education so she used to be a teacher, a counselor but she also used to sing opera.  So she--at a very young age she had a talent for music and she was recruited by like the Mickey Mouse Show, back in the day
Speaker 1: Yeah, '[The] Mickey Mouse Club,' right.
Speaker 2: Mickey Mouse Club, but my grandfather refused to let her join that club, if you will.  That was a memorable story that she often used to tell me.
Speaker 1: And why did he refuse to let her do it?
Speaker 2: She doesn't say, sh--he was just adamant about not having his daughter be in some Mickey Mouse Club.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that was it.
Speaker 1: Wow, that was a big show then, a big children's show watched by millions, you know, we only had three stations in most towns.
Speaker 2: Oh wow.
Speaker 1: And so it was somthin' seen all over the country, you know, and since it was produced by Walt Disney, you know, it really made it a big, big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but she--her father refused to let her do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he refused.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Adamantly and I guess during those times when your father said completely no, you just acquiesce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did she continue to sing after she got married?
Speaker 2: (Nods) Uh-hum, she continued to sing and study music.  So she--when she moved to Baltimore [Maryland]--well, so my mother's first job right out of college, after she received the four-year degree from Hampton University--an she often said that this was Hampton Institute back in the day, not even Hampton University.  That Hampton Institute really trained her to be not only become a teacher but also trained her to think intellectually and act--I mean, to, to reach a level of an academic esteem.  So she really values the education of Hampton Institute when it was Hampton Institute.  An so after she finished her four-year degree she worked in a school in New Haven, Connecticut where she was--where she used--she said she used to teach elementary school but she had some experiences there that brought her here to Baltimore.  I guess the discrimination was still high then, so.
Speaker 1: Was she the only black teacher in the school?
Speaker 2: She was one of two black teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when she came to Baltimore from a singing stand--well she, she worked in the Baltimore city public school systems after, you know, going to--getting her master's degree from Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], where she did a master's in special education, she did go to school at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] for a period of time, before Coppin State University.  But she didn't have a great experience at NYU, said the students were very competitive, taking notes out of books, like tearing pages out of books, things like that, so she left New York and then came here to Baltimore, you know, studied--focused on, you know, special education for children.
Story_ID: 113694
Speaker 1: And then she [Doswell's mother, Brenda Tucker Doswell] also sang on the side 'cause she has a love for music.  So she joined the Morgan State Choir with Nathan Carter who's a--I mean Nathan Carter--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Who, who--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dr. Nathan Carter.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Who led the Morgan State Choir?  You know about the Morgan State Choir?
Speaker 2: I, I, don't, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean, in Baltimore [Baltimore], that was a prestigious choir, so they used to travel all around the world, so it took her to St. Petersburg [Russia] and some other places around the world.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]'s Choir was similar to the Fisk Jubilee Singers in the sense that they traveled around.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And were a sensation like, like, you know in--on the international scene?
Speaker 1: (Nodding) On the international scene.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right
Speaker 1: Very prominent type of choir.
Speaker 2: What, what style of music did they specialize in?
Speaker 1: So my mother sang--sings soprano and they specialized in spirituals and not gospel, but more like historical spirituals and, and classical music as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But prob--but the way Nath--Dr. Nathan Carter would, he would arrange the music, it had a different rendition, if you will.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, is, is he still alive?
Speaker 1: No, he's deceased, he passed away.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But he left a school, Dr. Nathan Carter's School of Music (unverified).  My mother still attends that school, and I'm supposed to be taking--starting up violin lessons again in two weeks at that same school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay Dr. Nathan Carter, that's somebody we ought to know about.  So, so your mother when she graduated she went to Connecticut came back to--went to NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] for a while, came back to Baltimore?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Finished her degree at Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], now is all this before she got married or?
Speaker 1: Oh, she was, she was married in between that time I think, yeah, so she was married during the time that she went to--got her master's degree at Coppin.  She--I don't think she was married when she went to NYU.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, she met my father [Ronald Doswell] on a blind date from what I recall, and my father was just coming back from Vietnam so the story from my father's side is that--my father said--sergeant combat medic in Vietnam, he never talks about war at all, he never really talks about his experience he just says it's not that bad, that's all.  No matter how much I try to ask.
Speaker 2: Well, let's, let's do this, let's go to your father's side.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And bring him up to speed and then we'll talk about how they met and everything.
Story_ID: 113695
Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ronald Jayfus Doswell, R-O-N-A-L-D, Jayfus, Doswell.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know he's born in July, July, I think it's July 27th and I don't know his year off the top, I know he's sixty-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay so, is that 1941, I guess it would be?
Speaker 2: I think it's 1941.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born here in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lafayette [Courts] projects in Baltimore, Maryland, yep, so East Baltimore, he said--they called it East Baltimore (unclear), back in the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Third generation--so I'm third generation Baltimore so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace the Doswell side, and how far back do they go and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: So Doswells, they have an interesting history too.  My grandfather Doswell was from Blackstone, no, coincidentally there is a Doswell, Virginia, right, and we do have some relations to Doswell, to the founders of Doswell, Virginia.  So Doswell, Virginia, in which Kings Dominion [theme park] resides wasn't always named Doswell, Virginia.  So there--my father being a historian looked at the court records and looked at property, so African Americans were property during the slave period, consequently there were slave records that were held in court because slaves could be deeded as property.  So Doswell, where Doswell, Virginia is, Kings Dominion is, was renamed because Ji--Jim Doswell was an entrepreneur, he was a horse breeder so he bred horses for transportation and also for racing.  So it's almost like being a car manufacturer today, like BMW or Chrysler or Ford because that was the mode of transportation for that time period.
Speaker 1: So, so this Jim Doswell was a slavemaster?
Speaker 2: Jim Doswell was a slavemaster.
Speaker 1: An he, he lived about what, what time they say, this I guess, well during slave--slavery, but like that's a long period so?
Speaker 2: I think it may have been between--definitely before 1865 so probably early 1800s, maybe.
Speaker 1: Was he alive during the Civil War, was he still alive when, when slavery ended?
Speaker 2: With Jim Doswell?
Speaker 1: Uhm-hum.
Speaker 2: Think so, my father could tell you completely accurately 'cause he has the records.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right, and tell us about--what is Kings Dominion, now we're not familiar with this area so, just?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, wow, wow, so Kings, so Kings Dominion is a, amusement park.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For most people in this area, they're gonna go to an amusement park, ride a roller coaster, somethin' like that, it's in Doswell, Doswell, Virginia, 'cause it's the closest one, so in terms of geography, the Doswell, Virginia is about two hours away from Williamsburg, Virginia so it's north of Williamsburg, Virginia, yeah.  So they were relatively close, my mother's side of the family, my father's side of the family, if you will.  So they didn't, they didn't move I guess too far.  Now historically speaking on my grandmother's--well--so I mean that's the only thing I know about--so the--so the Doswells after World War II [WWII]--during World War II my grandfather moved to Baltimore [Maryland] for job--for a job.  That often happened with a lot of blacks during that time period because during World War II a lot of the shipyard here in Baltimore was active and so my grandfather was a--was hired as a welder on a shipyard and that bought the family here but my grandfather grew up in Blackstone, Virginia which is right around the corner from Doswell--from now in Doswell, Virginia.
Story_ID: 113696
Speaker 1: Okay, so, your, your grandfather's [Jim Doswell] in Baltimore [Maryland] as a welder in the shipyard--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Shipyard in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: --during World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) during World War II.
Speaker 1: So he brings his family from--it's from, not from--Doswell--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --The Black--Blackstone
Speaker 1: --Blackstone?
Speaker 2: Yep
Speaker 1: Okay, Blackstone, Virginia, so.
Speaker 2: But see the Doswell, the Doswells should live all in that area, but the white Doswells probably, probably right, most likely had an affair with a slave, right so you have an il--illegitimate son, that's in the court records actually, my father [Ronald Doswell] traced that.  And then certain things were deeded to that son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so there comes a line of modern day Doswells, where my-- you know that's, that's my father's father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's familiar pattern, I've seen it so much, I never thought about that much before I started doing this job, but there's so many--the children of the former slavemasters you know, they end up having property--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --in the South, and that's how they get it, because of their father who was--so even though they're black and don't have any rights, you know, or they may still be a slave they end up getting property aft--after slavery because of that relationship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so did they farm land in Blackstone, did they, they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Tobacco, tobacco was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the cash crop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my grandmother [Louise Doswell] often told, told stories about takin' the little worms off the tobacco leaves.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Right in the hot sun, so she used to--so shareholders, I mean sharecroppers mostly, so that was the, probably the occupation back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On tobacco farm.
Speaker 1: So your father just missed that generation of being a farmer an--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uhm-hum.
Speaker 1: And came here, you know, when he was young?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my father was born here [Baltimore, Maryland]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Born here.
Speaker 2: --but my grandfather came here as a welder, so he worked on the shipyard and then drove a taxi,  I think that's how he took care of his family, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my grand--now my--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, would have been '43 [1943] your father was born, I'm sorry, I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: '43 {1943}.
Speaker 1: -- put it back the wrong way, but if he's younger than your mother by a year that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --'43 [1943].
Speaker 2: '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the war was in session--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, an so.
Speaker 2: Yeah the war is in session.
Speaker 1: So now, did--are there any stories from that side of the family about, about the whole slave experience, or, or, or, or, or the reconstruction period at all, or is?
Speaker 2: On my grandmother's side there's a--in the same area there's a, a plantation called Carter's Grove [near Williamsburg, Virginia], it was a huge plantation, like something you probably saw in Texas in 'Django,' the movie 'Django' (laughter) huge--now my father, being the historian, took me over there to see the plantation and also took me to another house that's like their bed and breakfast now, but in the back of the house there's still the slave quarters, like you have the--almost looks like a, a baseball pit and under the pit there's like--it looks--there's like a--like sleeping areas and that's where the slaves would sleep outside in the field, so it's an interesting experience to see that up close.  But Carter's Grove is where my grandmother's family came, so she's a Carter.  And that's where--I mean from a slavery--slave time period, I mean that's all I know about, about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My father's kept accurate records 'cause he's tried to trace it back all the way.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Jim Doswell.
Speaker 1: Okay, Jim Doswell, and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Louise--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So Louise Carter?
Speaker 2: --Doswell, but her, her--certain--I mean her maiden name is Carter.
Story_ID: 113697
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now did your father [Ronald Doswell] have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: He did, he has stories growing up, mo--mostly in East Baltimore [Maryland], so he grew up in the projects [Lafayette Courts] in Baltimore when he fi--when he, when he, you know, when he was first born, grew up went to a high school, he talks about this a lot, Dunbar High School [Baltimore, Maryland].  And Dunbar High School was pretty historic because during those times you only had two high schools, as an African American that you could attend in Baltimore, really.  So there's Dunbar and I think there was Douglass, Fredrick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Mayland].  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, named for black heroes, you know, poet, Paul Laurence Dunbar--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --Fredrick Douglass the great abolitionist
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, Fredrick Douglass High School I think it's one of the oldest African American high schools in the nation, yeah.  So, some famous people came out of both schools.  Dunbar--so Reg, so Reginald Lewis and my father were in school at the same time.  Now Reginald Lewis, the billionaire--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of Baltimore, Beatrice Corporation [TLC Beatrice International] that wrote the book, 'Why Should White Guys Have all the Fun.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he's legendary in the business community--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --everybody talks about Reggie Lewis, yeah.
Speaker 2: And he grew up in Somerset projects in the East Baltimore.  My father grew up right around--not too far away in Lafayette, so they grew up in around the same area, had similar life experience, I think.  But my father said even though the projects were considered an impoverished area, you know, in comparison to some other neighborhoods in Baltimore, it wasn't--they didn't understand that they were in poverty, so his childhood, you know, he thought it was a good experience.  They had fun, they had a stable family both mother [Louise Doswell] and father [Jim Doswell] were in the home at all times, you know, caring family, things like that.
Speaker 1: That's an important point because the projects, when they were initially built were to stabilize people so they could move on and buy a house and they were inspected and, you know, they were clean for the most part and not the projects we have today, you know, most of the families were intact in the projects back in the day.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is interesting because a lot of people when they hear projects they think of, you know, what we now know as projects and not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was then the projects, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So the idea of federally subsidized housing actually was a good idea in the 1940s, today, it's not--it's kind of slipped off it's, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, for many different reasons, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so, so your dad--what was the name of the projects he grew up in?
Speaker 2: Lafayette.
Speaker 1: Lafayette, okay.  Lafayette projects.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so your dad went to school at Dunbar, do you have any stories about Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Well, not too much about the academics, he did have one story though, 'cause my father--well, he tells me a story that, you know at some point he wasn't taking school too seriously.  So then his father, my grandfather, drove him to some places in Baltimore where there was a high population of homeless people, right and my grandfa--my father's--I remember my father telling me that my grandfather told him that if you don't get your act together you're going to be just like this, right.  Now my fath--my grandfather was pretty a mild-tempered type of guy so my father must have been acting up, being too playful.  And so I think that got my father checked and he started taking school a little bit more seriously.  That's one story that sticks with me, but, he said he pretty much, you know, enjoyed Dunbar a lot, had, you know, great experience there.  And it prepared him, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] after Dunbar and then he graduated and then he was--then he had to go to war, so, he was drafted.
Speaker 1: So he was drafted after graduation?
Speaker 2: Drafted after graduation, I think he was drafted after graduation, may have been drafted right after high school.
Speaker 1: He would have graduated 1961 I guess if ev--if they followed along where he graduated at age eighteen.  He'd of graduated in 1961 from Dunbar right?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he may have been drafted right out of high school and then went to Morgan State.  'Cause I know as soon as he came back he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh so, okay, so, oh, so he graduated from high school in '61 [1961], he would've come out of Morgan State in '65 [1965], so that would've been right in the middle of Vietnam [the Vietnam War], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 113698
Speaker 1: But did he--was he [Doswell's father, Ronald Doswell] the first in his family to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, so my grandmother's [Louise Carter Doswell] sister, I call her Aunt Doris, so it must have been Doris Carter, she went to college and then pursued her Ph.D. in nursing.  So, I'm not the first in the family to secure a Ph.D., my grandmother's sister, you know, took the Ph.D. in nursing.  I don't know where she went--did her undergraduate.  And then my moth--my grandmother's other sister went to college as well, she's also a nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay, a nurse now.  Where do they live, the, do they?
Speaker 2: One lives in New York, coincidentally, ironically the, the, the sis--my grandmother's sister Aunt Doris that pursued her Ph.D.--secured the Ph.D. took the Ph.D., she died of breast cancer.  And she did not wanna go through the operations, she was pretty tough I guess, so she said, I'm just gonna--I'm not gonna have anyone, you know, do that operation on my breast, so I'm just gonna exit.  So-- but the Carters --have, you know I talked about temperament before so, Carters have pretty much a--they have a lot of grit, you know on that side of the family.  Do--you know--remember temperament is a genetic trait that's passed on through generations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Tucker, you know, back in the day, there are many Tuckers, there was Capt--notorious Tucker who, who actually lead the campaigns for the Indian Wars, right, so I'm sure he had an interesting temperament.
Speaker 1: This is a white Tucker?
Speaker 2: White Tucker, of course, yeah.  It's in the history books, and then there's Carter coming down, you know, they achieved a lot through, through grit and sustain--you know, perseverance and stuff like that, same thing with Doswells, so now we get to, you know, my grandmother's sister, right, imagine all the things that she had to go through, then at the top of her career, you know she could make a choice, but she chooses, you know, not to go through that operation which at that time probably wasn't a sophisticated as--wasn't as advanced as it is right now, so she may have made the right choice.  So that was the first--those were the first on my father's side to get their education that I know about.  You know, my grandmother didn't pursue it.  I think she was the oldest so she had to take care of her sisters.  And my grandfather's [Jim Doswell] side, his brothers, I think his--one of his brothers did pursue, you know, did get an education, worked at Aberdeen Weapons Systems but my grandfather, he didn't, he didn't go to college.
Story_ID: 113699
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father [Ronald Doswell] was at--interesting your father was at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and he pursued a degree in history is that what, what it was?
Speaker 2: Pursued a degree in history, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was there, did, did he ever talk about how Benjamin Quarles and Roland McConnell, those are two great black historians that were at Morgan?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe so, I don't remember back then, but what I do remember is he used to talk about, like the Civil Rights Movement and my father and a famous black attorney here now in Baltimore who's still living, Billy Murphy [William "Billy" Murphy, Jr.] and my father grew up together--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Judge [HM Robert Mack] Bell and my father went to school together.  And [HM] Larry Gibson and my father used to hang out, you know my family used to hang--and Norris Ramsey [ph.], these are all famous--these are all, you know, well-established attorneys.  William Gibson [sic, Larry Gibson], I wouldn't get--Attorney Gibson, he just came out with a book at the Enoch Pratt Library, yeah, I think that is, I don't know, yeah but these are--these are attorney's that he grew up with they were also active in the Civil Rights movie--Movement back in the day.  So fran--he had me reading Frantz Fanon at age thirteen, '[The] Wretched of the Earth,' right, 'Black Men of Color,' [sic] you know, with--Hannibal, that's how I got introduced to Hannibal the Great--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'World's Great Men of Color' by J. A. Rogers, yeah.
Speaker 2: --there it is, and so that became--so I mean, these are the books that he used to give me with the stories as a synopsis and then he would encourage me to read them.  Now Hannibal is my all-time famous hero and I apply some of the strategies in business today, like flanking and all kinds of--penetrate your market, you know, eradicate your enemy, you know, these days it's competition, that kind of stuff.  So--and having the perseverance, comes from the history, so, that helps to mold me the person I am today right, good or bad, whatever it is, yeah, so the history was very important to my father.  And, so Frantz Fanon, Hannibal, N'Zinga, so great woman of color and great men of color, yep.
Speaker 1: N'Zinga, queen of Angola, yeah.  So, so he, he was involved in civil rights an--in the movement at Morgan, in a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know if he was active then, because you know it was during the war time too, so he was serving Vietnam, I don't know exactly when he came--but he was, he was active in movements like community service.  Like I remember there's a--well my father didn't even tell me this, Billy Murphy told me that they were doing some kind of campaign to help black communities--rid the black communities of this--of a, of a bad rat infestation and so my father and Billy Murphy worked together on that type of program.  And then my father used to write for the Afro-American Newspaper so he's pretty vocal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now that's Murphys, that's Billy Murphy's family.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did he interact with the Mitchells, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or the, or the Dobsons, Union Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland] and all that?
Speaker 2: I think my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] work--worked alongside with the Mitchells, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Parren Mitchell.
Speaker 2: Larry Gibson, that's his name.
Speaker 1: Larry Gibson?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Larry Gibson, yep.  So the Mitchells yeah, I think I went to school with one of the grand--great-grandsons, something like that, David Mitchell.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, but.
Speaker 1: Well these are people all had a national impact on civil rights--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were these people, so.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yep, and then, who else? The person who actually created the 8(a) program that we know today, [HM] Parren Mitchell?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Parren Mitchell.
Speaker 2: See, my mother worked on--worked with him for quite some time, I think volunteered and I saw Parren Mitchell before he passed away, went to a, like a celebration of his life.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a hero of the Congressional Black Caucus and all of that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes sir.
Story_ID: 113700
Speaker 1: I guess--now did your father [Ronald Doswell] have any stories about, well you say he didn't talk, talk about the details of Vietnam [the Vietnam War]?
Speaker 2: He doesn't talk about the de--the details of Vietnam.  He probably--he talked to my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] about the details of Vietnam, but my mother doesn't tell me the details, so I don't know why, 'cause I need to know now because I'm building systems for combat medics on the battlefield now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, coincidently, but, yeah, he doesn't tell--he tells--he talks about the terrain but he, he doesn't talk about the details 'cause he suffered post-traumatic stress disorder, PTSD, I didn't know it until my father takes me to the Angola Embassy in [Washington] D.C. because, supposedly my mother's family came from Angola originally--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and travelled from Angola, Queen N'Zinga's territory here to United States and getting intercepted by a Portuguese ship so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are the Tuckers going back to--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are the Tuckers from--we're--naw--my father had this idea that we could probably do business back in Angola.  So, during a meeting with the Angola Embassy and the representative with which--with whom we spoke, that's when my father even mentioned that he, he suffered post-traumatic stress disorder because we were talking about, you know, in Angola the war was recently--it had recently ended and we were talking about providing services to the veterans in Angola, like mental health services and things like that.  Yeah, so my father's--he all--when I mention to him he says, you know I didn't, you know I didn't, you know it wasn't that bad, we didn't fight that much, you know, but he did talk about he thought he was gonna, every day he thought he was gonna die every day.  So that created fear.
Speaker 1: So he was a medic in the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: He was a sergeant medic.
Speaker 1: Sergeant, okay.
Speaker 2: Sergeant medic.
Speaker 1: This is the era when black soldiers go over just as Black Power is being--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, called for by Stokely, then Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and so the Black Power era in Vietnam with the black soldiers, there've been lots of books, plays written about it, you know, as, so, time when black soldiers were dying disproportionately to whites and they were being warded into the most dangerous parts of combat--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on purpose.  There's a big, almost a war within a war in Vietnam--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --so, just but--okay.  I just want to point that out, so that--so anyway, when he comes--so he didn't have any stories that he told at all about that, you know, he just.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not too much, not about, not about his war experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Per se, and I never heard him mention what you just mentioned, but I'm sure if I were to ask him he would, he would, you know, give me the story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If I had--if I asked him, you know, but not too much.
Story_ID: 113701
Speaker 1: There's a book called, 'Bloods[: Black Veterans of the Vietnam War]' it's about black soldiers in Vietnam, it's really, you know, well-written, it's about that era--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He [Doswell's father, Ronald Doswell] did mention--he used to tell me about H. Rap Brown, Carmichael, you know, the Black Panthers and the difference between the Black Panthers and the real violent group like the Black Panthers weren't really the violent organization back then, they just carried arms, but you had the right to carry arms, but they weren't, like really violent, they just protected themselves.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were some tougher ones in Baltimore [Maryland] I know about (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think it's something called Black October here, was a lot rougher--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Billy Murphy's [William "Billy" Murphy, Jr.]  firm-- I mean he, he def--I mean that was one of his jobs, he defended the Black Panthers at one point, he's a def--you know, a defense attorney, you know criminal, criminal attorney so, I think he got his mark doing that.  So I mean there's some history in Baltimore.  I have to sit down and talk to my father about a lot more.  Some of the things that he--I mean most of the things that he used to educate me on--I mean see--my father is like--so he's a father, but he's more som--like some--like a teacher and a mentor.  So he only tells me when I need to know, but that what he tells me I often subsorb it and it must be meaningful if he's going to actually tell me.  So, it's not a lot of small talk, you know, it's , it's pretty much, he's a nice guy, but he's straight up type of a, you know, "why don't you read Frantz Fanon," so I read Frantz Fanon.  I'm the only child, so, I don't have anybody to compare it to, I guess it's what I'm supposed to do, right (laughter), read Frantz Fanon's book or this other stuff.  But I was surrounded by--I mean if I, If I were to walk in my father's house right now he'd have shelves of books on black history.
Speaker 1: Okay, was, was, the Fanon book, 'Black Skin, White Mask[s]'?
Speaker 2: He gave me that one too, '[The] Wretched of the Earth.'
Speaker 1: 'Wretched of the Earth'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the one I really remember, yep.
Story_ID: 113702
Speaker 1: Okay. So your father [Ronald Doswell] comes back from Vietnam [the Vietnam War] and your mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] and father meet?
Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, now how did that happen, how did this meeting take place?
Speaker 2: My father says that he was motivated because after war, I guess, he saw people dying and death was all around him, life is short--get to know that.  Then he said that he--I remember--I just recall him say when I came from war I just wanted to get married and have a family.  But someone set them up on a blind date.  I don't know who set 'em up on a blind date, my mother would know that story, you know, off the top.  But that's how they met, on a blind date.  My father is very intellectual, he loves disseminating knowledge, if you're into zodiac signs you'd think--he's a Leo, so Leo's often disseminate information based on my own pattern analysis of zodiac signs.  My mother's an Aquarius, right, she also likes the knowledge and the philosophy and my father used to do that, so I think they connected on a, a, intellectual side as well as everything else.  And after that they courted and got married on Hampton's campus [Hampton Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  That's, that's what I know about their union.  I don't know anything about the romantic stuff; they really don't talk with me about that too much, yeah.
Speaker 1: Very few parents talk about (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh really (laughter), yeah?
Speaker 1: They're not the only ones (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so anyway so they, they get together, get married around 1960--'60 what--what is it, or is it in the '70s [1970s] or?
Speaker 2: They got married in the, I think like the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like probably '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 113703
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Ronald Doswell]--now what, what did he do with history?  Did he pursue a graduate degree or did he teach school or what, what did he do?
Speaker 2: So after he did--he have to pursue the--I mean graduated with a history major from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] then he pursued his graduate work at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in social work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I think by understanding history and growing up in those times he wanted to reach back and help the community, so he was really into that.  So he pursued a master's degree in social work--achieved a social work master's degree from Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then (clears throat), took a break, I guess, to you know, really focus on family.  Went back to pursue the PhD while I was here so, but he got all the way to the dissertation stage and he didn't finish.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: So often I tell my dad, said, you can be on your deathbed dad, but you're going to finish that PhD.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So he laughs at me, he doesn't take me seriously too much.
Speaker 1: Where, where'd he go to get his PhD?
Speaker 2: Howard University.
Speaker 1: Howard, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --all right.
Speaker 2: He says he's gonna pursue it, you know.  It's a exercise of discipline, I mean it doesn't mean anything too much if you don't use it but, it definitely pushes you to your intellectual limit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you allow it to.  So that's what--he's supposed to be taking classes right now at Capella University [Minneapolis, Minnesota] to complete his, you know, his stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, now what--did he work for the government later or what happened with the social work?
Speaker 2: So, they said at one point he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Master's.
Speaker 2: --had his own social work practice, so he worked the--he worked--well he worked in the government first, he worked at HUD [United States Department of Housing and Urban Development] in housing, he had a pretty good job there but I think he--my father was re--kind of a nationalist in a way.  Not in the terms of being racist, but understanding and appreciating his history and he did not, I mean, his temperament is not about someone, I guess, denouncing him or disrespecting him because of the color of his skin, so I think he faced some of that at HUD and consequently I think he had a type of a feud with his boss and then he was, he was let go.  And so after HUD, which was a pretty good job for the family, at that time, he opened up his own social work practice.  And he did that for quite some time.
Speaker 1: How, how does that work--I mean I, I just don't know how it--a private social work prac, practice would be, what, what would he be doing?
Speaker 2: Mostly counseling, so like counseling young men or families so you--it's, it's not like a psychologist but it's like a community counselor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can--in Maryland you can actually bill on that, so you can actually--you get paid by insurance company and for the hours that you actually counsel.  So he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah he had that business for a while, and then he also sold--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was it called, was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: (Leans forward) Huh?
Speaker 1: Was there a name for it, his, his business or?
Speaker 2: He called it R. J. Enterprises.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Takin' me way back in memory.  Yep, Ronald Jayfus Enterprises, and then he actually owned real estate; he owned fifteen properties in Baltimore at one point.  So, that was revenue coming in as well as his social work practice.  So my father was an entrepreneur, you know, and he really did it, he really, he really was an entrepreneur, cash flow, cash flow was important.
Story_ID: 113704
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I'm the only child, no brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Now, when you, when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, sense of humor, their interests, their looks, how they walk and talk--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I look like my ma--I look like my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] almost exactly, she's definitely more prettier than I am, of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: My father [Ronald Doswell], I have some of his personality both my parents--so my mother is an--she has an artistic personality, she's very nice all the time, a very much of a humanitarian.  So I--but I take zodiac signs into respect, you know, when it comes to this too, not just genetics.  But her temperament, Aquarius, she's like, she's you know, she's very spontaneous sometimes.  She doesn't have a structured regiment and she's very--she was a caring mother, so if you took a mother in the dictionary and took her out the book and put her in real life, that's con--that's my mother.  Very maternal, very giving person, very caring--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, a mother.
Story_ID: 113705
Speaker 1: Okay, so, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, an earliest one?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory is when I learned how to wave, like you know, like bye-bye.  That's my earliest childhood memory.  And to me, I remember I was on my mother's [Brenda Tucker Doswell] shoulder and my mother says, "Wave bye-bye" and I was thinking should I do it this way--do it that way.  That's my earliest memory, you know.  Then I had an early memory at four years old, I was playing the piano, take, takin' my first piano lesson.  So I was--I didn't know really what I was doing, but I was on the keys and some, some older person is telling me to, to play something, so.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so your parents got--they started you with piano lessons at age four?
Speaker 2: (Nods) Um-hum.  My mother had me take piano lessons at age four and then violin lessons at age six.  Now she chose piano for me, but you know--so, my mother used to play piano and sing while I was in the womb, so, you know, you don't--your neurons are really starting to crystallize, right, find their way, if you will--determine pathways and really create a solid foundation at five and then your brain completely develops up until age twenty-five.  So it stops at 25.  So hypothesis is because she was always singing, but always playing the piano that my neurons probably developed a pat--you know, pathway for my ear for music.  So anything, even today if I don't even practice for years, I can go on a piano and if I hear something I can play it.  I have relative pitch, not perfect pitch, so that means I need to get it wrong before I get it right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I describe it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah but they had--be--I was--I started piano, I pursued that for a while, won many competitions, went to the Apollo [Theater, New York City New York] when I was fifteen years old.  Performed at the, at the Apollo with a band called Future Dynamics, and there was a three-piece band.  I was on piano (clears throat) Vonzell Sunderland [ph.] was on drums, he still plays drums today and Prentice Benson [ph.], we all had different names, was on the--he played the saxophone, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah.
Story_ID: 113706
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe the home you grew up in, what did it look like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a good question.  So, when my parents [Brenda Tucker Doswell and Ronald Doswell] were together, up until age ten, I grew up in 33rd--I remember 3311 The Alameda [Baltimore, Maryland], that's my real memory of growing up.  You know, where I had consciousness (laughter) so that the, so, one level, a rancher, like a home and we had a ba--there's a basement but it's--so there are two levels and the sights, I mean, I remember the, the Memorial Stadium 'cause it's when the Memorial Stadium was right across the street from where we are right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where, of course, the greats like Babe Ruth played, the Colts were here.  And then had the backyard that maybe was like my play area, if you will.  So the sights and sounds, mean, it's like, city sounds, pretty much.  You know, cars goin' down the street, like any other city, sometimes hearing a siren.  My mother singing sometimes, you know, background--it's pretty much a--you know, but I'm an only child so it's pretty much like a quiet and serene type of environment, if you will.  My mother cooked all the time, of course, so, she used to cook these hambur--when--well I don't eat any meat--I'm like a si--pescetarian, I eat salmon, but I won't eat any red meat.  But she--when I did eat hamburgers, you know those old style hamburgers with the onions fallin' out of the patty, so I remember that very well.  And cream of wheat, that's what--that was one of my favorite foods growing up, for breakfast, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in '72 [1972] so you, so this is Baltimore in the, like, mid-'70s [1970] right, I guess?
Speaker 2: Baltimore in the mid-'70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Pretty good neighborhood though, yeah.  And I remember the backyard so, (clears throat) my mother used garden a lot so she loves plants and aesthetics so I wo--my first entrepreneur experience I took the initiative to take her peaches off the tree, put it in my red wagon and go around the neighborhood and sell the peaches for about five cents or less--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --just because I had an idea.  I can make money off these peaches, so I can get some toys.  So I did it.  And she didn't prompt me, but I--an I think, I don't think I got in trouble for that, but then after the peaches. I decided selling my toys to get new ones, so she would often say, "Before I get you new toys you have to give away your old toys."  So instead of giving my old toys away I figured I'd sell the old toys, with the same red wagon. So these experience and then Baltimore's--even through that time you have a city of neighborhoods so boys from the other--cross the street from another neighborhood came into my neighborhood, saw this--the peaches time, saw me with money selling peaches knocked down my wagon-- peaches--the product is destroyed and they took my money.  So that was my, early, very early experience of competition, you know.  But I didn't know how, at that point to retaliate, so.
Story_ID: 113707
Speaker 1: So, what--were gangs an issue growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I grew up with some pretty tough guys, so there weren't gangs--matter a fact, Brian Nichols, the young man who killed a judge in Atlanta [Georgia], remember in 2004, I don't know if you remember that?
Speaker 1: I thi--was that the one that, that punched a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --guard and then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he punched the guards, like one of the largest manhunts in history.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: We grew up together in Baltimore [Maryland] right down the street.  He lived on Windemere [Avenue], I lived on three-three--3311 The Alameda.
Speaker 1: I think--is that's the one where, where, they left--a woman guard was in charge of him or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they left him unconstrained.
Speaker 1: Un--just, just, just with her and he just turned around and knocked her out or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep--right.  So, we both grew up in martial arts, I know how Brian used to train so, we grew up, with an insatiable desire for martial arts.  Karate, Kung Fu, Aikido, all that and we used to practice on one another.  So we didn't really have problems like that, as we got older, with other guys because we could defend ourselves pretty well.  But I--that came from, from growing up with other neighborhoods, so they're not gangs, but Baltimore's a city of neighborhoods so if you go from like one block to another block you get a whole different cul--a whole different culture if you will.  These guys don't know you so, they're gonna try you, typical, typical boys stuff growing up, but in Baltimore it's really like that.  Like they're not--in some areas like Washington, D.C., you have Northwest, Southeast, Southwest, Northeast, right, in Baltimore, you can be on this street right here go two blocks down to 33rd street to Green Mill Avenue and it's a different type of culture, and then go two blocks down and then you're in Charles Village where Hopkins [John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] is.  So that's, that's pretty much what it is in--in-group, out-group phenomena as we'd explain it in social science--social psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 113708
Speaker 1: So, now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Well I started school at--well elementary school was Mount Royal.
Speaker 1: Mount?
Speaker 2: Mount Rolls--Mount Royal Elementary Middle [School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Royal, like a?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like Mount, M-T, Royal, R-O-Y-A-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So I went there from elementary to, to--well kindergarten to seventh grade.  And then, I transferred to Fallstaff [Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland] for the--for my whole eighth grade year.
Speaker 1: Is that a middle school?
Speaker 2: That was a middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't think, I don't think it exists anymore, Fallstaff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after eighth grade for one year I went to Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland], so that was my first private school, Catholic private school experience back in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was a whole--that, that pretty much was my turning point for who I am today, maybe.
Speaker 1: And, from there you went to college (laughter) I think, I think, right?
Speaker 2: No from there I went to hi--to--that was one year Calvert Hall, then my tenth grade year I went to Baltimore City--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --College High School and then after Baltimore City College High School [Baltimore, Maryland] I went to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] and then after Oberlin, I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and then after Howard, I went to George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was it.
Speaker 1: George Mason, okay.
Story_ID: 113709
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, tell us about Mount Royal [Elementary Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], now what kind of--did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked school, I performed well in school.  At that time I was, you know, takin' the general academic courses and also pursuing music, so--'cause you remember I was--started me playing piano and violin at four and six respectively, so simultaneously I was going to school and then throughout, you know, at least one day the week taking music lessons.  I didn't get really serious about school, I don't think--how important school was, until my father [Ronald Doswell] and I had our first, I guess, son-father encounter, meaning--I said--then my father told me to study for my SATs so I must a been in tenth grade and I said--I guess hormones were in rage I said, "I'm not studying any f'in SAT's."  That was the very first time I used profanity with my father, ever and all of Vietnam came out that day--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And, and, were your parents [Ronald Doswell and Brenda Tucker Doswell] split up at that point?
Speaker 2: My parents split up when I was ten.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were ten, so this is--okay, so this is maybe about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So (unclear).
Speaker 1: --five years later or something, or?
Speaker 2: Right, so my--it was like--well I'm the only child so it's like vacation, so my parents splitting up was like vacation for you.  My father would allow me to do things that my mother would--wouldn't allow me to do, my mother was very a--a strict disciplinarian, but also caring.  But she was a molder--so educator, I mean, she was like--I was an apprentice to my mother and my father.  But I was in strict school way all the time, right.  Grammar control every single day of my life even still today, you know.  My father (clears throat) I went to my father's house, like for R&R, if you will, every weekend, Friday, Saturday and Sunday and then go back to my mother's training throughout the week.  You--so--but this the time I--one weekend at my father's place where, which is right down here, 33 The Alameda, I'd still wanna, I was goin' through some stuff and I just didn't wanna study for SATs so I told him I'm not in my--in that way that time and then I never saw my father act like that in my entire life, so I decide--I thought at that moment, education must be so important for my father to have that response that I'm gonna study my SATs.  Now during that time I was still getting over some stuff from Calvert Hall.  Now Calvert Hall was a--is a blue-collar Catholic private school. I kind of rationalize prejudice with competition, so when you have, you know, two working class populations in a same geographical area, two groups are going to compete like [New York] Yankees and [Baltimore] Orioles, right, so I was in high school, all boys high school and that was the very first time, you know, I heard whites call me the "N" word and things like that.  So, my personality back then is different from what it is, I wanted to, you know, have friends and things like that and it wasn't a good experience Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland] during that one year.
Story_ID: 113710
Speaker 1: Let, let me go, go back even further, we, we start with grade school, so, we, we try to do this chronologically so I'm sorry I, I let you talk about high school before we got to grade school but--Now, in, in grade school, what, what were you interested in in grade school, do, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Grade school I was interested in, I liked all my subjects but I think I was more interested in the, in the arts, and English and writing.  I did not have an interest at that time to much in the mathematics and of course we didn't have real science so it was math and English in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?  Were there any real good ones?
Speaker 2: Actually I did (laughter)--you know incidentally--my math teacher was my favorite, Linda Eberhart and she still remembers me today, that was my favorite teacher at Mount Royal [Elementary Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], even though I wasn't her best student (laughter), but she used to do interesting things in the class that had nothing to do with math, but I, but I still remember like making candles in her class, so, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Now you were growing up, it this the '70s [1970s] now--'80s [1980s], '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], grade school, I guess, right and?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, was, was popular culture--I mean television radio movies did you, did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Run-D.M.C. was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Popular back when I was in like elementary middle.
Speaker 1: So it's like 1981 or so?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) so that was popular, so we all, you know--I remember the guys--we all--you get the puff leather jackets, those were big back in Baltimore [Maryland].  Kangols and the boots and the hats, back then.  Hip-hop music was on the rise, so I, I considered myself a--one of the cool guys, I guess (laughter), back then, so you--you know, I don't know if that answered your question?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it does, I'm thinkin' about that's an era of, I think, I think the Fat Boys and, what's his name, gamin' was starting, the game systems.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Really just startin' up, Nintendo games.
Speaker 2: Nintendos, Texas Instruments, TI-99, Commodore 64, during those times.  And that's also during the time that I started programming.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So at twelve years old my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] had me--since she was in art she had connections so I had my first commercial at age twelve.  That was the only commercial, Park Sausages, with Ray Haysbert's [HM Raymond Haysbert, Sr.] company.  Ray Haysbert was one of my mentors before he passed away.  But I didn't know that was his company at that time.  You know I was the--that was the first African American conglomerate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did, you know Ray, Ray Haysbert?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my mentor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, he actually walked me into Harbor Bank [of Maryland] and had--and actually any--and I opened my first--my bank account, Juxtopia's bank account at Harbor Bank.
Speaker 1: I mean okay, at--the--at the age--in the school--when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: No, no, no later on.
Speaker 1: Or middle school or?
Speaker 2: Fairly recently.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right, all right yeah,
Speaker 2: Seven, eight years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you know him when you were in school, grade school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know Park Sausage was a company that, you know, he ran for that time.  So that was my first commercial an--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: With a black company, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a black company, that's right, an--so at that time at twelve years old, I did this commercial and the money, I could have done anything I wanted to with it, but I brought my first computer, that was a Texas Instrument TI-99.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, you did a commercial for Park Sausages?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And what did you do, what kind of commercial was it?
Speaker 2: It was--all I did is say, "Mmm, Mmm, Good" and ate some hot dogs, right, and got, and was compensated $127 every time the commercial ran.  Which to me at that age was phenomenal, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now how, how is that hooked up, did your father [Ronald Doswell] or mother hook that up for you?
Speaker 2: My mother hooked that up.  There was a lady, June Thorn [ph.], who used to be an actress, she's deceased now, she used to act in Arena Players, my mother used to act too.  So my mother used to act in Arena Players--playhouse and June Thorn did as well an she was also a neighbor of my mother's when my parents split my mother went to the Westside, my father stayed here, so June Thorn was also part of the church and I guess they got to talking did photo--did some, you know, headshots, she took me to an agent, agent said okay I have this commercial, let's book you for this commercial and I did the commercial an only one commercial, money was pretty good though.  And that's how I brought my--I saved up the money and brought my first computer, yep, that way.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now this was in nine--this would be in 19 what, '80 [1980]?  How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve, yeah, okay, so this would be like 1983 I guess, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, about that time.
Speaker 1: No, no, maybe '84 [1984], '85 [1985], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirteen, 1986 so it'd been '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '85 [1985], '85 [1985], 1985.
Story_ID: 113711
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what kind of computer did you get?
Speaker 2: A Texas Instrument.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was called a TI-99, a gray computer, speak-synthesizer module, you have to buy it separately and hook to the side of it.  So I was actually doing speech recognition programming back in 1985 on my own.  And then one of my friends, over here, Paul Buchanan also had a computer and we used to try to program games together back in 1985, during just--that was part of the play time, okay let's program.  We want to have our own business at twelve, but we didn't have any direction we just self-directed.
Speaker 1: Now how did you, how did you even like know what to do in terms of programming a computer?  I mean, who, who--where did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well first, well first started when--like play.  The computers used to come with books, we could buy like books on how to program, I don't know where the real interest was, but I remember my mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell] took me to a class--a programming--an introductory programming class which was the most boring thing in the world, but because my friend also had a computer we thought well we can play games with the computer right, but what else could we do with the computer.  Now there, there were game systems like the Atari, and the Texas Instruments where you can actually program and build your own systems.  So I was--I had an Atari, but I also liked to build my own things, right, I'm a--you know, with software.  So that was the interest and Paul Buchanan, we're the same age and he liked to do that as well.  So, it, it first started off when we would go to different stores and type in some phrase, right, and then loop--make it loop on the computer so we'd type up a small program and we knew how to do it so we'd go in like shopping malls, type some crazy phrase and it would show on the screen, this looping, over and over and over and over again, we thought it was the funniest thing.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the people didn't know how to get it off of there or what?
Speaker 2: We probably did but, when people walked by they would say this crazy--see this crazy phrase.  It may have been our name, be something else, we don't, we don't know.  And that sparked the interest because it was almost like, like for laughs for us and then it got more sophisticated after that in terms of, you know programs, trying to program things for real.  Like game characters, scenarios, but everything was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they used to publish those codes, game codes of how to cheat different games, different levels and all, did you all, was that, that part--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We didn't do that, we liked to build the stuff from scratch, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we studied programming languages, and at that time too we were saving things on cass-we were saving data on cassette tapes so there was a connector from a cassette tape to the computer and we used to save the data there then floppy disk came out so that's when we said, okay, this the greatest thing and then 3.5" disk came out after that, yep.  So that was like, that was like every weekend we're gonna build upon a program, yeah so that was pretty cool back there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so were, were you gettin' any support from school in terms of how to do these things?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: The schools didn't even have computers like that.  I mean, typing sure, programming, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So all that was like, self-directed learning if you will.  But to us it wasn't even learning, it was like a project, like building a, building a model airplane or model rocket, same type of concept growing up.
Story_ID: 113712
Speaker 1: Okay so, now you were in--at Mount Royal [Elementary Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland] from K-7.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, you're about twelve years old then?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, so after twelve you're at Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland], this is the Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Catholic school.
Speaker 1: An, an, now, now why did your--your mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell]--did she send you to Catholic school 'cause she thought it was better than public school is that why you were going?
Speaker 2: She thought--she talked with my father [Ronald Doswell], so my father and my mother, even though they weren't together they often--and they, the never got divorced so they were separated so my father can retain the house, so I can still have access to my friends so that's the relationship they still continue to have today.  They talk--they only really talk when my father wants to share some history stuff, or it's about me.  I think they had a conversation about Calvert Hall and being a pretty good school, right and a quality education with a great curriculum so, my father I think really encouraged it so, he had me in Calvert Hall.  Now his philosophy's a little interesting, my father wanted me to learn very early on how people really, really are instead of my being blindsided later on, so I think that was his motivation for sending me--for encouraging me to go to Calvert Hall, but it was always my choice.  So, I, I went to the campus--on the campus, I said, okay, I'll give it a trial, and at that time I was pretty a mild-mannered, you know, young man.  I did what my parents recommended me to do, and that's what I did.  So I went to Calvert Hall for one year, yeah.
Speaker 1: An, that's when you say, you kinda encountered racism an--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Calvert Hall was no joke.
Speaker 1: It's a whole different.
Speaker 2: When it came to that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: From faculty and students, now faculty, of course they can't do it, but you can actually feel the favoritism or the unfairness, if you will.  And then, you know, if you--if there's--the way I rationalize right now, there's a stereotype of a group of people then, you almost reinforce that stereotype certain things, certain times in the classroom from a faculty stand point, but the students (laughter) the students were deftly on a different level, quote unquote, they--pretty prejudice during that time,  This back in--this was like '87 [1987], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], '87 [1987], '88 [1988] it was '87 [1987].  So for one year I stuck it--I stuck it out though for one year.  But it pretty much became a turning point in my personality I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in--I guess in '87 [1987], '88 [1988] you went to Baltimore City High School?
Speaker 2: Baltimore City High School [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was you, you just want to get away from Calvert Hall?
Speaker 2: I had to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Is there anything in particular?
Speaker 2: --started quit--I started quitting things I remember I was in Taekwondo, I was performing well in Taekwondo, I was doing extraordinary in music and my academics fell so I made a decision in order to really focus on my academics I need to stop taking Taekwondo and if I had stayed with it I'd probably be a, you know, I would have competed in the Olympics, I thought I was that good.  And I was--and later on when I took Taekwondo again I was actually that good.  But I stopped all that because I need to focus on me, my mindset and also on the academics.  But, the culture was just too crazy so, I left and decided to go to City, which was a completely different experience and I excelled there, but I didn't really--Now at City College High School I had to build my self-esteem back up because racism plus prejudice can destroy someone's self-esteem at that young age, yeah.  Despite all the history that my father used to take--teach me cause you're surrounded by something else and I was not prepared for it so.
Speaker 1: What was the percentage of black students there you think?
Speaker 2: It was probably like two percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I was often in detention for reasons I did not even know, so that kind of atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Any black teachers, at all?
Speaker 2: No black teachers, zero, so.
Story_ID: 113713
Speaker 1: Okay, so Baltimore City College High School [Baltimore, Maryland].  Now you, you're a sophomore by now?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Or, or--okay.  Sophomore, okay, an, now, was the--what was that like?
Speaker 2: That was a great high school experience, larger school approximately 3,000 students; it's a huge population of students.  A very nurturing environment in terms of the academic, you know, academically speaking and also encouraging art, you know, the arts, so I remember at Baltimore City--I, I--you know in high school everybody wants to be popular and things like that, I wasn't necessarily driven by that, I was driven, I was driven to go to college, you know, in a way.  And then definitely after my father [Ronald Doswell] had that talk with me I was really driven.  So I would get, I would get--try to be the first person at City in the entire school every day.  So I would get up early to be--to go to school so I could prepare myself for my first class, you know.  And in my mindset it was competing so it was like, you know, if I'm gonna be the best, I want to be the first.
Story_ID: 113714
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there, there a, I guess a scientific complement at Baltimore City [College] High School [Baltimore, Maryland] to what you were actually doing at home, reprogramming computers and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: At, City, no, not in my fr--sophomore year.  Not that I recall, nope, not at all. I was doin' a lot of that on my own so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So there wasn't
Speaker 2: --there wasn't.
Speaker 1: I mean I just wanted to see--any coursework that facilitated what you were pursuing at home, at all.
Speaker 2: No, just the general coursework in high school it didn't re-reinforce anything that I was doing at all.  Now the City students that are my interns, they come and intern with me and they program for real.  But that's still--it doesn't--it--that, that type of rigor doesn't even exist today.  Not in Baltimore, not for Baltimore City Public Schools.
Story_ID: 113715
Speaker 1: So when--now, now, you--what you described as a, as a youth as a--you, you, you have like a--you're into a lot of disciplined things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nods) um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know music, which is a discipline you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nods) um-hum.
Speaker 1: --two instruments you--Taekwondo--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --requires discipline.  Even the computer programming alone, that requires some discipline too because you (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --gotta get it right.
Speaker 2: (Nodding) gotta get it right.
Speaker 1: So now you're showing up at school early, earlier than everybody else.
Speaker 2: (Nodding) um-hum.
Speaker 1: An--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding) and it requires a discipline, yep all-- music requires--music practice and orchestra required a discipline so when students--when kids were watching cartoons at very young age, and even when I was at my father's [Ronald Doswell] house I had to, you know, take my violin and walk up to orchestra practice that was held actually at the high school which I--which wa--which I, you know would eventually attend, City [Baltimore City College High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  That was orchestra practice starting at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 12:00, so four hours, you know.
Speaker 1: That's every Saturday?
Speaker 2: Three hours.  Every--nine to one, every Saturday, yep
Speaker 1: Okay, so this--you know, so anyway we got a story of a--it's building up.
Story_ID: 113716
Speaker 1: What--did, did you have any favorite teachers at Baltimore City College [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I did have a favorite teacher--well, not, not really.  None of the teachers at City--I had favorite people, but they weren't my teachers.
Speaker 1: Who were they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Like, Miss Orange [ph.], I remember her, she's actually still at City.  And that's pretty much about it.
Speaker 1: What did she do?
Speaker 2: She taught English, so City--in Baltimore [Maryland], one of the oldest rivalry's in Baltimore City Public School System is City and Poly [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute, Baltimore, Maryland].  So, City used to be an all-boys school; Poly used to be an all--I mean, (clears throat) all, you know all-boys school too.  Now, now there's--it's co--they're both co-ed, but it's, I think it's one of the nation's oldest high school rivalries, so we used to--they used to have football games at Memorial Stadium where the coach used to play.  That's how big the rivalry was, right, so City was known for English and literature and Polytechnical [sic] Institute is still known for the math and science.  So I, I think I developed my writing ability, fundamentally at City.  So, you know, we had to say the pledge in Latin at most of the school events, you know, in unison, that kind of thing.  Now it's not required at City anymore, but when I was going there it was required that you had to learn the pledge in Latin.
Speaker 1: Do you know it now, can you do it now?
Speaker 2: No, some of my classmates know it, Fidem meam obligo vexillium [vexillo] and then it drifts off, then the last phra--the last word is omnibus, like for all.  But I think that tended to be something the stu--the students didn't really underst--didn't learn the phrase that whole pledge in Latin, but pledge of allegiance in Latin, but they would all--always at the end all--always in unison say omnibus.  Psychological recency effect, that's what it's called, yeah.  Makes sense if--primacy effect and recency effect, recency last thing you--you remember, you're gonna say and then primacy effect, the first thing.  So even my--from my memory, it's a, it's a testament to that.  Now, some of my classmates, they still know the whole pledge in Latin.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, let's see--so--now how, how were your grades?
Speaker 2: My grades were average at City.  I mean, I was a, a, pret--now my grades were average until my father [Ronald Doswell] had that talk with me, because remember I was still getting over stuff in Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland], so--an then I was a teenager so, there's no excuses, but when my father had that talk with me then I, I started to really excel in my junior and senior year.  I use--an I took--now that's when I was taking high school very, very seriously, or academics very seriously and then it was college preparation.  My first two years, like Calvert Hall, of course, but my sophomore year I was, you know, getting back on track with everything and then my junior and senior year that's when I really excelled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So
Speaker 1: So, did you focus on the--were you still focusin' on the arts primarily or was, was, was it sciences by now or the?
Speaker 2: I was still--I was focused on--at that time I was reading 'Gifted Hands' by Ben Carson [HM Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], so because I read 'Gifted Hands' and then I was also reading Michael Crichton, 'Jurassic Park,' I believe it was during that time.  I think so, so because I was reading those books I became interested more in the biological sciences (clears throat) and I de--an neuroscience in spe--specifically and then my mother brought me a book on the brain so I was very interested in what the brain couldn't do, like what percentage of the brain can we use that we're not using, I was very fascinated with that and consequently it drove me to pursue neuroscience and study on my own.  Different brain regions what the neurotransmitters do (clears throat).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, but I was also--I stayed consistent with the arts.
Story_ID: 113717
Speaker 1: So you were--you said you were playin' music, you performed at the Apollo [Theater, New York City, New York] at age fifteen?
Speaker 2: At age fifteen, played 'Careless Whisper,' by George Michael, won first place doin' the 'Amateur Night at the Apollo.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That must have been an experience just bein' there for 'Amateur Night'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, it was really-it was a great experience, and the principal made sure that it was announced on the PA system, you know, so, that was, that was cool back in the day (clears throat).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went there three times but then we, we got a little cocky, we thought we were going to do some originals, we were like (laughter) we didn't stick to the--our parents told us that, you know what why don't you just stick to what got you the win each and every time, but we decided we were going to do some originals and we were there for three times consecutively, we won first place the second--first time, third place the--first place the first time, third place the second time, and then the third time we got--we were booed out, 'cause we were trying to do an original.
Speaker 1: And nobody recognized it an, an--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No one recognized it--like what is this, but didn't know any better--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --we thought, you know, we were young, we thought after we won the first time we're golden (laughter), life lesson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you went to New York on those trips did, did your mother [Brenda Tucker Doswell]--father [Ronald Doswell] go with you or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother went with me, I think my father was working or something like that.  Von--but Vonzell, the drummer's father went, because the drum--the fa--the drum--my--the drummer in the band, the band was called Future Dynamics, so the drummer, Vonzell Sunderland [ph.], his father was a pretty well-known drummer in Baltimore [Maryland] and I think he used to play with Billy Murphy [William "Billy" Murphy, Jr.], 'cause Billy Murphy plays drums, that's then another connection.  So he had the connections an--in New York.  So I remember Von--both Vonzell's parents went and my mother went and some of Vonzell's sisters and Prentice [ph.] went by himself, the saxophone player, then we had a bass player, Daniel, but after Apollo we didn't see, you know, Daniel too much anymore.  So we all were like in one big van together driving to Harlem, New York to go play at the Apollo.  So it's pretty--it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: So basically you, you played like popular stuff that was on, you know, on the radio like George Michael songs and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well we could only play one song.
Story_ID: 113718
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, mean--I mean I'm talkin' about your repertoire as a, as a band.
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much popular stuff, some compositions. I mean I compose, so when we used to compose, I used to compose all the songs, at age fifteen.  But when we played popular stuff then we just practiced, it was a discipline and Vonzell Sunderland [ph.] at that age, he was very much the disciplinarian, so he was the leader of the band, he was one year older than I was.  At that point--at that time I was the youngest of all the band members, they're all older than I was so I looked up to them and, so Vonzell called practice and we better come to practice and we better have--be--you know have our stuff tight, otherwise, he would, he would get on us and yell at us a little bit.  It was interesting.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was like goin'--it was like work in a way.
Speaker 1: So, so, did you do gigs around Baltimore [Maryland], too?
Speaker 2: Yep, so we had--I had--after that whole--after the Apollo thing ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'] then we went our--you know we split up, did our separate things.  And I had another band and we used to go around, just show up at a talent show, win first place, that kinda thing, (nodding) you know.
Speaker 1: So did you all sing too or just play music?
Speaker 2: We primarily played in the first band, in the second band we sang and played.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, guy named Charles Franklin, who's now a minister in Baltimore, his father was a minister, pretty well-known minister now he actually is a minister.  He didn't think he was ever gonna be a reverend at all growin' up.  But he--I mean he--he had the voice, so he would like, he would sing lead and then I would, you know, back up, back, you know, do back up stuff.  And we, we laid down tracks in studios, did all that then, you know, all that.  My parents [Brenda Tucker Doswell and Ronald Doswell] pushed me to music, 'cause they recognized the talent, so my father likes--loves music, especially, you know, the, the older stuff.  Like Marvin Gaye, things like that, during that time, Donny.  My mother had me listen to [Ludwig van] Beethoven, [George Frideric] Handel, Franz, you know, Liszt [Franz Liszt], [Frederic] Chopin, [Antonin] Dvoak, [Antonio] Vivaldi, so, I was classically trained, but I had an appreciation for, you know, music of that days as well.  So, my parents, both of them encouraged me to go to music, but I was the one, right, that said, I don't want to do music.  So what ended up happening, when I was at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] I saw someone strung out on heroin, right, it was a woman with a sequenced [sic, sequined] dress, beautiful woman, young woman right.  And I remember before we would go on stage we actually had to, you know go in a room and wait to be called and I sat--see her like just nodding and strung out and at that point, you know, being impressionable, I said you know what, I don't think this environment is for me.  So, I'd rather pursue medicine, you know.  I like playing it, but I didn't want to be in that environment.  So that, that was the decision point and I remember being in the barber shop before going to the Apollo and I was daydreaming, Vonzell was like, "You know, what's wrong man?"  An I--at that point, I was thinking like, I'm doin' this for the band, but I don't wanna, really wanna do this for a career.  Then the second thing that reinforced it, I was, (clears throat) I was working at the Meyerhoff Symphony Hall, here in Baltimore and the Temptations were performing and the manager comes out and we talk and she says, "Where are you in school?" you know how adults, I do it too now, talk to high school students, and I said, "I wanna be a musician just like--a performer, just like the Temptations." And she said, "They're performing 'cause they have to, not because they want to, always have a back-up plan."  Those things always stuck with me, so.
Story_ID: 113719
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now were you engaged in other high school activities when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first person to letter in dance, choreography.  Modern dance that was the very, very first per--very first male to letter in modern dance at City [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], I don't even know if they have that program.  I ran--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This, this is an all-male dance class too, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, this was female, males.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'cause I thought City, City college was all-male?
Speaker 2: It used to be, its co-ed now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: When I went there it was co-ed.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Mayland] was all, all-males but City's been co-ed for quite some time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I did that and interesting enough, even though I was first--I was first seed in tennis, so I was number one tennis player at City, while I was there and also I ran track, I ran cross-country, like three-miler, and I did pretty well, I used to come in third place.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of activities, is, is, tha--is, that it, I mean, did, did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: I didn't run for class office.  So I wasn't really interested in politics at City.  I was interested in sports, music and my academics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I excelled in tennis.  But I took private tennis lessons too before, you know, goin' to City and running track I was pretty fast, so someone asked me if I wanted to be in a cross-country team and I said okay, why not so I joined.  Tennis was really my sport and taekwondo.  But I did--taekwondo as, for, you know competition outside of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was in a lot of activities.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you take--How, how far did you get in math--did you, did you have, have a chance to take calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: Pre-calculus in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't take calculus until I got to college.  Now, students are taking calculus now, in like tenth or eleventh grade.
Story_ID: 113720
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were on--what, what kinda counseling did you get about college?  'Cause, I, I, I take it everybody going to City College High School [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] intends to go to college right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's [Brenda Tucker Doswell] an educator though, so she didn't really trust all the counselors because she was a counselor herself.  So she had me go to a private counselor, like someone who--someone she paid to do an assessment.  And they did a real assessment on me and my, an my results came out scattered, well, that was typ--means predictable (cough) 'cause I had so many interests and I was exposed to so many different things.  I really--just didn't know what I really wanted to do, so the counselor recommended Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] because of the arts and also because of the science.  (Clears throat) So I knew I wanted to be a neurosurgeon at that point, like Ben Carson [HM Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], but I knew I wanted to also play music, right, or at least compose music.  So, the guidance counselor--the counselor, paid service counselor, had a detailed report and in that report the recommendation was Oberlin.  So that's how that came about.
Speaker 1: Oberlin College is about, what about an hour south of Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Forty-five minutes.
Speaker 1: South?
Speaker 2: South of Cleveland, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, in, in Ohio?  So, were you, were you--what did that sound like to you--did, did--were you excited about going to Oberlin or did you know anything about it, or?
Speaker 2: I didn't know any--so here's my father [Ronald Doswell] kicked in.  He was about Oberlin and then he'd, he'd, he'd--gets me a list of the history facts about Oberlin.  Oberlin being the first school to admit African Americans, women, Native Americans, last stop of the Underground Railroad.  He named famous people who graduated from Oberlin.  Later I learned Ben and Jerry's Ice Cream, those guys graduated from Oberlin.  A lot of great scholars graduated from Oberlin.  So, I--my mother took me on the campus and I fell in love with the campus.  The campus is beautiful, it's like an Ivy League campus in the middle of a cornfield without the, without the urban traffic.  So it's almost, in a way, better than Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because they're in urban areas, right, where you--it's mixed up with the urban city.  So in a way that's great because you have a lot of party life, but Oberlin was really a center of academic excellence so as a student when I was attending, there's no car 'cause you didn't have a car.  So you're there to learn (clears throat) and you're in that campus and you better enjoy that campus life or it's probably not for you.  But I enjoyed it, I enjoyed the, the environment in that respect.  So after that--so I fell in love with the campus and I said, yep this the school I wanna go to, plus my father went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and my mother went to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I'm the only child, right, so I didn't want to play favoritism.  I don't wanna go to Howard and my mother would've been mad at me 'cause I didn't go to Hampton, 'cause she wanted me to go to Hampton, but I didn't want to go to Hampton (clears throat) 'cause I didn't want my father to be like, well, you should have gone to Howard.  So I said, in all--all this goes into my mind equation and I said, you know what, I'ma go neutral and go to Oberlin, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, this is--you graduated from City College High School in--probably--?
Speaker 2: 1990.
Speaker 1: 1990?  Okay.
Story_ID: 113721
Speaker 1: And started, I, I guess you started at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] that fall right, then, then when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I started Oberlin that fall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now did, did you do anything special over the summer?
Speaker 2: Between the time?  I can't remember, 1990?
Speaker 1: You had so many activities though, probably if you just lived your regular life (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so Oberlin College 1990, well, I, I have a note here that you began to investigate virtual reality and learning at Ober--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Ober--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yep.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the teachers and mentors at Oberlin?
Speaker 2: Now, I don't remember the names of my teachers.  Now Oberlin--you know there's one percent African American at Oberlin, so, all my science teachers were white, except for my Afro-science teachers.  Like Afro-American studies.  However, there's a, a biology teacher, Yolanda Cruz that took me under her wing and kind of mentored me, even though she wasn't even my teacher.  So that was one--that was my favorite faculty person at Oberlin College, by far.
Speaker 1: How did you meet her, she, she wasn't one of your teachers how did you come in contact with her?
Speaker 2: I don't know I think I was taking genetics one year, because you know in order to go into medical school you had to take these, these basic courses, like genetics, chemistry, and organic, organic chemistry, calculus and I didn't do well my first time taking genetics and I think, you know, I needed like a tutor and I had to go to Yolanda Cruz for the tutor and that's when we started talking and then I started doing research as a--I was a Ford Scholar at Oberlin in 1993 and I was doing research on virtual reality and how virtual reality can assist enhancing the learning of a sphere, like a--the properties of a sphere.  Like circumference, diameter, you know volume and very specific, so I was matching cognitive--my major was cognitive neuropsychology and computer science.  So I was matching the cognitive science with the computer science and then I had to a presentation at William and Mary College [College of William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] and I did a--I mean I put my--I, I--during the summer of 1992, I really, really, really put, put a lot of effort every single day like a job in the computer lab building the animation, doing the research and presenting it and she saw this (clears throat) as a way of teaching embryonic biology, you know using animation and using learning theories to really reinforce and actually accelerate the learning of her students.  So after that I got a--she hired me to do animation for her.  So I was a pretty good animator.  I don't animate anything right now, my students laugh at me, but actually did some really detailed computer animation what could have been right there a product that could have been sold right there in 1993.  Incidently, Macromedia Director, that's now become Flash, he grad--the person who founded Macromedia Director graduated from Oberlin.
Speaker 1: Okay, Flash as in Flash?
Speaker 2: Like Fla--Fla--these are programs like Shockwave Flash all these different software programs but the originating of that was Macromedia Director.  Was an animation package back then, and now it's--now has evolved into what we now all call, you know, Flash.
Story_ID: 113722
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well tell us about the Ford, Ford Foundation Scholar--this is a Ford-Mellon [Research] Scholar, or Ford--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ford, Ford-Mellon Scholar, Scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, what was it--did you apply for that or how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) It was a competition at the (unclear) at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio].  It was a, a collegiate competition and then, you know, based on your research proposal you were selected.  So my research proposal was evaluating for underserved and disadvantaged populations, how could multimodal learning, or how, how could a, a, computer animated training intervention help underserved and disadvantaged populations in Lorain County [Ohio] better understand the properties of a sphere (laughter).  Very focused research and it got accepted, and then it was up to me to do the research and I had--my advisor was James Tanaka [Jim Tanaka], he was my cognitive psychology advisor, he's my teacher but he was also the advisor on the research and he really guided me very well.  Helped me--I mean, he guided me to make my own decisions but, you know, I took it very seriously.  I guess that's where all the discipline back in the youth, you know, really kicked in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you built like a, a math instruction tool right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) Um hum.  I programmed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Without--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the whole thing, so I programmed it, did the animation, selected the music, laid down the tracks and it was an interactive--so computer interactive program that teach the properties of a sphere.  And I had a character called Ziggy that I was like a, a 3D animated character used the hip-hop type of feel so that the population Lorain County young boys who are in middle school, right.  I did a pilot study and received their feedback, like how would you like to learn math?  If the math was presented to you like this would you ha--would you be more motivated to learn math?  Would you--and they said, they all said, of cour--they said yes, this is more interactive, it's fun.  And I didn't use leading questions, I used more objective, open ended questions to get the responses and it was a consensus that they would like to learn, you know, math this way.
Speaker 1: So, th, this is Lorain, Ohio--near Lorain--well, Lorain County near Lorain, Ohio, which is the home of Toni Morrison the most--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- famous writer in the Black community, right.
Speaker 2: That's right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --where Oberlin sits.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lorain, Lorain has been written about many, many times by Toni Morrison.  That, that little black community so this is a 'hood right there in Lorain--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's 'hood, in Lorain, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanna make that point, but, okay, so, so the, the project was useful for the students there at Lorain.
Speaker 2: That's right and became very useful eventually for teaching embryonic biology.  So the very first--so after I graduated--so I continued that research but what end up happening the results--the results I guess were impressive enough for Yolanda Cruz, a biology professor at Oberlin, that she wanted the same thing done for her biology students.  So she had vision that I could teach my biology students embryonic biology and we're gonna start with a, you know, Drosophila fly and understanding that embryonic process versus a textbook.  And she gave me pictures, I remember she gave me the pictures of the embryonic process she gave me a textbook to read and I had to read that and interpret it and then create, you know, an interactive package, interactive animation that she used in her course studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she wanted exact--similar thing for what--for what you did for Professor [James] Tanaka.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But just for her class then?
Speaker 2: (Nodding 'yes') um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so you, so you had like, as you said earlier it could, this could've been a product on the market?
Speaker 2: Oh, it could have definitely been a product on the market.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Some--a publishing company came to her later on and asked to license it from her, but she didn't.  She kept it in the body of Oberlin College.  Now at that point I didn't understand intellectual property, understand really product development, all I did is have fu--I was--at that time I was traveling--and then when I graduated I was still working on the project.  So she used to pay me 150 dollars to travel from Columbus, Ohio, back to Oberlin, sometimes.
Story_ID: 113723
Speaker 1: So what were you doing in Columbus [Ohio], what, what, what happened in Columbus?
Speaker 2: Well, so after I graduated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And, and that was in what, what year, wha--you graduated in?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994], okay.
Speaker 2: And then before that I was playing in bands at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], I was in a rock band at Oberlin.  Played lec--electric violin and sing, I also choreographed dance pieces.  I choreographed this dance piece called 'Intimate Torture' at Oberlin, performed it.  And you know, of course, pursued, you know, did well on my academic studies.  And then in 1994, I graduated after putting out about 3,000 plus resumes, I had--I got--I was offered one job in computer programming.  Only one, after 3,000 resumes plus, right, so I was very, I was very, I had vision back then, most people didn't even put email addresses on their resumes, I would do that, you know, just, I figured if someone wants to get in contact with me I might as well put my email address, so this was brand new back in 1993, 1994.  Oberlin picked me up, you know, they had me--they had me interview all day in Columbus, Ohio so I borrowed the R.A.'s--R--the resinal, reginal--resident assistant's car--the residents manager's car, she let us do that as students.  Check out the car and drive it to where we need to go like Cleveland [Ohio].  So I drove that to my interview, did pretty well on the interview and got--got hired.  My salary at that time was (laughter), it was crazy, it was 27,800 dollars. I thought that was a whole lotta money back then, you know, for a first job.  So, I was excited.
Story_ID: 113724
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were hired by?
Speaker 2: I was hired by CompuServe.
Speaker 1: CompuServe, okay.
Speaker 2: So right after college some of my classmates didn't have jobs, but I was--I wanted to get a job, so I was very persistent.  So I wasn't gonna quit and I had a conversation with my father [Ronald Doswell], was like, "Dad, no one's hiring me."  So he was like, "Well, you're sending resumes to jobs that aren't hiring, send more."
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So that's what I did (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I followed his instruction and sent more resumes out, and I got a job.  So that was my first--that was my first job, it was probably my whole career working for someone else, it was the best job I ever had 'cause I was assigned a mentor, Michael Johnson, who had--who has photographic memory an he was like maybe thirty-two at that time, I'm twenty-two, right, so he's serving as my mentor at that time and he's--and he talked about--I had a violent teacher back in the day, Irene Comire [ph.], who was very strict.  I would often joke and say, and say to myself, it's--she had--she must have come out of World War II [WWII], right out of Germany to teach me directly, 'cause she had that same persona, right.  If you didn't hold your violin correct, you get hit with a ruler.  Maybe not that severe but you know if she's--if she ever could--gonna come and evaluate, if you're six, seven, eight and nine, it didn't matter you better have the propensity for perfection.  You better do it right.  No mistakes were tolerated.  Michael Johnson was the same way.  Columbus, Ohio, seven hours away from home, you know, first job, certain things I still didn't understand.  But the only thing he understood was perfection and no excuses.  And there were only two blacks in the whole department.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your job title?
Speaker 2: I was computer programmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But so, what that means--meant though is that I did the computer programming if anybody in the office had a computer problem or software problem I had to be the technician as well as write documentation.  So I had to write user manuals, maintenance manuals, as well as program and also fix the computers when they broke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was cross-trained and it was an apprenticeship program and a lot was expected of me and there's some--lot, lotta, lotta times there were lotta sleepless nights on a salary.  But my mentor told me that if you mess up you goin' home, you goin' right back home seven hours away.  And I saw him do it; people come in there and slack, so I took him seriously.  That was my, that was the start of my career in software engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He set the foundation; he set the tone for that.
Story_ID: 113725
Speaker 1: All right, so--but you were still like interacting with your teacher over in, I mean, Dr. [Yolanda] Cruz in, at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) um-hum, yep.
Speaker 1: --you know, with interactive stuff?
Speaker 2: Yep, so I committed myself to complete the project, so I was trained very early on if you're gonna start something then complete it or don't do it at all.  So I committed that I was gonna make it happen.  And then I was also taught to be thorough and don't slack otherwise you best not even start.  So she hired, she hired me, I think the only thing she really could do was pay for my gas, that's what she said 'cause she didn't have budget, but I liked it very much.  I liked product development, I like soft engineering so that's what I did, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went back and forth from Columbus, Ohio to Oberlin, you now, when we had to have meetings.  And I took what I learned from Michael Johnson, my mentor then about project planning, documenting, task analysis, scheduling when things need to be done and had a notebook when I arrived; very organized at that time, yeah.
Story_ID: 113726
Speaker 1: Okay, so you learned a lot of planning and organization stuff--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --from [Michael] Johnson?
Speaker 2: From Johnson, from CompuServe. CompuServe had us--all of take a three-day course on the Franklin Planning.  You know like your Franklin Planner?  There's actually a course, we had a three-day course on how to prioritize tasks like A, B and C.  Have five-year goals, weekly goals that come from your yearly goal and your daily plan.  So I learned that all at CompuServe, no other place taught me that, even reinforced it, except for CompuServe.  So that was good training, it was really good training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and you, you've been able to use this training--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Everyday my interns come in an every single day they have to do a daily plan.  If they miss that daily plan one day, I dock their pay.  So that discipline, that Irene Comire [ph.], Michael Johnson, you know, type of training that they taught me, I take it to another level these days.
Story_ID: 113727
Speaker 1: And I also--not supposed to pledge at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], but I did anyway, K-A-Psi, Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity], so.
Speaker 2: Do, do, do, do they have the fraternities on the campus?
Speaker 1: They're not supposed to, so we couldn't pledge on campus we had to, we had to pledge on--at a city chapter.  'Cause pledging at Oberlin was not allowed.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So, Adrian Fenty, who's a former mayor of [Washington] D.C. he--he had to do the exact same thing.
Speaker 2: So he was there with you?
Speaker 1: He was there with me; Stephanie Rawlings[-Blake] was my big sister, Mayor of Baltimore [Maryland].  Adrian Fenty was like a big brother.  Stephanie Rawlings-Blake was consid--I looked up to her, she was like a big sister to me.
Speaker 2: Was she a member of a Greek organization too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's a member of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 113728
Speaker 1: But for my interns I actually--so they have to memorize poems like 'Invictus' [by William Ernest Henley], be strong, no excuses, and they have to recite it this Friday, tomorrow, that kind of thing.  So I train them the way I was trained.  By consolidated, so I take bits and pieces of how I was trained and actually, you know, make their training better so they can even be better than I am.  And some of them are excelling very well in high school and they're doing real software engineering.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now software engineering is the second highest paid engineering discipline second to chemical engineering.  So, two years of experience those high school students with a college degree, even an associate's degree can walk out doing 60,000 dollars a year.  Which is transformative for their, for a lot of things.
Story_ID: 113729
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when did you go back to school, to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to get your master's degree?
Speaker 2: So two years at Oberlin [Ohio]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All I did was program and go to taekwondo, that's why I picked up taekwondo again.  And then two years after--two years doing that in Columbus, Ohio I applied to graduate school at Howard--to many places, Stanford [University, Stanford, California], Howard, all these different places, I got into Howard.  Now--
Speaker 1: This, this is what year, 19--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Howard.  So what was--who were your teachers and advisors at Howard, your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Ronald Leach was one, can't remember all the names.  I'm pretty bad at names.  I remember him; he's my master's thesis advisor.  And, I can't remember all my--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I didn't ask for all, I, I don't expect you to remember all of them I just wanna know the major ones.  So Ronald Leach was your advisor for your thesis?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And what was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: The thesis was virtual reality and teaching basic numerical concepts using virtual reality.  So, that was pretty much the basis of it.  So I was using, I was using virtual reality--I had to create a vir--a 3D-simulated method of teaching basic numerical concepts using like these graphical blocks that one can manipulate, right.  So I had to go into instructional theory--so I had to apply pedagogical theory, analogical theory, learning styles on teaching basic numerical concepts using virtual reality and prod--and build--so do the research, build the prototype and then present it to a committee.  During that time that was--to me I considered that pretty rigorous it was a step up from what I did in 1993 under my Ford-Mellon Scholarship program, a step up.  It was a lot about--and the writing had to be thorough, well organized and structured, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And plus it was six credits.
Speaker 1: All right, and then, then you moved on to George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia] to get a Ph.D. was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --there any step in the middle there?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was teaching Ph.D. classes while I was-- and you can understand in my master's program I was working full-time too.  So at that point, when I came here to Washington, D.C I just didn't get a--go to school, I worked full-time.
Speaker 1: Did you work for CompuServe, or?
Speaker 2: No I worked for Lockheed Martin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now first an--when I first arrived I didn't work for Lockheed Martin it was a like a, a subsideresque--a sub company T--to TRW.  TRW was doing data systems or software engineering at that time too, so I was working for a small start-up, start-up company that was a sub to TRW, yep.  But it was still the same, doing the same thing, software programming.  Then, right after my--I graduated in 1998, while teaching classes, Ph.D. classes, I mean teaching concepts like object-oriented programming, Java programming to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is after your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I mean this is after my master's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: After your master's, okay, all right, all right--(simultaneous)--(unclear).
Speaker 2: I was teaching like class--I taught--I was invited to teach a class in object-oriented programming and Java programming to Ph.D. students.  To what would be my advisor, but he was testing me and evaluating me on my knowledge.  I didn't know that.  I thought he was just givin' me an opportunity to teach. I wasn't getting paid for it so I should have known that's what was happening.
Story_ID: 113730
Speaker 1: And then I enrolled in the George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] and he [Jim X. Chen] was my--he was selected as my advisor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I remember him walking me down George Mason and he had talked with me 'cause he, he's Chinese American and he said, what you, what you dealing with in race, I deal with in language.  I get discriminated against on language.  So he was tryin' to, I guess, letting me know that he understands.  That was one of our first conversations.
Speaker 2: Wha, wha, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Jim Chen.
Speaker 2: Jim, okay.
Speaker 1: He's still, he's still a faculty member at George Mason University.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he was tryin' to let you know that he understood some of the--?
Speaker 1: (Nodding yes) Um-hum, he was a good professor.  He's a good--he was a good advisor.
Speaker 2: And, now what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 1: Dissertation was on build, building the virtual instructor, a peda-cultural and body conversational agent for pretty much teaching human beings.  So the premise is that human beings have, make too many mistakes--make too many mistakes teaching, this my premise, right, too much variability.  So it is impossible to assesst--to assess the performance, the learning outcome of your student base if the teachers teach so differently so many different--the same subject.  So consequently I created a 399-page dissertation, most of it was software architecture on how to create--how to develop an autonomous virtual instructor.  So in essence, if I'm an animated character teaching you about a subject, let's say orbital mechanics, right, in order for you to build a robot to get to the moon, right.  Which we do in our not-for-profit, the virtual instructor would teach you, better than any teacher could because it's a personalized instructing experience.  The virtual instructor understands the best way you learn, right, it has a history of what you've learned because now data from kindergarten to wherever your age is right now, right, understand your brain patterns and then understands pedagogical theory to really address a specific concept and tailor it directly to the best way that you can retain that information in long term memory.  So I had to look a brain-based learning, pedagogical theory, software engineering concepts and bring all that together into one package.  So built upon, you know, Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], the virtual reality in my master's program and now I'm saying in the virtual reality experience, that's an, that's an environment.  Now, here's a virtual instructor that can be delivered or deployed or distributed in both the virtual reality experience and also augmented reality experience which is commonly called today, mixed reality.  And so that became my niche, you know, virtual instructor systems for mixed reality environments.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In the research world.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, you got your Ph.D. it was in '98 [1998] or, or was it in two--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005].
Speaker 2: --two, two-thou--oh--(simultaneous)--(unclear)
Speaker 1: I entered the Ph.D. program in '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay, and got a Ph.D. in 2005.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was working full-time, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's what took me so long.
Story_ID: 113731
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well--in the interim--in 2001, you founded Juxtopia right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001], I founded Juxtopia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now tell us what, what the concept of Juxtopia was and what?
Speaker 2: All right, so Juxta--Juxtopia stands for the juxtaposition among utopias, all right.  So remember the propensity for perfection?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Juxtopia is the utopia--this juxtaposition among perfection, that's what it really intends to be.  So, I'm spiritually, intellectually and physically, so internally in Juxtopia that's how I define it.  And that's how--and the culture of Juxtopia that's how we treat it.  The juxtaposition among utopias, the name, the word didn't exist, the concept exists in several words so I just created the word in 1998 actually while in a barbershop sitting down thinking about company names.  So Juxtopia was originally created in 1998 but in 2001 it was formed into a, a corporation, so--the no--Juxtopia is a biomedical and information technology company and we develop products to improve human performance.  So we say the--in order to reach a level of--or strive towards perfection you have to prove yourself every day, right, to get to that.  So, well we have to build systems to help people improve their performance on specific things.  So consequently the mission of Juxtopia is simply to improve human performance.
Story_ID: 113732
Speaker 1: Okay, well what are some of the projects of Juxtopia in terms of in, in the products?  What was the first product you came up with?
Speaker 2: So the first, the first product that we came up with was a, a fetal monitoring device.  That was conceptual, that was the first conceptual product we--it never went to market, that's one we came up with.  So the problem that--so we--always we start with products based on problems.  So the painful problem is that there's six million pregnancies in the United States, at that time it was 2002, and there're four million births.  This world--this is in the United States, so out of the four million births there are, there are like two million--something's happening, right, so it's still births or you know, fetal death.  We focused on fetal death and the reason why there's fetal death is because there's a loss of oxygen to the fetal brain causing hipox, hipocic, Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, HIE, which causes brain damage, so you may have cerebral palsy, a child born with cerebral palsy, or in some cases, the best case scenario is fetal death.  Best case meaning that for--a child born with cerebral palsy that's a strain on the, on the caregivers as well as the hospital system, right.  So we looked at, looked at, you know, based on the creat--based on the creativity that I received from my childhood, that education as well as the computer science programming, right and then a vision mindset, Steve Jobs and I have the same birth date, February 24th, different years of course, so he was a visionary he could see things like precognition in a way you see things how things could work, I have that similar ability I believe so I saw that if we have a wearable fetal monitor that can non-invasively monitor both the fetal heart rate, but also the fetal brain then we could have an early detection of a pathological condition which gives a result--which gives rise to HIE, right, and very early on so it becomes a preventative device versus a reactionary device during labor and delivery.
Speaker 1: Okay well, preventative and what makes sense to me you, you would know, but you couldn't really prevent the condition right?
Speaker 2: You can know very on--very early on so the mother knows very early on and a signal is sent wirelessly to a healthcare provider, then least you're notified as the, as the pregnant woman to go and get it checked out.  At that point it should hel--it should, you know, that's your option.  But at least you know.  Many times pregnant women don't know and the cord is wrapped around that fetus's neck--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and, you know, there's, there's low oxygen getting to the brain and that's what, that's what the problem is.  Now that's during third trimester labor and delivery in hospital strapped and then, you know, looking at a fetal heart rate monitor.  But that all didn't come through my brain, so who actually address the problem was Dr. Edward Hill, and Dr. Edward Hill's my Chief Medical Officer and Vice President of Juxtopia.  He, he got--he was accepted to medical school at age seventeen years old.  So he essentially skipped--his first degree was a medical degree, not an undergraduate degree at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So he's--he actually--he's a fetal forensics specialist, and he knows the problem very well.  We, we were introduced by another businessperson who actually since sold his company for lots of money (clears throat) and we formed another company called Advanced Heuristics Solutions just to develop and manufacture that product.
Speaker 1: Advanced, I'm sorry--(simultaneous)--(Unclear)
Speaker 2: Advanced Heuristics Solutions.
Speaker 1: Heuristics, how do you spell that.
Speaker 2: So H-E-U-R-E-S-T-I-C-S [sic, Heuristics], think that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You can check the spelling on that.  Heuristic is like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So its
Speaker 2: --a short cut, that's what it means.  So it's Advance Heuristic Solutions, right.  But we developed that company so we wouldn't have to--if--that the--so if--if the company was ever sold or--we wouldn't have to actually dilute Juxtopia.  That was the thought behind that process.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But if--but you know there's a struggle of getting biomedical products to market, it's something called FDA [Food and Drug Administration] (laughter), so, we--that helped us--that helped to push that product on the side and focus on some other things that can make money a lot faster.
Speaker 1: So is it still waiting for approval by FDA or is it?
Speaker 2: They--we tabled that project but we're gonna pick it back up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 113733
Speaker 1: All right, what was the, what was the second thing?
Speaker 2: So after that we focused, while I was doing my Ph.D. program and, you know, this is all during school, work and starting Juxtopia, right.  So, the Wearable Augmented Reality Goggles, so we--I started doing research in that in 2002, right, while it was still in--for me it was in its infancy, but augmented reality was started in Boeing in 19--in the 1980s.  The, the notion is to have additional information that's superimposed over ruled objects and to help with, at that time (clears throat) aircraft maintenance and aircraft manufacturing.  Boeing looked at this as a technology to assist with aircraft maintenance and manufacturing.  We looked at it--I looked at it as a-- one virtual reality in the research which was getting so saturated, too many people were in it, I like doing things that are unique that also improve human performance.  Augmented reality I saw as a way of improving someone's ability to perform a task more efficiently.  An consequently, I--Juxtopia secured its--a grant from the National Science Foundation [NSF] the same year I graduated with my Ph.D. [2005] so while--once I graduated with my Ph.D., I focused directly on that research because we're funded by the National Science Foundation.  The very first company funded applying wearable augmented reality, right, to improve a humans performance on a manufacturing line.  So I, at that point, our target market, our target market was all automotive manufacturing companies in the United States to have variability on the product line, right.  There's only one in the United States, that's BMW, variability meaning whatever I'm gonna order for BMW is gonna go on that line.  It's not gonna be chunked into stages, right.  So that's how cars are manufactured from Spartanburg, South Carolina, right.  So anytime you get in a BMW here in this area it's coming from one location, that's an assembly plant, well that one person may be at BMW for twenty years but they have not seen this wire harness configuration in one year, but still has to retain that from long term memory on how to do that wire harness assembly.  So our--my hypothesis was if you had augmented reality goggles then you could actually see when that car comes down what the pattern of that wire harness assembly would trigger a memory and you know what to do, minimize mistakes.  One mistake at BMW cost that plant like five thou--fif--5,000 dollars per year more, per car, you know.  So we did all that analysis an ju--and then the augment reality intervention was justified, toured BMW several times, the managers liked it, but then the bottom came out of the big three and the car manufacturing industry because of the recession even though we were not focused on a U.S. automotive manufacturing company, but a German one, the German manufacturing company decided that they want their German engineers to focus on augmented reality.  And then coincidently one of the best YouTube videos of augmented reality and car manufacturing came out, and it's almost been that one video that's defined the future of current or the, of the, the, the almost like the standard for augmented reality today, visually for the, for the person--people who have not done the research.  After that, we said, okay we have to find another home for our product.  So we started--so it took me back to medicine, so again improving human performance, now we're getting to combat medics on the battlefield, right, so coincidentally my father [Ronald Doswell] was a combat medic in Vietnam, U.S. Army medical research and material command in Fort Dietrich championed this type of intervention or at least funded the intervention and investigated it to see if it can actually indeed improve a combat medic's performance on the battlefield.  And so we did research in 2008 up until now, we're still doing that research, investigating whether or not--how, how effective is this intervention, how many mistakes would--how many mistakes could the medic have prevented using wearable augmented reality?  How could the user interface be created to improve the accuracy to, you know, to minimize mistakes and achieve the task completion in a shorter period of time?  How many lives can be saved, what's the human factors of it?  How can--how should the components be integrated into the headset?  How should the software be developed?  How can task mounting be evaluated on a service side, right?  And how is this used in the field and as well as used in a training environment before--so when he was in--even as--if we--before soldiers deployed?  So, all those things we look at in Juxtopia today.
Story_ID: 113734
Speaker 1: Okay so, is there a product out on the market being used--currently or is everything in development or pending approval of (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah we had some sales of the products for ac--academic purposes, and that's about it.  So in the R&D [research and development], we're still in the R&D--well, we're, we're launching another product for training purposes, I can't tell what that is, because Google entered into the market, they're supposed to be launching in March.  Their augmented reality goggles called Google Glass, but it's only one feature, it's not real augmented reality but, they created the buzz with their product and I know what they're doing, they generate revenue from one product launch and then they build upon the features after that.  It's a very smart move, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you can get it out faster and then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they can get it out faster; the public doesn't even know what augmented reality is on a large scale so they think it's just a cool device.  Google is an advertising company so it's another way of advertising in your eyes while you walk around, so the market's going to be in tourism and shopping malls, things like that, where our market is more in training and more industry-specific type of markets.
Story_ID: 115578
Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we were discussing a problem off, off-camera with the videographer--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Matthew Hickey. Can you address that--on camera?
Speaker 2: Sure, so in the notion of augmented reality there's two types: there's optical see-through, that means it like a pair of glasses like anybody would wear that's transparent, like reading glasses and there's video see-through augmented reality where you're wearing glasses that--through which you cannot see so your eyesight is defined by a camera.  So you're looking exactly what the camera's looking at.  We develop optical see-through augmented reality, like corrective lenses, if you will, but they're not corrective lenses they're just lenses that you, that are polycarbonate you can look through and what you see out in the real world, you may see the real world objects annotated with digital information.  So for example let's say I have this, this Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] cup right here and I have this at a fixed distance, like a focal distance and the focal distance is measured from my eye to the cup, then if the program, the augmented reality program, is programmed to do the circumference of this cup or actually do an outline, I mean of the cup, like from here all the way around, right, that's what I'm gonna see.  Now the wa--the way that's done is that in augmented reality goggles, there's a prism that has depth to it so that the, so the image can be focused at a certain distance, right, so it not near your eye, 'cause otherwise you have I--an inclusion problem.  You have this additional information, this, right here at your eye, so if you look past your--my hand right now the hand is blurry, and if I look at the hand the rest of the world is blurry, but if I put my hand at a certain distance then I can see both the, you know, away from my hand and the hand too without both objects being blurry.  And that's the concept of real augmented reality and so in my practice you know, someone may have to stick a needle in a certain place, right, so I want to see that anatomy where that needle has to be stuck and I also need to see like a circle with a tech saying or an arrow points stick here.  And so it you'd almost imagine my hands are fi--you know filled with the--I'm a medic and I'm actually sticking a needle but I can actually see where I need to stick the needle.  An augmented reality makes it great because in a battlefield scenario the best medic (clears throat) is one who, who protects first.  You're still a soldier, but you're a medic as well.  So you have to respond to fire, you have to clip, but you also have to heal.  Your hands can't be tied up with some other digital device.  So augmented reality, in my opinion is the best way, so based on the research that we've did--we did with the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, we believe that we encouraged and motivated requirements for investigating augmented reality especially wearable augmented reality for combat medics in the battlefield.
Story_ID: 115579
Speaker 1: Okay, so the research and development that, Juxtopia's doing right now is--who supports it, I mean, financially?
Speaker 2: The National Science Foundation [NSF] supported the fundamental research on the technology on the science behind a fully integrated augmented reality system.  Fully integrated means this, everything is inside an HMD--a head-mounted display in comparison to other products, like Google Glass there's a cell phone that has a wire tethered to the goggles or a blue tooth connection back and forth, ours is completely fully integrated in the headset because of the environment.  So, I don't know if that answered you question.
Speaker 1: Oh, what was--I was asking about who, who, supports it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, National Science Foundation and the U.S. Army Medical Research Materiel Command.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They supported it under a grant that came from a local funding agency called, Tedco, Maryland Tedco.  And then we received another grant from Maryland--the Maryland Industrial Partnerships program, MIPS, for different things.  So, we've gotten different types of funding over the years.  Right now it's supported by grants--we're supported by U.S Army Medical Research and Materiel Command and NSF.
Story_ID: 115580
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I know the world of inventing in the age we're living in now can be very, can be legally challenging, I know Silicon Valley people are filing patents for things they think of that somebody might invent so that they can have--already have a patent.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for, for it.  I mean, did you have problems with that sort of thing or are you struggling with that kind of?
Speaker 2: No, now augmented reality goggles are almost like cars so you can't patent a augmented reality goggle by itself.  You can patent components or very unique sub-systems that make it better, like an engine or carburetor or things like that.  So, we don't have any problems with that right now.  And we try to keep a lot of things trade secret and maintain intellectual property very close-knit, and so I guess, yeah.
Story_ID: 115581
Speaker 1: Now do you have a dream project you can talk about now that you're working on that you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, sure, so, under my not-for-profit organization that's where we do some really fancy stuff and they govern--the nice--the great technology I, now I train on how to become an entrepreneur, how to become an inventor.  So under my not-for-profit organization, we have a program called JUICE, the Juxtopia Urban Innovation and Cooperative Entrepreneurship Network, an in that network we have a--a one--a young lady who's an undergraduate student that actually had a dream about interacting with information without a display.  Now, the Star Trek fans with--you would call this holographic experience, right and then new technology you'll see like interactive holographic experiences.  That's one project that one of my mentees, my apprentices is, is working on.  How can you create an independent interactive holograph experience without, you know, outside cameras or display systems using potentially smart materials and also applications of biotechnology, so that's one (clears throat).
Speaker 1: Now, the governor [Governor of Maryland, Martin O'Malley] was present for the opening of JUICE [in 2012].
Speaker 2: Of the JUICE Lab, right.  So right here in this building in my lab, the governor, Governor O'Malley had a ribbon cutting ceremony to re--to celebrate the opening of the JUICE Lab and also the Maryland, (cough) excuse me, the Maryland Innovation Initiative [MII], which is an initiative legislated in Maryland to really spark innovations and technology transfer from universities.  Juxtopia's even during, you know, its initial inception it's always been tied to a university at some point. An academic institution with a preference towards (clears throat) underserved and disadvantaged institutions like HBCU's, Historically black colleges [and] universities and minority serving institutions.  Giving internships to populations who are underserved in the sciences an math, right so I think the governor, Governor O'Malley and Maryland legislation recognized that and celebrated the JUICE lab and celebrated Juxtopia for what it's doing not only in product development and manufacturing here in America, in Baltimore [Maryland] but also (clears throat) improving the efficiency of underserved and disadvantaged youth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you have a--how, how many people you have on staff here, yeah?
Speaker 2: Here in this building we have thirteen, yep and then we have management that are not in here, scattered, so five core management including legal counsel, vice president, Dr. Edward Hill, Diane, Doctor Diane Adams, who's president of Juxtopia Life, John Johnson, Chief Operating Officer, so, yeah.  But all the technical staff--the technical staff specifically for the goggles are here in our secret Juice Lab (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 115582
Speaker 1: You were recently [in 2010] named one of the rock stars who makes things happen in Greater Baltimore by the Economic Alliance of Greater Baltimore. What do you think of that?
Speaker 2: What do I think about it?  I mean I was, I was honored to receive that award, you know.  'Rock star' I don't do the music too much any--I know it's a metaphor, but I think they were mentioning it 'cause of what--especially the Juxtopia goggles, you know the technology even back then was considered hot and innovative, so, and we actually--we're always recognized for takin' the risk and encouraging the students an, and the interesting stuff--interesting thing about Juxtopia, we do take a risk by having even high school students intern on real world products, right.  Many companies won't take the risk especially product development companies won't give an active internship to students at that young age without the necessary experience.  But we make an effort to do that and everybody's on board, so an, an, Baltimore [Maryland] needs that and Baltimore needs an economic push in innovation and that's why I think there's some momentum now growing in this area so I think that's one of the reasons I was recognized as that 'Rock star.'
Story_ID: 115583
Speaker 1: Okay, and with the kind of work that you're doin' now, we, we've discussed this with robotics engineers too, there's so many menial jobs, labor jobs now, that are now disappearing.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So the average guy that can just carry somethin' or just flip somethin' or do somethin' like that is--he doesn't have anything to do.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you think it's gonna be increasingly like that, huh?
Speaker 2: I think the exposure--I was lucky to be exposed very early on, as you can, as you can recall, to a variety of things.  I often find out that many of today's youth, irrespective to the social economic conditions may not be exposed to a variety of ha--of things, jobs and many people don't know what a software engineer really is, even though one may interact with a cell phone, interact with the microwave, you know, a digital watch, go through a traffic light, you know, the digital--the traffic light cameras from the actual traffic light itself that was developed by one, you know, Garrett Morgan developed one, you know instance of that, today, it's mostly software driven, you know, you have the mechanics, the lights and also the encasing, but a lot of, lot of the logistics behind the traffic light's software driven.  Your operating systems on all your cell phones a software engineering team had to create that an artist team, an industrial design team had to create the user interface so it's aesthetically pleasing to the human eye, right, today's digital televisions, software, software systems to create cable to run pretty much the entire world.  If all software engineers took a strike today, the whole world would be completely crushed because no one would be available to maintain the systems that are even existing today.  So, software engineering isn't something, or electrical engineering, mechanical engineering or industrial design, these are all multi-disciplinary skillsets that come together to create one product.  So, often times we see on TV, you know, CSI, I wanna be a doctor, a lawyer or cop and that's reinforced over generations, the MacGyver is not there on television anymore.  So, th--if the world is--my exposure of occupations is primarily on the TV set then, you know, I don't blame students for thinking that in order to get an entry job they're still going to go to McDonald's or they want to be a doctor 'cause they see it on TV.  They want to be a forensics specialist or attorney because to them those are prestigious jobs.  Even though there's Steve Jobs and Bill Gates and [Mark] Zuckerberg, who went--all went into software engineering, they were practicing software engineers and they built a business around it.  Juxtopia--I mean, I'm a PhD software engineer so, and I have the same birthday as Steve Jobs, so I feel like, at least every generation should get better, so my mind I think I can--if Steve Jobs can do that, you know with the level of education that he achieved, right, and at that time period when innovation was at a slower pace--we're at a accelerated pace--I probably should be able to do at least that good, as well.  So in students, they see that they can even do better than, than me.  So my students come to the lab and they work on, the software systems for the goggles, you know, and excel.
Speaker 1: Who, now I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And they're seventeen years old.
Story_ID: 115584
Speaker 1: Okay,  I don't wanna get you, get you in trouble but, who are some of the young students that you've encountered who are, you know, were doin' similar things to what you were doin' in high school, tryin' to program and tryin' to?
Speaker 2: You mean the ones--my apprentices now?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say my first one was, I employ--remember I employ all the brothers in the family, so Rafeek [ph.] was one, he graduated from my program, he got another job, so he was tinkering in high school on a robotics program and these robotic programs, they expose the students to type of connecting blocks together like lego or vex robotics but the student really don't get into the hardcore engineering or le--or programming.  So I remember he came to my, he came to, you know, came to our internship program and he said that he knew programming, I think he really wanted the job so, you know--I knew--I know how it goes, so we evaluated him, but he had the motivation so I mentored him and he became pretty proficient and, and started--he was self-directed so he, he, even though he was looking for other opportunities while going to school and someone--you know, another company offered him a lot more money than we could pay him, he was twenty years old.  So he was, he was a success story.  Then I employed all of his brothers, so Sultan [ph.] is his youngest brother, and he's working with us now.  He does--he doesn't do it on his own but he always tinkers with computers (unclear) he plays video games at that age seventeen years old.  But he's been with us the longest, since his brother and he's at a level of proficiency where he has conversations everyday with my--with a student that I advise, now a new PhD student from Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee], so John and Sultan interact on Skype every day and Sultan a lot of times contributing to the conversation with a student who already has a master's degree in mechanical engineering and teaches JAVA programming at ITT Tech [ITT Technical Institute].
Story_ID: 115585
Speaker 1: Okay, you want to just speak a little bit about how Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] plays a role in what you're doing?
Speaker 2: So John--so this facility Johns Hopkins--so in Juxtopia had to find a home at some point in its life and started off in an incubator after, you know, doin' the stuff out of my apartment I started to move Juxtopia into a facility and with money, with grant money then we found a home in Emerging Technology Center [ETC].  An at that time there was a guy Mario Armstrong, who's on, he's on, he's on 'Today Show,' I think, now.  So he used to, he used to be I think on the board of ETC and he also went to Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland] and he recommended that Juxtopia have an interview.  So I interviewed the E--the Emerging Technology Center director and they liked what we were doing, augmented reality and so we, we entered into the incubator program, graduated from incubator came back and opened up the JUICE lab.  So Johns Hopkins University has this--I mean, owns this building but on this third level it's pretty much--the tenant is the Emerging Technology Center.  Another link with Johns Hopkins University with the goggles, and this brings us back to Ben Carson [HM Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], which is really coincidental and ironic, I, I wanted to go to college to become a neurosurgeon because of my--'cause I wasn't really prepared for the academic rigor at Oberlin [Colelge, Oberlin, Ohio], right, I didn't go to medical school, so I ended up majoring in cognitive neuropsychology and computer science which is now taken me to augmented reality development and we achieved another grant looking at how our goggles can really improve the performance of a neurosurgeon performing tumor resections right in the same department as Ben Carson.  So Dr. Carson is no longer the chief pediatric neurosurgeon anymore, 'cause he's th--I think he's retiring.  Dr. George Jallo is now the chief pediatric neurosurgeon who champions this.  If I had done this maybe five years ago, I'd've been working with Dr. Ben Carson who'd actually motivated me to pursue neuroscience in the first place, so it's come back like round circle.
Story_ID: 115586
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a great question.  All right, my hopes, my hopes--my concerns first, I always like to start with problems so I, so I can fix 'em like an engineer.  The problem--the concerns that I have that today's youth are not being exposed to the opportunities and do not have the mentors necessary or family structure anymore that takes education very seriously.  And I think the concern elaborated is that if this path is continued then we're not going to progress--the culture of African Americans is not going to progress, it's gonna digress [sic].  And unfortunately the jobs out there that are, you know, are gonna be the same jobs today like the janitorial services, fast food places and then you may have a trickle of hope from a small population, very small they go into the traditional fields like medicine, you know, law, but, and maybe engineering.  But, also the concern is that even though we talk about the whole STEM pursuit, it's not being reinforced really in media, an consequently that is the young person's world.  Then how can you really reinforce something, right, outside of that young person's view of the world and some other stoic, archaic and traditional system, it's not gonna work.  So the hope is, from the--like the programs that I do, and some others and we do have a small TV show, small TV network funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF], to focus on that one problem, is that, and based on experience the students give me hope, so when I see them come into the lab and taking the initiative to learn, right, because they want a better life for themselves and their future families and they have to get up in the morning at let's say six o'clock in the morning, go to school, take a bus to go to school you know, get off at 3:30 come into my lab, work until about 7:30, take a bus home which may get them home maybe about 8:30, 9:00, study for about four hours, go to sleep, get back up and do it again, so we talkin' about two hours, two to three hours every day, five days a week, right, they're almost getting eight hours every other day and still doing it over and over again and they all are, you know, they're pretty much doing, you know achieving their goals.  So, that gives me a hope that for one, a pop--my--the students I bring in some of them have challenging home environments, right, but the rigor that I put them through is that no excuses, like "excuses are tools for incompetence. With them we build great monuments of nothingness, those who use them seldom amount to anything else, therefore we have no excuses."  And they memorize these poems or, "be strong we're not here to play, dream or drift we have hard work to do and heavy loads to lift.  Shun not the struggle for it is God's gift, be strong," [by Maltbie D. Babcock] right, so no matter the obstacle, right, no matter the seemingly insurmountable boundary, right, in this life you gonna live and die, what you do in between matters the most.  Life will be challenging, you suck it up, man up, even if you're fourteen, you know, sixteen or seventeen you make it happen.  So, and that's what it is, that right there, seeing the students--seeing my students, seeing my apprentices give me hope.
Story_ID: 115587
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't go to Calvert Hall [College High School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I probably would go to Calvert Hall because if I went to Calvert Hall then I'd probably be a musician, you know.  I'd probably been a good musician, but I wouldn't be the person I am today.  So if I had to go back, what would I have done differently being--see I was being flippant right there.  So what I'd've--been--do differently that was serious?  I think I would have--well, one think I would not have--I would have pursued--I would--so--yeah Calvert Hall is the turning point so I wouldn't've dropped taekwondo and I would have pursued music a lot more.  So right, an when I was going through my career I put music on the back burner to focus, I think I would've tried to manage the time so I could actually focused more.  I think that's the one thing that I would have done differently.  And also at an earlier stage, taken education even more seriously, but then again I don't know if it would help, you know why?  [Albert] Einstein was a class clown until he worked at the patent office, but now he's a symbol of genius, right, because of one theory.  But he took education like a joke and his father died thinkin' that Einstein was gonna be a joke, right? And you know, we talk about signs and technology and the symbol of genius, Einstein is our symbol of genius, yet he didn't take academics seriously until after school and then he pur--you now, then he pursued his PhD, but he worked in the patent and trade mark office and his creative zeal flourished, you know.  So I think all these experiences--even though I think I would have changed some things I think the experiences were necessary for me to learn and to grow and become the person I am today.  So, I really, I really value, even though--even the hardships I value, you know, so.
Story_ID: 115588
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean likewise when you look at, what you've done so far, what today, would you consider to be your accomplishments or your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy is the, maybe, like the JUICE lab.  I think that because I can see that growing and flourishing beyond me and then Juxtopia, the culture that I built around the propensity for perfection.  About--around improving human performance, you know, around continuously improving the products that improve human performance.  Almost like what Deming [W. Edwards Deming] did to--with Japan after World War II [WWII], one person went into Japan, like a navy seal, right, and applies statistical theory and continuing improvement to build Japan into--helped to build Japan into a superpower.  So I think my legacy, you know, will be Juxtopia as that culture to help us redefine how human beings improve themselves and how processes are improved to in--to actually develop the best products in the future.
Story_ID: 115589
Speaker 1: Now do you still find time for music and taekwondo, for tennis, for those kind of activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so one of my products is, is teching out tennis rackets, that's in the JUICE network.  Taekwondo, I practice, there's a Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], so I practice myself, you know, I don't take anymore classes, but I still train and we partner with a security company so, we had ideas about, you know, improving battle performance on hand-to-hand combat using technology.  But I still practice on my own and music, I still play so this year I've decided to actually go to open mic every night ay this--every, every Monday at a place called Teavolve, it's my favorite restaurant in Baltimore [Maryland], T-E-A-V-O-L-V [sic, Teavolve], open mic every single Monday, six o'clock and I'ma  start pl'ayin' my, my three pieces that I'ma play, Donna Hathaway's 'A Song for You, Michael Jackson's 'Liberian Girl' and then 'Careless Whisper' by George Michaels.
Speaker 1: That's still in the repertoire?
Speaker 2: That's still in my repertoire (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not gonna make the same mistake I did before, I played something original but I like--people like to hear things, and I have another company in the JUICE network called Music Network Center, that it's focus is to improve human performance--music performance.  So the notion is, every musician wants to figure out how to improve his or her performance during practice or performing, but music proficiency is a subjective call not an objective call until computer science is applied.  So, that's another company that I partly own called Music Network Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So every, every part of me is pretty much been distributed through a company, right, where technology can be developed to improve the performance and then I can improve my own performance using the technology that I helped to build, which is fascinating.
Story_ID: 115590
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us a little bit about your family, now do you have children?  Did you get married and have children or, or?
Speaker 2: I got married, but I don't have any children.  Married and divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Still fi--your parents [Brenda Tucker Doswell and Ronald Doswell] still alive?
Speaker 2: (Nodding) Um-hum, father still lives around, around the corner.  He came to give me my Christmas gift a week after Christmas, exchanged--we just too busy.  So he walked up here from his house, he can walk up here now it's easily like one block--two blocks.  My mother's still alive, she's a--still lives on the Westside of Baltimore [Maryland], yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are they, are they impressed by your success or they?
Speaker 2: My mother vocalizes it more.  My father, I'm sure he's impressed he's just not the type to say it.  He's old school, really, so he's, you know.  He may get excited when I--he gets excited about makin' the money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he used to have a janitorial service, he used to clean the park--the Pentagon's parking lot and he understands real entrepreneurship so he says, if you're not making any money, it's a hobby, why do it?  So he gets impressed when I secure contracts.  When I talk DOD [Department of Defense] he knows that's the largest--that's the federal government agency--it's the largest pot of money so, that's what he--that's what he vocalizes, but I know, I know he is.  My mother on the other hand is your, is your stereotypical mom so, she wanted to even come to this interview today and I'm like no, you don't have to.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she would have been here though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, now is there anything I haven't asked you about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think you pretty much covered, yeah covered it all.
Story_ID: 115591
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: So I would like to be remembered as, an innovator, right? A disciplined engineer that pursues, with unyielding perseverance a--ach--a--goals that may not, to some, be achievable, right, but doesn't quit until those goals are achieved.  That's how I'd like to be remembered, and also, secondly, as a benefactor to the community of underserved, disadvantaged populations around the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
