Story_ID: 91325
Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Fred L. Davis, F-R-E-D, L. D-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: Now does L stand for a middle name?
Speaker 2: Lee, Fred Lee.
Speaker 1: Do you have a nickname or anything?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 8, 1934, Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an insurance broker.
Speaker 1: Alright and you are a former city council member?
Speaker 2: Yes I was elected to the Memphis City Council in 1967 and took office on January 1, 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you the first black city council member?
Speaker 2: I was one of three original members of the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: I was the first to be chairman of the city council--first black person to be chairman of the Memphis City Council [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay now, sir what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 23, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the office of the Med South Minority Business Council on the campus of the University of Memphis in Memphis, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 91326
Speaker 1: All right. Now before we go into depth, there are five kinda People Magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've never been asked that questions before.  I guess my favorite food is a category of food--common food.  Beans and peas and steak and pork chops, I had triple bypass two years ago and my doctor told me "Mr. Davis, your chitterling days are over" (laughter) but I ate them before then.
Speaker 1: Okay well sir do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I do, I guess if you look at my wardrobe, you would conclude that I do because most of my suits are brownish or bluish--blue or brownish and, and I guess it's because they are sort of conservative and by nature I run in that fashion.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess it would have to be fall.  The football games, you can play golf a good portion of that time without getting too hot and Memphis is beautiful in fall.  It's the-well, spring and fall.  Memphis is a city of trees and in the spring the trees bud and a lot of them have flowers and it's, it's beautiful.  If you fly over Memphis, many times you can't see the houses for the trees, and in the fall those trees turn, and it's--it's awesome.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite vacation destination sir?
Speaker 2: I guess not, I do so little real vacationing until it's hard for me to put a good place as a vacation destination. I serve on a lot of boards, some of them are national, some of them are international and I'm always taking these three or four day weekend trips to various parts of the country and I guess one of the areas that I enjoy a lot is Colorado Springs.  We--I've served--I'm emeritus on the board of young life--national board and we have our meetings a lot at the Broadmoor Hotel which is a very nice hotel at the Springs and we do that in the spring and we do that, guess you could say in the winter and that's--that's, that's a good place to hang out.
Speaker 1: Okay now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in high school a young woman came to me to see what I wanted in my yearbook and at the time I was in--my phrase in the yearbook, and at the time I was day dreaming in a history class trying to figure out how I was going to get to college. And "Where there's a will, there's a way" just popped out because I had no idea how I was going to get there and I did and I graduated.  So, I guess "where there's a will, there's a way."  I have a young lady that--who came to Memphis out of Baltimore [Maryland], knew no one in Memphis.  She's a computer expert, she's a-she's an administrator and we were introduced and I sort of adopted her to sort of show her around and she has come through some pretty difficult circumstances and my phrase to her that she had printed and put on her wall in her bedroom is to stay focused and stay the course.  So, those are two phrases that had been a part of me and have served well.
Story_ID: 91327
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell me something about your family history?  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: My roots on top of the ground (laughs).  If you had asked my wife that question, she could go back to the 1700s.  I never met my father's father and I never met my mother's mother.  My sisters--my older sisters knew my maternal grandmother and she--they tell me that she was Native American, but she was dead before I was born.  So I never met her.
Speaker 1: Is there a place here in Tennessee or is it in the city of Memphis that you think your ancestors were back in the days of slavery or--?
Speaker 2: Well, both my father [Frank Davis] and my mother [Charity Holmes Davis] came from Mississippi and as I said, that's sort of a too big a gap because I never really knew especially much about my mother's people.  Now let me explain, my father was born in 1892, my mother was born in 1899 so that's a fair piece for a lot of people my age.
Speaker 1: You know, sometimes families pass down stories and, you know, stories about what happened way back when.
Speaker 2: Well unfortunately both my mother and my father were not very talkative about that kind of thing to us.  Now my mother was married three times and we are the--we are the product of the last marriage, the other two men died.  My older sisters--see I have, my oldest sister was born in 1915 and they knew a lot of history that I didn't have sense enough to ask about when I was growing up and I guess at that point, nobody was telling.  We didn't, we didn't have these family get togethers on my mother's side because she was an only child and there were not a lot of cousins and whatever there and many of the people in her family were even, that she knew that was even older than she was.  I understand that my father's father was a slave but I--I just, I just--not much was ever explained to me about that so I really don't know.  That's the reason I told you my roots on top of the ground.  You know, I kid with some of my white friends about this, and I say "Well you'd better be glad that I've got an even temper, that my paternal grandfather was a slave and my maternal grandmother was Native American and you know what you did to the slaves and you know how the Native Americans came out that I got a mixture in me that would justify me being mad all the time (laugh)."
Story_ID: 91328
Speaker 1: Sir tell me about your mother [Charity Davis] and if you could give us her full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Her name was Charity, C-H-A-R-I-T-Y, Holmes Davis.
Speaker 1: Was Holmes her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was she born and where was she born?  You said 1899?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1899 and I think it was in Lula, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, L-U-L-A?
Speaker 2: Yeah but don't ask me where my daddy [Frank Davis] was born because I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now well I'm going to ask you about your father too in a minute but right now tell us what you can about your mother.  What, you know, what personality did she have and-(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: My mother came here from--when my sisters were young and she was a domestic.  She, I'm told, learned to read and write over an ironing board in Memphis [Tennessee].  Different white people that she worked for, worked with, helped her to learn and she developed into a person who could write fairly well--pretty literate and was well spoken.  I guess that deficiency weighed on her to the point that she bared down--I was the oldest boy.  There were, there were three boys of us and when I was three--three, I knew my ABCs 'cause she beat it into me, I mean literally.  She would have that chalk board up there and A B C and just going through that thing over and over and over again until I knew it and started to doing some elementary spelling and stuff.  As a matter of fact, long before I was old enough to go to schools, some public school teacher saw how much I had been trained in advance and wanted to start me to school in the, in the first grade and she wouldn't let them.  And the same was true for my--not as hard on them as she was on me because maybe I took the edge off a little bit, about learning and about being after it.  But actually I really grew up in a, in a split family.  My, my mother and father were only together periodically--from time to time enough to get two more brothers (laughs).  So I never, I guess ever really lived with my mother and father at the same time.  I lived with my mother at one point in my life and I lived with my father at another point in my life. Yeah.
Story_ID: 91329
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about your father [Frank Davis].  What was his full name and?
Speaker 2: His name was Frank Davis and--
Speaker 1: He was born you said in 1890?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1892.
Speaker 1: You know he was from Mississippi but you don't know exactly where?
Speaker 2: No, I was thinking about going to the Health Department, and I know it's on his death certificate and getting it and looking it up just for my own edification but I, but I hadn't done that.
Speaker 1: Now you said his family was part Indian?
Speaker 2: No I said my mother's [Charity Holmes Davis]. I said my mother's mother, my sisters tell me, was--was--was Native American, not part but was, was completely Native American but I never, I never, I never knew her.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about what group she was from? Was she Choctaw or--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, they didn't tell me.
Speaker 1: Well back to your father, your father was from Mississippi and do you know about what time he came to Memphis?
Speaker 2: I would presume it was in the '30s [1930s].  He had three sisters--my aunts that I was very fond of and sort of helped to rear me when--us, my two brothers and me, you know, when we were around them.  They were, they were good people to us. And, but--
Speaker 1: What was his personality like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a barber, he was an entrepreneur and I guess that's where part of the entrepreneurial spirit in me came from.  He worked in two places, primarily he, he worked in barbershops that other people owned and then twice, in our neighborhood since it was just him and then us, he turned the living room of his house into a barbershop.  And the barbershop was in front and we lived in the back and that was that way most of my, most of my growing up period.  He worked in plants.  I guess I could remember ten months or a year and then he'd quit, came back to that because he and the system and the people just didn't make it and he was used to being his own boss and doing it like he wanted to do it and however and that's what he did.  My father was a very bright man even though not very well formally educated but the people in the neighborhood would flock to the barbershop to hear his opinions on this or that or other social issues that many times they considered enlightening to them.  And, he enjoyed that and they enjoyed it so, you know, it worked out.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a chance to hear a lot of those discussions?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I used to sit around in the barbershop as a, as a kid and listen to the discussions about the old days in Arkansas and Mississippi and--and--and the way things were.  And, the fellas used to say "Frank, it's gonna be a whole lot better for your children than it is for us; they gonna change things, they gonna change things."  And--after I was elected to government and I would hear people repeat those same kinds of phrases forty years later, that your children are gonna change things and help to make it better.  And I'd say "Wait a minute, this is the same kind of stuff that I used to hear when I was sitting in my barbershop in chair and my legs weren't long enough to touch the floor."  But I guess things, there have been numbers of what I would consider positive changes but in a way wrapped in that package of positive change has been some negatives that we did not anticipate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91330
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  What did the neighborhood look like and what were people doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my early growing up period was really not--the earliest part was not--even typical to the other poor kids growing up around me in my original neighborhood.  For instance, I really started working to stay in school when I was in third and fourth grade. Now let me tell you how that happened, in the fall of the year our mother [Charity Holmes Davis] would take us--it was just two of us then my other brother who's deceased now--to Arkansas to a plantation called the Anderson Plantation, to live with a man who sharecropped on that plantation by the name of Mr. Henderson.  And we would work two--two and a half months picking cotton. And all of the cotton I picked, the money for that was set aside--kept separate.  And, and that was used to buy my school clothes when I got back to Memphis [Tennessee].  And I remember some, some times which were only unique to me at that time, as far as my friends are concerned.  Sometimes standing out in that field, I would be looking up in the air just watching the buzzards soar, they could do it so beautifully and I was supposed to be picking cotton and all of a sudden I would feel cotton stalks--boles and all--coming across my back.  "Pick cotton! Pick cotton! Go to work!" and I would be crying and I'd get back at it and that happened at least through the fourth and fifth grade.  We did that and we'd come back from over there with side meat and lard.  We used to go to the woods when I was a kid and pick pecans up, the woods were just full of pecans and we would go in there and pick up big tall sacks of pecans.
Story_ID: 91331
Speaker 1: Yeah now, what you're describing is a situation where you would leave from about age nine or so for about four years--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Actually, actually just two years of this that I remember. The fourth--third and fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were eight and nine years old--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah
Speaker 1: --basically and you would in the fall--now this isn't in the summer.
Speaker 2: No, this is in the fall.
Speaker 1: Cotton picking time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't, I was not in school at that time
Speaker 1: So you-
Speaker 2: and I was expected to catch up when I got back.
Speaker 1: So you were away for two and a half months--
Speaker 2: Uh huh
Speaker 1: --basically until mid November--
Speaker 2: Uh huh
Speaker 1: --and then you had to go back and catch up in school?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Alright. Now, what kind of a day was it when you had to go pick cotton, how long of a day was it?
Speaker 2: Well, we started out about six in the morning and went over until dusk dark in the evening time.
Speaker 1: So this is like can't see in the morning until can't see at night?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, we called it can to can't (laughs).  But that's, that's--Well, then I'd come back--we would come back and we'd get our school clothes and I would start back and I did catch up.
Story_ID: 91332
Speaker 1: And then, when I was in the sixth grade, well my--well even--well, what I say? Third and fourth--fifth grade my mother [Charity Holmes Davis] and one of my aunts went up to Knoxville [Tennessee] to work in what--and they were building an atomic energy plant up there at that time outside of Knoxville and they went up there to work as, as cleaning women, maids and stuff like that.  And we were left with a neighbor who lived down the street--two doors down, to keep us while she was gone.  Now this neighbor--the Hawkins--her name was Pricilla Hawkins and his name was Will Hawkins.  She had in fact, been a slave as a little girl and I vaguely remember stories that she told about that time.  Ms. Hawkins used to keep me when I was--before I was one when my mother and sisters went to work and she, she sort of adopted me.  You know, I was her boy and it was easy for her to keep us while during that time. And--
Speaker 2: Do you remember any of the stories she told you at all?
Speaker 1: Unfortunately--she would just--no I really don't.
Speaker 2: Were they happy stories? Sad stories?
Speaker 1: They were just sort of matter of fact stories about her mother when she was a little child running around her mother's skirt tail.  And, and one of the things that she learned during that period is to quilt.  She, she made beautiful quilts and she quilted for a living.  That's part of--she was old, she, she was a very heavy woman and she had a running ulcer on one leg and she could hardly get around and she had to treat that ulcer every day--very large legs.  But she was a very happy woman, she was not bitter and she, she could hardly leave out of the house.  I don't ever remember her leaving the street.  And--excellent cook, and at one point my mother over reached her--overreached because she decided before she took this job that she wanted us to go to a Seventh Day Adventist school because they taught bible as a subject.  And, you know, I was sort of a prodigy in church as far as recitations and things of that sort were concerned when I was growing up.  And she, she taught us all of this stuff and I enjoyed it.  I would go to these conventions--church conventions and stuff and recite and dazzle the older people with my memory of all of this bible verses and lore and stuff that I was taught.  And, but we could hardly make ends meet and this was a private school and she was out working to send money back to Ms. Hawkins to send us back over to this school.
Story_ID: 91333
Speaker 1: Now, can, can you go back for a minute, what was the name of the grade school you first attended?
Speaker 2: Florida
Speaker 1: Florida grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Florida Street School.
Speaker 1: Florida Street School?  And what about the Seventh Adventist school, what's the name of that?
Speaker 2: It was--all I remember it was just a Seventh Day Adventist school and I remember it was on the corner--it was a church and a very small school in the back and I remember it was on the corner of Mississippi and Jeanette and there is still a church there to this day.  It was a one to twelfth grade school, and there were actually only two teachers there, one for the students--the beginning students and one for the high school students.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church that you actually--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: My first church was Mount Zion Baptist Church out in south Memphis [Tennessee] at the, at the time.
Story_ID: 91334
Speaker 1: Then where were we--On the
Speaker 2: We were talking about
Speaker 1: --cotton picking.
Speaker 2: Yeah so you got respite from cotton picking when your mother [Charity Holmes Davis] went off to work in Knoxville, you said, and you stayed with Ms. Hawkins for the summer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well,--(unclear)--but sometimes--Oh yes, but sometimes there were and this is, is running hazy.  There were times--that I caught those cotton trucks as a kid with my mother going over to Arkansas to pick cotton and I remember so well, you know, they was these big trucks with these planks across the back of them and with covers--the trucks were covered.  And we would all climb over on the truck, and like, packed in like sardines and would be driven over to, to the fields in Arkansas to pick cotton.  And, you know, one of the things I remember is that you wanted to, you wanted to get there fairly early in the morning because the dew was on the cotton at that time and you weighed the cotton by the pound.  And when that first sack with that dew on it was heavier than the cotton that had dried out as the, as the sun came out during the day.  So you would do that and there were other times--when I--now there were times later on when I chopped cotton in the summertime and school was out in the summer and I chopped cotton.  I guess I've, I've done a little bit of it all as a kid.
Speaker 2: So chopping is different from picking?
Speaker 1: Yeah, chopping is getting it together-getting the weeds out so it can grow--just coming out of the ground getting all of the weeds out--chopping the weeds out so it could grow unfettered and thinning it out.  So it could grow unfettered so it would be there to, for full bloom and growth in the fall and you did the chopping in the summertime.
Story_ID: 91335
Speaker 1: Okay. Was there anything that you got a chance to do when you were, when you were a kid that you liked to do?
Speaker 2: Well, later on we--I--I, you know, I--I went to live with my, with my father [Frank Davis] after the Seventh Day Adventist School.  He came out to Ms. Hawkins' and got us and I started The Hyde Park School where I ultimately graduated from eighth grade.  I had lots of good friends there and times were decent, we played sandlot football and baseball in the summer and it, it, it was okay.  I was always a leader, even in grade school and in high school I guess I was elected president of every homeroom class I was in even from grade school.  We're--so that was--the life wasn't bad at the time.  Now sometimes, because of my father's attitude toward money and keeping, you know, I guess for the most maturing ages, I lived with my father; just him and me and my other brother.  I would, and this was even when I was at Hyde Park, stay out of school a few days, catch the truck, go over into Arkansas, pick some cotton so I could have some money for school because many times he didn't give us what we needed or what I needed for school.  Sometimes we'd have to argue over getting a pair of socks or a pair of shoes or something of that sort and so, you know, I'd just hang out two days, go pick cotton, come back home and have some money to, to do that with.  Some of the other kids in the neighborhood did it too, so I wasn't by myself.
Story_ID: 91336
Speaker 1: Mentioning that, I guess there are some wild stories--well not wild but, I guess I've done a little bit of everything.  I've, I've picked cotton, I've chopped cotton, I've been the water boy in the field, you know.  You know through the field with the pail of water, taking water to, to the people who--who, who were working.  I've been the mule boy, I guess eleven or twelve years old.  The mule boy is the person who rides the mule down through the field and pick up the cotton sacks and put them on the back of the mule and take them up to the scales to be weighed and I was no more than eleven or twelve at that time and, and probably weighed 125-30 pounds and I was pulling those hundred pound sacks up on the back of that mule and taking them up to the scales.  And, I guess sometimes that was, that was fun.  I remember when the day was over and we'd have to take the mules back to the barn, and imagine I'm a city boy--we'd have to take the mules back to the barn.  Some of those we'd, we'd throw two or three cotton sacks across the back of the mule to, to protect our rear ends and some of those old mules spine come on an angle in the back.  Now that was pretty hard riding, but some of those mules had natural curvature in their backs and it was almost like sitting in a saddle--a natural saddle when you would ride them.  But, I guess the interesting part came when you came out of the fields and taking the mule back to the barn.  When they look up and see that barn, it was hard to stop them from galloping.  Now if you were riding one of those old mules with one of them sharp bones, you butt is bouncing up and down (laughs) on that sharp bone all the way, all the way back to the barn, it wasn't much fun.  But if you was riding one of the old mules that had sort of a saddled back, it was, it was pretty good kid fun.  We were galloping down to the-but, I guess that was all sort of an instinct to do what it takes to get through school.
Story_ID: 91337
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you were in school--in grade school were there any teachers that you consider like a role model?
Speaker 2: Oh, in grade school they were all mentors.  They were beautiful people.  You know, I remember my grade school and high school teachers with great fondness.  We were listening to La Traviata and II Trovatore and Carmen when I was in the seventh grade. We--
Speaker 1: These are segregated schools?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we were nurtured.  That's unheard of now.  We were, we were--art was brought to our schools so that we could have, the teachers would bring it so that we could have an appreciation for art and music and oh these teachers mothered us, it--and so many of our classes did well.  When I, when I left grade school and went to high school, we didn't know it, we didn't know what to call it, but we were tracked and the--there were two classes, 9-A and 9-2 were students who were--those were college prep courses.  I think it's illegal to do that now.  And we were kept together and forced to take all of the subjects which were requirements to, to get in college.  We had three years of math; we had four years of language, two years of Latin and two years of Spanish.  We had to take chemistry, biology, physics as a part of that tracking.  It was--we were nurtured.
Speaker 1: Okay so do you remember the names of any of the specific teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes in grade school it was Mr. Cash, Ms. Johnson, Ms. London, Ms. Gilchrist (splg.).  We started passing class in the, in the seventh grade and those were the four, four teachers that were part of the seventh and eighth grade and we had beautiful high school teachers.  I really don't think most schools, in terms of teaching, could--could afford to give the students the kind of luxury that we got in those segregated schools and we didn't know.
Story_ID: 91338
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Manassas, that's where Isaac Hayes went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee], and so you were--you were president of your class all through high school?
Speaker 2: I was president of the student council when I, when I finished high school and editor of the school paper and left school every day to go to the Peabody and work.  I started working at Peabody when I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: That's the Peabody Hotel?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I started in the grill at the Peabody when I was thirteen and then I went on up to the dining room in the skyway as a waiter and a busboy, later on.
Speaker 1: So you had all these activities plus work.  And, what--who were some of the teachers in school who influenced you at Manassas?
Speaker 2: I would say Ms.--Ms. Turner and Ms. Gilchrist and Ms.--Mr. Weed and, and--let me think of some more--Mr. Tigg (splg.), who was my Latin teacher--Ms. Jones.  Ms. Jones wrote a book about many of the more successful kids who came out of Manassas, and the book was entitled "Portrait of a Ghetto Kid" [sic, "Portrait of a Ghetto School"] and I was one of the ones who was included.
Speaker 1: When was the book written?
Speaker 2: Oh, that book was written, oh 15/16 years ago now.
Speaker 1: Okay and it was written by?
Speaker 2: Ms. Addie Jones and it's called "A Portrait of a Ghetto Kid" [sic, "Portrait of a Ghetto School"] and she, she did bios in that book of physicians and the lawyers and the teachers and the politicians and the business people who came from Manassas.
Speaker 1: Okay, Manassas graduates?
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91339
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, now you were working hard and you were going to school, you're making good grades, you're kind of a prodigy and all that but at the same time you were saying earlier that you were concerned about how you were ever going to pay for college, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well (laughs) I wanted to go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and I didn't have any offers from Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: Now why not, you're a good student, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know.  So when I--I had a friend of mine who was a year ahead of me who lived down the street and he said, I had worked in Chicago [Illinois] the previous summer and saved up some money.  I had about $350-$400 and he said--I had registered, I had been accepted and he said, but I really didn't' know. So he said "Just come on up" and I came on up and he lived in what you called, what we called the vets dorm--the dorm that was built for the original veterans from the World War II era.  And he introduced me to the lady who was over the dorms and she gave me a room. They were all single rooms which was nice.  They had two sets of dorms, the veterans' single and the veterans' doubles--football players, the basketball players lived in the veterans' doubles.  And we lived, and you know we had Olympic track teams there when, when I was there.
Speaker 1: That's right, who--who were some of the people there?
Speaker 2: Mayfax was, was there--
Speaker 1: All part of that famous, the Memphis--Tennessee State--
Speaker 2: Tennessee Bells, Tiger Bells
Speaker 1: Tiger Bells, yeah
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Was Wilma Rudolph there?
Speaker 2: Wilma Rudolph was coming in when I was leaving.  So he said "Go over to the cafeteria and tell the lady over the cafeteria that you want to work."  I went over there and she gave me a job putting food on the line three times a day for breakfast, lunch and dinner. And then on the side I had learned to wait tables, and I would wait tables at the hotels and the clubs around the city and when I had an evening job, I would pay somebody to put my food on a line at the, in the cafeteria while I went to wait tables (laugh).
Speaker 1: So you subcontracted with another--.
Speaker 2: So I--I worked in the cafeteria four years and later on the last two years my job was to mop the kitchen floor because I got tired of being there at six o'clock in the morning to put the food on the line so I got a job mopping the kitchen floor after, after everybody else--after the cafeteria was closed. But I tell you, sometimes I'd be in there taking the garbage down and, and mopping that floor and all the boys would be out walking their girls across the campus and I said to myself, "Anybody who--I'm going to look out for myself when I get out of here.  Anybody who didn't make it, it's their fault.  And, and if I could make it, anybody can."  The thing that did happen is, when I came out, I did just the opposite.  I spent more time helping folks than I did doing my business (laughs).
Story_ID: 91340
Speaker 1: So, at, sir, at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you said you had time to be involved in other activities on campus too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well most of my activities were confined to the business school activities.  And then, I forgot the business organization--Future Business Leaders of America was the one that I was most active in and encouraging.  Funny thing, you know, when I was a--I was an accounting major and I met my wife there, she was an accounting major also and most of the people in the business department were doing, were getting business degrees but also getting certified to teach school so they'd have something to fall back on, quote.  Most of them fell back on it.  I opted not to do that because I didn't want to have a fall back point as far as that was concerned.  I determined that I was going root hog or die poor pig and so I sort of stayed the course.  I guess we ultimately--my agency at the time that it was opened was the first black owned general agency. That is, a black person contracted with a major company in six states.  There was not another black broker who could write a standard policy for a major company in Tennessee, Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky or Missouri. And many of the fellows in Memphis [Tennessee] who came along in the business after me, the State Farms and the Allstates and that crowd were contracted after the industry people figured out how well I did, if I was going to make it (laugh).  So it is--
Speaker 1: Was it rough--was it hard to get started?
Speaker 2: Very. You see, this business is one that you cannot learn in school.  You have to be mentored.  I developed a friendship with two brothers, in another context, who happened to own one of the oldest insurance agencies in the city of Memphis [Tennessee]: the Colliers--John and Jim Collier [James D. Collier, Jr.], the Collier Agency.  Their father [James D. Collier, Sr.] started their agency and they are closer to a 100 years old than they are 75 now.  And we met in the great books group.  That was a group of us who got together to read and discuss great books and they were in that group, and they--
Speaker 1: So this was an integrated study group?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: That was unusual for those days wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 91341
Speaker 1: The only thing that a black agent could do was write substandard automobile--and then he was not direct with the substandard company, he had to run that through a white agent who had the contract with the substandard company. And, I--yes?
Speaker 2: The question I have is this, was all that--all those people in the middle between the consumer and the agency--did that mean that black insurance costs more money than white insurance?
Speaker 1: No. No, it didn't mean that the automobile insurance costs more money, it just meant that the white broker got a piece off the top of your commission.  So, what you ended up being was a solicitor for him because you didn't have a direct contract. And when we talked, I would bitch about it all the time to them when I was asking them [John Collier and Jim Collier] to help me to do something and they said "Fred we are tired of you bitching, we going to get you a company."  In 1968 or '69 [1969], I don't remember which, they went over to the regional office of [The] Hartford [Insurance Group] which is in Memphis--they had a regional office in Memphis then, and told them to sign me.  Now they didn't ask them, they told them to sign me.  Their book of business with the company was large enough for them to have that kind of clout.  And they said "Well who going to train him?" and they said "We are." And they came out to my office and taught me everything from how to put a five folder together to how to inspect commercial buildings, guesstimate the age of a roof of a house, the whole thing.  They'd come out periodically and put me in the car and say let's go riding and they mentored me for years.  Anytime that I hit a rough spot--I needed another company, they'd get it for me and they taught me the business because the only way you can learn the business is to be taught in an agency.  A company person can have all kinds of insurance credentials and work for a company, that does not prepare them to run an agency.  You still have to leave and be mentored or apprentice in an agency before you could learn how to be an agent.  And, I guess my agency opened the doors for a lot of people. And I still represent The Hartford, to this day, as one of the companies in my agency.  So--but the thing is all of the churches, all of the automobiles, all of the homes in all of these states no black person could write a direct policy to cover those.  And, I'll tell you, to this day if you find in the city of Chicago [Illinois] ten black brokers; I'd be surprised, to this day.  The insurance association, the national organization had its annual meeting in Chicago and I was there, I did not meet five black people from Chicago and it was held in their hometown at that convention.  So it is a very white business.
Story_ID: 91342
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a tough--now the racial climate of this city [Memphis, Tennessee]--it was 1957. I guess, when you came out of school [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], what was it like?
Speaker 2: Very segregated, very segregated.
Speaker 1: Was there any change on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Not really. When I, when I came back to Memphis from the military in 1959, Russell Sugarman who is an attorney, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained, was running for commissioner of public works.  There were a number of people running for the school board.  Now the reason a number of people were running for the school board, is many of these races would have black candidates in there as a catalyst to get black people to go register so that they could vote for them. That was part of the voter registration situation.  Russell was running for commissioner of public works and at that time, the person--it was an at large vote, and the person in the group that got the highest number of votes won.  Some of the white candidates who were running pulled out so that the white vote would be concentrated and Sugarman would not win.  None of the people who were running for that office publicly in 1959 won but we organized the Memphis and Shelby County Democratic Club which turned out to be a model organization for a political organization in the country. And either the Ford Foundation or the Rockefeller Foundation, I don't remember which, it's a little hazy now, gave fellowships to people from other parts of the country to come to Memphis to study our organization.  We had done it well and eventually we broke in.  I guess one of the earliest local elections that took place state-wide of significance was Russell's law partner.  A.W. Willis became the first elected black state representative since reconstruction.  It wasn't in that election--it wasn't during that election but it was during that period of time.
Story_ID: 91343
Speaker 1: With reference to the, reference to the city races, they changed the law so that you would have to run in slots so that, to preclude an opportunity for a black person to sneak in and to win.  And that is part of the agitation behind the change of government from--we had a commissioner form of government.  The commissioners were both the administrators and the legislators.  They sat as commissioners one day a week and then they went back and were administrators over their various departments the other days of the week.  And under that system, there was no way for an African American person to be elected to government.  So then the agitation was started for a change in government and a committee was created to determine what that change would look like.
Speaker 2: Now I have a couple of questions related to this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What, what was the black population--the percentage of the black population at that time?
Speaker 1: At that time?  It was probably 30 percent.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What is it today in 2003?
Speaker 1: About 58 percent, 59 percent, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it is kind of, I suppose, a growing black population (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Certainly 30 percent of the city unrepresented at all is problematic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So that proposition passed over serious opposition and from that the first city council was elected.  Incidentally, the first adopted city council districts were drawn on my living, on my dining room table. And it happened because Russell, who is now Judge Sugarman, Russell Sugarman and A.W. [Willis] and Jesse Turner, who was for many years the national treasurer of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], was on that committee and they were charged with bringing in lines--suggested district lines.  And they came back and gave me the assignment to draw lines and, and bring them back.  And my wife and I teamed up and carved up the city and took it back to them and there were other people who were--who had the same charge.  And when they evaluated all of the recommended districts, ours was adopted.  So for four terms the district lines for the city of Memphis was drawn on my living room table because every time competing lines were shown, ours always won.
Story_ID: 91344
Speaker 1: And the [city council] district that I drew, I drew two obviously black districts and one with a slight white majority. And that's the one that I ended up running in; I had no intention of running for the city council at the time.  Much later on it was a pop decision to run because I had come out and I had organized my area of town and I had solid precinct organizations that I had put together and I decided--I had an instrument and why not use it. And then I made the decision to run.  But my group, the Shelby County Democratic Club did not think a black person could run against in that district and they supported a white person against me because they were afraid that I would only cause a more conservative white person to win and we would be worse off. And I won, in a runoff.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how did you organize people for the campaign?  What technique did you use or had any experience in trying to organize people?
Speaker 1: Well I came to the community as a debit insurance agent working for North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company, going from door to door collecting premiums.
Speaker 2: The door to door sounds important.
Speaker 1: It is. And I worked for North Carolina Mutual five years and in the process there was not a house in this community that I had not been in and out of at least once `cause some days we'd do door to door canvassing just to try to drum up business.  And I was very well liked by my policy holders.  So I organized my policy holders in each precinct and we had precinct clubs made up of my policy holders in those precincts and it was probably the most tightly organized community in the Shelby County Democratic Club.  I had precinct leaders and block leaders and area leaders.  So I could call up a precinct leader and in a matter of an hour touched almost every house in this area.
Story_ID: 91345
Speaker 1: So, I built a, a strong following.  But the strange thing about it, Orange Mound has such a prominent name in the city that my opponents--and I had eight opponents, one other black person was in the race, there was nine of us in the race.  My opponents looked at me as being from Orange Mound and really campaigned to beat me in this area, when in fact this area was a very small part of the district.  So I would make campaign noises in Orange Mound and try to keep my opponents chasing me around.  I had seven, I had seven white opponents and one black opponent.  And then I'd be out in the white neighborhoods knocking on doors--door to door in all of the white neighborhoods telling them who I, who I was, what I stood for and that I would represent them and then when the thing would die down a little bit, I'd run back to Orange Mound and make some more noises, make them chase me and run back to the white neighborhoods (laugh) to--to explain to them that--and then I had two fellas who turned out to be--two Jewish fellas, Jimmy Jelenak who was a partner in a very prominent law firm now, young fellows and George Lupides who was a sports editor for a major paper here and now the sports editor for a local television station, come to my house--didn't know them and they said "We want to help you."  And they campaigned for me in the white neighborhoods also and recruited a lot of white support.  Now what really jelled them that one of my major opponents made the mistake of making a sign and saying on his truck--we used to have these cars with speakers on them--his name was Elmer Varner.  He said "Elect me, or you will have a nigger for a councilman" and that brought me people that I didn't even know who would probably have voted for him but was put off by that public position.
Speaker 2: Now were these black and white people?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah
Speaker 2: Or mainly black people?
Speaker 1: No, no. These were white people that came to me that I didn't even know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I got support.  I almost got 50 percent in the first election out of the nine.  But in the runoff I just beat the hell out of him. And I was elected to the first city council.
Speaker 2: Now what year was this?
Speaker 1: 1967
Speaker 2: And the two other, the two other black people were elected that same year?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Joe Patterson, who was the son of the bishop of the Church of God in Christ at the time.  His cousin is now G.E. Patterson who is the bishop of the Church of God in Christ worldwide and another person who is--Gerald is now a bishop now but he was far from it at that time, no inclination nor did he ever go in that direction.  And James Netters, who was pastoring at the time that he was elected to the council.  And the first year of the second term, I was elected chairman of city council.
Story_ID: 91346
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your first term was a real turbulent time for the city of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The turbulence results in the death of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that, what happened?  You were sworn in January '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah there had been an ongoing fight with the administration.  Let me tell you, there was something that was paradoxical that had happened prior to that.  The outgoing mayor, [William B.] Ingram had been a judge and he used his bench to politic.  He knew of the antagonism between the black community and police.
Speaker 1: Now there had been even reported in those days, I remember Time Magazine reports of black men sitting out on the stoop being, being attacked by the police and arrested for various--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.  So whenever he had a case of controversy in his court between the police and a black person, sometimes even when the black person was wrong, he sided with him.
Story_ID: 90674
Speaker 1: I went by the campaign, I was working for the county [Shelby County, Tennessee] but I went by there to get him to vote for another candidate and he said "If you think I'm not going to vote for [William B.] Ingram, you got to be crazy" and I said "Why?"  He said "Come on around the back of the house and I'll show you."  And we went to the back of his house. He said "Look at the front of my car."  I said "It's all bent up." He said "Yeah, I ran into the back of a car and Judge Ingram let me go." I said "Yeah?"  But he said "Not just any car, a police car" (laughs).  He said "If you think I'm not gonna vote for Ingram you're crazy."  Now that's an example of a kind of thing that Ingram did.  When he ran, because some of the leadership was so insulted at the way he viewed black people for his political purposes, A.W. Willis who's Russell's [Russell Sugarman] law partner and the first black elected to the [Tennessee] state legislature--House of Representatives--I spoke of him earlier--ran against him as mayor [of Memphis, Tennessee].  The black folk turned on him [A.W. Willis].  Now this was a fella who is a lawyer, who fought civil rights--fellas been shot at in cars and all of that--saying that Ingram's opponent, Henry Loeb put him in the race and really desecrated Willis' name.
Story_ID: 90675
Speaker 1: When [William B.] Ingram was elected [mayor of Memphis, Tennessee], he did something for every segment of government except the sanitation workers and the sanitation workers were the ones who were most vocal in his support.  And the dilemma that the sanitation workers were left in was created by their favorite person: Bill Ingram.  The injunction that Henry Loeb used during the sanitation strike against the strike and against the march was not taken out by Loeb, it was Ingram's injunction that was just enforced and continued by Loeb.  So when we took office, as chairman of the public works committee I had high hopes of doing something significant for the men in this department.  And two months--I think it was two months--it was in February that the agitation started.  Now Ingram had done something that was unparalleled in the history of the city of Memphis [Tennessee] and that is the city was on a deficit path, never had the city been on a deficit path.  So that when the workers asked for increased pay, the city council had to try to figure out a way to do something it could not do by law. And that is to raise--to create a deeper deficit.  Now there was no question that the grievances of these men were very, very real.
Speaker 2: Now it wasn't just the pay they were grieving about?
Speaker 1: That's right, you know, working conditions it was, it was terrible.
Speaker 2: I've read that there were no facilities for them to wash up--
Speaker 1: It was terrible. Except that we had not gotten an opportunity to address them. Yet.  But Ingram, who left them in this condition, was on the outside urging them on after he was no longer the mayor. And he was the one who helped to create this dilemma.  And he was the one that they were voting for to be mayor.  So, prior to that a worker had gotten crushed in a packer and there was no insurance or worker's compensation for him, there's no question.  I learned of the strike on the radio one morning--that the men had been told not to go to work at the yard out in the area we called Binghampton in Memphis.
Story_ID: 90676
Speaker 1: Well at one point did--well if I may--at one point was [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] called into this?
Speaker 2: Dr. King was, was called in by the ministers.
Speaker 1: I had heard that Reverend [Samuel "Billy"] Kyles was the one of the--
Speaker 2: Billy Kyles, the other fellow out in California now--
Speaker 1: James Lawson?
Speaker 2: Jim Lawson and some others called King in.  I knew Jim when he was in Vanderbilt Divinity School [Nashville, Tennessee].  He married a young woman in my class at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], we came the same year.  We were in the same graduating class [1957].  So, Reverend--because of the way the talks were going, the ministerial group called in Reverend Kyles.  There was a group called Calm Citizens Against something--I don't remember the name very well now--who was a part of that group.  Dr. King was reluctant to come to Memphis.  He really didn't want to get into this, but he was pressured to come and he came.  You have to know that in the city of Memphis even to this day the sanitation strike--let me digress a little bit--the sanitation strike was not just a labor strike, it was a racial and civil rights activity.  It opened some deep wounds that had been festering underneath for years the longer it went.  But let me add to that, to this day--thirty five years later where there is a racial conflict in Memphis and the majority of people involved are African American, there is no such thing as a labor strike.  Most of the time the discussion ends up in church, rallies and civil rights leaders and whatever is involved in those actions even to this day.  So Dr. King came in with the best of intentions except he had no understanding of the mine field he was walking into.
Story_ID: 90677
Speaker 1: What were some of the big dangers?
Speaker 2: Well there were young activist groups who felt that they needed to be consulted.  They needed to be a part of the action, they weren't at the table and that anything that did not include them, they were gonna sabotage.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of these groups, would you recognize any of the names of the groups?
Speaker 2: There was, the most prominent one was called The Invaders.  They started out as a little campus group over at Owen College [Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] before Owen and LeMoyne [College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] were put together. And was magnified beyond their significance in newspaper articles.  They didn't know they were that big time until they read it in the papers (laugh).
Speaker 1: What was their philosophy, basically?
Speaker 2: Their philosophy was that, I guess, "You old geezers, you preachers and you civil rights leaders, you all aren't the only spokesmen for the black community.  We are the young radicals and got something to say and if we aren't at the table, we gonna to tear it up."  And that's basically what happened when the violence started and all that.  They were the ones who engineered that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now for the sake of history these were supposedly non violent marches, right?  But there is this threat of violence hanging over the marches and if they turned violent then they would discredit the marches.
Speaker 2: Right and these people had no compulsion about this discrediting [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or any of the other considered establishment leaders in the community and they made no bones about it.  As you saw in that picture in my office of that march with King and me side by side when we got a ways down Beal Street, these young people started wreaking their havoc and destroyed the march and made an effort to discredit King.  It was not good.
Story_ID: 90678
Speaker 1: What, what role did you play in the march?
Speaker 2: I was not so much in the march. My role was to try to pull together some reconciliation on the city council. To try to make it possible to end the strike equitably and to try to, to get some, some balance and some recognition of the union and some, some recognition of the sanitation workers as city workers equal to any other workers in the city of Memphis.  It's needless to say, I was a little naive when I was elected to the city council and as a part of that naivete, I persuaded the city council to allow me to call a public hearing--the whole city council and listen to the workers themselves.  And when I opened the hearing, I asked the workers to come up and just tell the council about their grievances and about their conditions and etc.  When a worker would step up to the microphone he could hardly get started before a union person would snatch him down and the union person would step to the microphone and I wouldn't listen to him.  And I'd say "You aren't the worker, I don't represent you, I represent the workers."  And I say "I want to represent--I want to hear from the workers."  And another worker would step up and a union person would pull him back and step to the microphone again and this tug of war went on for, for a few minutes.  And finally the union people said if it's workers you want, workers you'll get.  The sanitation workers were having an organizing meeting and a rally out at the Firestone Labor Hall.  They sent buses out there and got about twelve hundred people and packed them in a room that has the capacity for about six hundred. And then the fun started.  There were all of these fellow travelers.  The people were from various walks of life, preachers and hospital workers and wherever, who were drawn there like candles--fireflies to the light because the television cameras were on and everybody wanted to get his day in the sun.  It really turned out to be a fiasco.
Story_ID: 90679
Speaker 1: There were people who were saying all kinds of things.  One pastor suggested that since the capacity of the hall was so small and there were some many people in the room they might have to urinate or do whatever it is in that room.  After a point, they said that they were hungry and they weren't leaving so they sent out for drinks and bologna sandwiches and mustard and mayonnaise and said "These seats might be messed up when we leave."  That's, that's a beautiful room, one of the more beautiful rooms in the city [Memphis, Tennessee].  All along the ministers and labor leaders were stating their case before the council; everybody except the workers.  And it really turned out to be just pure chaos after a while.  We come to a point where the organizer of the strike, T.O. Jones--who's dead now God rest his soul, was a simple man who just wanted justice for the people he was leading--was starting to really agitate me and trying to get me to explode on camera.  And it went on to the point that I thought that I might lose it.  So I called a recess and I called T.O. and some of the other leaders into a side conference room that we had on the council.  The council members followed us down there and when T.O. got in the room, I grabbed him in the collar and shoved him against the wall.  I weighed about 230 or 35--I mean 130-35 pounds, T.O. weighed about 235 or 40 (laugh) and the preacher on the council, Reverend [James] Netters [Sr.] started praying (laughs).  He said "Oh Lord Brother Davis, you don't want to do that" (laugh).  So, cooler heads prevailed and we had a decent conversation back there. But T.O. promised not to do that anymore and things calmed down and we went back and had something closer to a semblance of a hearing.
Story_ID: 90680
Speaker 1: The amount of the wage increase was negotiated in my living room and the way that happened was we had these, sunshine law and all of the council members--you weren't supposed to have [Memphis city] council meetings without notifying the press. But at that particular point it would have been stupid if we had done that.  So I called a meeting of the city council at my house to talk about how much of a wage increase we could give and we started at about thirty cents and we argued nickel by nickel until we got down to fifteen cent.  And when we got there, you know, I said "Look, I'm not compromising anymore, I can't go any further."
Speaker 2: Fifteen cents
Speaker 1: An hour, okay.  So we argued about it and looked at it in light of the budget crunch that we were in because we really didn't--the money was not there in the budget to do it because we came in a deficit situation.  We finally concluded that we could manage five cents immediately and ten cent July 1st [1968] when the budget year changed.  So after substantial discussion, we agreed on that. And, we decided we would call a meeting of the council and all interested parties a couple of days later over at the city auditorium and announce it.  And here's where my naivete came in again.  I, after the preliminaries and the chairman of the city council got up and spoke to them, etc.--call me up to make my report.  I made the mistake of saying five cents immediately and somebody in the balcony said "The niggers gonna to sell us for a nickel" and the place exploded.  And they had to escort us by police outside the rear back to city hall.  Now after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed and the civil rights leaders and the preachers and the labor negotiators and all of those people came together to negotiate the raise.  They argued back and forth until they got to that fifteen cent and they negotiated a fifteen cents raise. And they walked out shouting victory, that they had won.  It was a worse deal than I was going to present--you can read the history of this--because they only got ten cents immediately and five cents later on. Where under, under my deal at the ten cents at the change of the budget and five cents later on, under my deal they would have had the whole thing at the change of the budget year, July 1st [1968].
Story_ID: 90681
Speaker 1: As a result of certain kinds of antagonisms and hostilities and whatever the police director intercepted a call, of all places to Chicago [Illinois] to get a hit man to come take me out. And for several months I was monitored, escorted.  I was not out of the sight of a police car 24/7.  There was always a police car within sight of my house; all day when I was at the office there was a police car across the street.  The director of the police gave me a .38 and I had to go to the firing range to qualify with it and I had to qualify with the pistol and the shotgun. Because after [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s death they did not want another incident of the assassination of another public official.
Story_ID: 90682
Speaker 1: On the day that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, the strike was pretty much over already.  I would say more than 50 percent of the men had gone back to work.  We were in a secret meeting over at the Claridge Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee] waiting for a national labor negotiator, Tom Miles to come to the meeting.  The city council--not the whole city council just a committee of us, Tom Miles, and King's representative were to meet that evening and settle the strike that evening.  We were there, Tom had not arrived which was unusual and none of King's people had gotten there.  And we were concerned that so much time had passed that--and his people weren't there and then we received a call from city hall, said "Turn the television on." He had been shot.
Speaker 2: April 4, 1968, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I had sat on the stage--on the side of the stage, I don't remember what date that was.  About two days--must have been March 26th or 27th [sic, April 3, 1968] in Mason Temple when he made that last speech and on March 28th [1968] when he made that last march [from Clayborn Temple], I was beside him. So--
Speaker 2: That must have been a terrible feeling.
Speaker 1: I can't describe the feeling to you that went through us when we got that news, you know, I came apart. I just absolutely came apart.  Then subsequently I had the responsibility of trying to keep this city from coming apart as a result of it. And that was hard.
Speaker 2: Yeah it would seem to me that it would be doubly hard here because this being the site of it-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when cities all over the United States went up-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in flames.
Speaker 1: Yeah. That was hard.
Speaker 2: So what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, most of the neighborhoods did not disintegrate because some of us were out there.
Story_ID: 90683
Speaker 1: This city [Memphis, Tennessee] did not come apart because some of us were out there putting our ass on the line to see that that did not happen with the brick throwing, the fire and all of that.  We were out in the middle of it. Talking to the brothers and helping them to understand it's stupid to get mad, so mad at the man that you burn your own neighborhood down and that we were not afraid to be out there in the brick throwing and in the fire.  The word got around about--we couldn't stop it all, but that we were on the scene, we were out there and much of what could have happened didn't happen because of that.  And I would suspect that in some other cities, political leaders were afraid to get in the middle of the fray.  I remember during that time I was--gone to bed, and Ike, Isaac Hayes, was doing something out at the University of Memphis, Memphis State [University] then, and things had boiled over out there and he called me at home to come out there and try to help put it back together.  And I sort of protested 'cause--I said "I'm in bed, man why you gonna bring me out there in some mess like that" and he insisted.  And I went out to the university and because of my profile and I guess in some ways because of the respect, it calmed down and what could have happened didn't.
Speaker 2: Did you feel that the community understood the role you played in that? Did you feel misunderstood or?
Speaker 1: Both. There were people who were using the [Civil Rights] Movement for their own agenda and they were saying things and doing things that were counter to the long term achievements of what should happen. And I couldn't go with it.  And I said up front "This is the way things should go and this is where I am."  That offended some people then, but later some of the people that I offended came to me and said "You were right" and said "If what we had been trying for--if it had gone our way, it would have been worse."  But a leader in my estimation has to be somebody with steady nerves in the midst of chaos and he can't let the popular movement or the popular turn of things cloud his judgment, because in that case he is not the leader, he is really being manipulated by the whim of the crowd.  In my opinion a leader does something more than decides which way the crowd wants to go in the first place and run in front of the crowd to be the drum major.  That's why leadership is hard and that's why many real leaders get killed.
Story_ID: 90684
Speaker 1: Now, I guess the net result of all this chaos in '68 [1968] was--I mean do you see a better Memphis [Tennessee] as a result of all of this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think a lot of things are better.  We have more political representation.  I am not sure that the people who are presently elected to office are leaders.  They're elected officials and they don't understand or are unwilling to lead.  They want to be re-elected.  I think there is a higher level of economic prosperity in this city among the minority population then there was before.  Government certainly treats its minority citizens better.  We have a black city mayor [Willie Wilbert Herenton] and we have black county mayor [A.C. Wharton, Jr.] since we have two mayors in this area.  I am not sure that the educational process is better; that the people in school who are teachers are operating in an atmosphere that they can be more than babysitters or test takers.  The kind of nurturing that I received in public schools is only available now in exclusive, private schools.  So some things are better and some things are worse.  I was speaking earlier of the social and economic integration of the black community at earlier times. Since the African Americans have an opportunity to move to the suburbs.  They've left their native communities sterile and impotent.  There are not groups of informed and educated citizens living in the place where their economic status and their education can have the most impact and strangely enough they have very little impact in their new surroundings. So it's a--
Speaker 1: They are outnumbered, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, they are outnumbered.  It's a mixed bag.
Story_ID: 90685
Speaker 1: Now you, you maintain your business and your home in the community that you-
Speaker 2: I maintain my business in one of the largest black neighborhoods in the country.  I live in the neighborhood, I go to church in the neighborhood. I hope that the young women who work for me in the agency represent a role model for the young people who pass by our business when they see them drive up, well dressed in nice cars walking into a office and doing well.  I had a young fellow stop one day when I was going in before our office opened.  I never shall forget, he was driving a little red car and he stopped and he turned around and he came back and knocked on the door 'cause we hadn't opened and he came in.  And he told me I didn't know him but I was his inspiration.  That in high school he had come back and seen me going in and out of that office and he decided he wanted to be a business person and he went to college and majored in business administration and he had a management job with Kroger at that time; he just wanted me to know it.
Story_ID: 90686
Speaker 1: You've been involved in various community activities and citywide activities as a businessman and someone who's a civic activist.  Tell us about a few of those--tell us about MMBC [Mid-South Minority Business Council Continuum] and then your role in, your role in FedEx being established here.
Speaker 2: Well we had an organization in Memphis [Tennessee] that does citywide planning for the future of Memphis and its state funded.  I'm trying to remember the name, I can't right now but anyway a select group of citizens are appointed to the committee of black and white senior executives, middle management and I was on that committee.  And they were discussing the issues that were vital to the city of Memphis.  And I put on the table minority economic development and we discussed it awhile and it was a consensus of some of the people in the room that that was not a vital issue for the city of Memphis to be in their planning.  And when they looked up I was almost gone. I had picked up my stuff and they asked me where I was going.  I told them back to my office that if planning minority economic development was not a vital issue for their group, I didn't have any business there.  So they said "Come back, let's talk." And when we went through the brainstorming sessions and then started prioritizing all of the issues, we voted by secret ballot on the priority issues: minority economic development came out number one.  And as a result, we got the cooperation to move what was then a minority business development program from the chamber of commerce where it had been stagnated to create a new and very vital organization that's here in Memphis now [the Mid-South Minority Business Council Continuum].  That looks out for the economic development and the certification of minorities and women and we are one of the best in the country.  And I got to pick, because of some serious conversation, the original board of directors which consisted of some very high profile business leaders in Memphis.  From, from the banking community to the president of First Tennessee Bank. Memphis Light Gas and Water which is the largest three service bank--three service utility in the country, the president of that utility and others of that ilk to, to be our original board of directors.
Story_ID: 90687
Speaker 1: Now you said you don't accept the lower assistants down the line, you know, to represent these--
Speaker 2: No. What we have here is the most senior executives in the business except in cases we make concessions for an outfit like Federal Express [FedEx] which is an international organization whose senior or executive vice presidents are equal to some of the top people in the world to be on our board.  And the reason for that is that we don't want anybody on our board that has got to ask his boss.  We want the boss to be sitting at the table.  We will not agree to a lower tier person because if that ever happened, it will become contagious and we'll lose the impact of the personalities on our board and we've been able to maintain this since our existence.  I was fortunate enough to go to Nashville [Tennessee] and recruit a person from Nashville who had been in their government doing this kind of thing to Memphis to run it originally, Carol Crowley and she did an excellent job.  She's moving into other areas and we have, after some stumbling with other presidents or executive directors, we now have another stellar ex-banker who is running our organization and it's, it's doing very, very well.
Story_ID: 90688
Speaker 1: Now, now what's the FedEx story?
Speaker 2: When FedEx came to Memphis [Tennessee] from Little Rock [Arkansas], Fred Smith was not very known, and I think he had four or five planes.  They did not accommodate him in Little Rock--his vision.  He came to the Memphis city council in 1972 and that was the year that I was chairman of the city council and I appointed a committee to work with him in finding landing space for his planes and a deal was worked out by the Air [National] Guard--worked out with air guard for him to be able to land his planes on their landing space.  And the committee and he came back to the city council for its recommendation and we approved it.  I got to know Fred at that meeting, we've been friends, we used to see each other a lot more often during the embryonic stage of his business.  He is a very personable and genuine person and the rest, shall we say, is history.  But, you know, I was very pleased to be in a position to lead that effort.
Speaker 1: Now you also mentioned earlier before we started taping that you were invited to become a member of another Memphis organization that people don't know that much about.
Speaker 2: There is a group in Memphis called The Society of Entrepreneurs that is composed of the most senior business leaders.  People like Fred Smith, Billy Donovan who runs a billion dollar privately owned company. The--
Speaker 1: These are major business leaders in Memphis, I guess.
Speaker 2: This is the business elite. The head of the Peabody Hotel family, Jack Bells who is the largest real estate owner in the state of Tennessee.
Speaker 1: People of that stripe, okay.
Speaker 2: Right
Story_ID: 90689
Speaker 1: We were talking about entrepreneurs and all the leaders and movers of Memphis [Tennessee] being involved in--it's a group that you just can't just join, right?
Speaker 2: No. A person came to my office and told me that I had been elected to the Society of Entrepreneurs.  I had never heard of the Society of Entrepreneurs, and I begged off.  I said "I'd promised my wife that I would not join another organization and I'm gonna get out of some of these that I'm in."  He talked and he talked about the aims of the group and whatever.  And let me tell you this, the group--substantially a portion of qualifying to be a member of their group is give back.  You can't just be rich.  The selection committee looks at two things, the basis on which you started your business and whether there was something original or something uniquely contributing to the business community from your business--that your business was unique and you were successful at it. That's one thing, and the other major consideration is what did you give back.  Now most of the people--I'd say a substantial majority of the people who are members of society are very, very wealthy.  Some of us have some unique give backs which would cause the society to notice us.  Only five people a year are elected to the society.  You can't request membership, they don't know that they are nominated and the board reviews the nominations and at one point I was the only black member of the society on the board and I was on the board (laugh).  And, I'll tell you a funny story.  One day we were going through the resumes of the nominees and I said to the chairman "Time out" and he said "What's your question, Fred?" I said "I got a stack of enormously successful and enormously wealthy people in front of me and I'm trying to figure out how I got here."  And his response was "Believe me Fred, if we didn't think you ought to be here you wouldn't be. Now let's get on with the business." So, I feel good about that.
Speaker 1: So through this organization you had to do things--
Speaker 2: Well the organization is low profile, but it's enabled to impact the lives budding entrepreneurs through mentoring and taking these people under their wings and being--have access to people who in your wildest dreams that you would only read about in the newspapers and see on the television.  And they are opening themselves up and exposing themselves to budding business people that they help to take to the next level.
Story_ID: 90690
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes--is that somehow the black leadership will recognize that this is a capitalistic society and that you can only have as much of anything in this society as you can pay for.  Only as much healthcare, education, mental health, whatever, as you can pay for and that you can't pray your way out of poverty.  I was once a member of the community development committee of the National League of Cities and as such we went and surveyed cities and their infrastructure, just the members of the committee. And almost any city that had a very large black community, if you could take all the people out of the city and ask me to show you where the most crime is, I could pretty much do it.  And the reason is something that's incongruent.  Invariably in the black community where you see the most churches, that's also the place with the most crime.  It appears to me that it ought to be the other way around. But for most cities that is not true.  If you go to most cities that's got a large black population and you say "Show me your black and white leadership," it will be white business men and black preachers.  That does not say now that black preachers are also the largest business people.  So you've also got the most successful business people in the community when you've got the black preachers.
Speaker 1: Many of them are also funeral directors too.
Story_ID: 90691
Speaker 1: Unfortunately that is not the kind of thing that moves a race of people to the next level of independence in a capitalistic society.  I have challenged some friends of mine. Now, what I have said, backing up, that we have not understood in the black community corporate think.  That is to come together as business people, put our dollars together to create a separate entity called a corporation.  To let our dollars combine to create something that would render a service or make a product at a profit.  To hire a president that was responsible to a board of directors to do this and that as the business grows and reinvest its profits, the thing would get more and more prosperous.  The corporate entity which is the engine of capitalism would work in the black community.  When I look at the largest black businesses they are incorporated proprietorships which does not fit the model.  The only place that many of us can put our dollars and dimes together corporately to build a million dollar structure is in a house of worship and I don't knock that, I'm a deacon and trustee in my church.  So I believe in the religious entity but I believe that we got to get past--I believe in more than that.  I believe that we need to come to the point that we learn how to operate the corporate tool, the corporate entity, to our advantage and as a whole, black America has not learned that.  And I have concluded that any group of people where the aggregate capital value of the religious institutions exceed the aggregate capital value of their business institutions, is a group of people destined to linger in poverty.  That's a personal conclusion.
Story_ID: 90692
Speaker 1: Okay. Now sir-now, now you are a stock broker too as well. You have some--
Speaker 2: We have a unique business; it is designed to serve small businesses in every way.  We insure their buildings, their commercial interests, their buildings, their cars, their workers' comp, their personal homes and their liabilities and all of that.  But we also equip--to help them with their pension planning, with their retirement planning in these small businesses.  And most of these guys don't have enough money to get the attention of the large brokerage companies like Merrill Lynch. To get the details, instructions, and babysitting if you please with somebody like me who's had over twenty-five years as a registered agent at the highest level.  So it's worked out good for the people, especially the small business people who do business with us because we helped them plan their total dollar.
Story_ID: 90693
Speaker 1: Tell. tell me sir what would you see at this point in your life as your legacy?
Speaker 2: One of them is a night clinic that I started over thirty years ago in Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee] when I was a member of the city council.  The people in my community would not take a day off from work to go to the doctor.  Many of them would wait until it got to be critical and go to the emergency room.  I was the catalyst in starting a clinic with the vista volunteer nurse.  Some volunteers who opened at either four or five o'clock in the evening time and worked until.  And working mothers could bring their babies and working people could come and get treated without missing a day from work and that clinic survived.  There were points when we would run out of money to meet the payroll and I would take money out of the agency and pay the staff so that I can proudly say that at no point have we ever missed a payroll.  We survived lots of near misses.  I can tell you we had many serious opportunities to fail, but we by-passed all of them (laugh).  There was one time I had a director who was robbing us blind, who was mistreating the patients, he was doing all kinds of bad things and I fired him.  And I decided that I would run the clinic for a few weeks--a few months until we got a new director.  I ended up running that clinic and my business for five years.  The clinic survived.  We named it the Brannon McCullough Clinic originally because I was on a foundation board that gave us the $10,000 to start the clinic.  The lady who created the foundation's name was Margaret McCullough.  She was a Quaker woman who had taught sociology at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and LeMoyne College [now Owen-LeMoyne College, Memphis, Tennessee].  And she decided to create a foundation to give her money away while she was alive.  The other name is Phyllis Brannon who was the nurse practitioner and we changed the name from--originally the Orange Mound Clinic to name it after those two women who were most instrumental in making it happen.  Later on we were invited to another community that had no medical service to establish a beachhead there and we did.  Ultimately we consolidated our services out there and bussed the people from Orange Mound out to that clinic.  We then combined our resources with another clinic that was started from an organization that I helped put together.  When five young doctors felt that medicine was their religious calling and came to us to get them to sponsor them in a clinic and we did and the hospital gave them some money.  And we called it Christ Community Health Clinic because we considered that a ministry.  That clinic done well, did well, and all of the people a part of that clinic were also a part of my extended family.  And ultimately we merged the two operations.  I sit on the board of the largest foundation in the city of Memphis [Tennessee]; it's called the Assissi Foundation.  Now it's small by some standards of some cities but $200 million is a lot of money for us and we persuaded the foundation to help us to build a new facility to house and combine the clinic.  And a little more than a year ago, we opened up a new building, down the street from the old one, and that building was dedicated to me.
Speaker 1: So it's--well people will be able to see that for years to come.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And there are other things that we helped put together that--but that's a physical structure, there are some other things that we helped put together that I think people will benefit in the future from.  It's a long way from those days in the cafeteria when I swore I wouldn't do anything when I got out, everybody for themselves, to this.
Story_ID: 90694
Speaker 1: So now, now you have a family, right?  You're married and--
Speaker 2: Yes my wife--we met in college.  She is a retired college administrator.  I have a daughter who is--who did work in the business with me but who is now in Nashville [Tennessee] taking a prep course to study for the bar.  She, she had her undergraduate at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and she had a law from Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And I have a son who is vice president of marketing for Verizon [Wireless] and who has created one of their most stellar advertising vehicles, "Can you hear me now?" which is his work.  My oldest son is a graduate of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and whose sort of took early retirement from law enforcement in PG County [Prince George County, Maryland] in the Washington D.C. area to open up a private investigative agency there and it's working well for him.
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become successful in business? And how'd they feel?
Speaker 2: My father witnessed my being inaugurated to the city council [1968] and saw me, but my mother died when I was a junior in college.
Story_ID: 90695
Speaker 1: Sir how would you--this is different from legacy--how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As somebody who tried to use his gifts to make life better for other folk.
Story_ID: 90696
Speaker 1: This picture was taken on March 28, 1968, that was [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s last march [from Clayborn Temple in Memphis, Tennessee].  I was beside him, I'm slightly behind him now because that truck going the other way--we had to make room for him and some of us had to sort of step back and let him through.  So I'm behind Dr. King instead of beside him in that picture.
Speaker 2: Okay this is in spring of '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: March 28, 1968.
Speaker 2: That is me, second from the left there, in a picture that was taken inauguration day in January 1968.  Standing next to me is Reverend J.L. [James] Netters who was elected to the [Memphis] city council along with me in 1967 when the election took place.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a picture of, I think taken a similar time with somebody congratulating me--it's been so many years ago that I don't even remember the name from the back of that person.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, next?
Speaker 1: That's just a picture taken after Father Time had gotten to my attention and let me know that he was there and I was moving on.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  What year would you say, approximately?
Speaker 1: That picture was taken approximately three years ago.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, alright then, next?
Speaker 1: Two-thousand [2000].
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the mayor of the city of Memphis [Tennessee] together.  I've known him for many years; he was one of my children's principal.  I--He consulted with me over the years when he was the public school superintendent and I served as chairman of the Memphis Parks Commission for a brief period in his administration.
Speaker 1: What's the mayor's name?
Speaker 2: Willie Harrington
Speaker 1: That's another picture of me and Reverend Netters.  The person in the middle is the person who's primarily--and his name, I--responsible for the rebuilding of the business structure on, on Beal Street. I, I can't, I can't tell you--we didn't--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we got to mark this picture.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA: Unidentified. Okay, next?
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me receiving the gavel after a successful term of chairman of the Board of Mid-South Minority Business Council [MMBC] and I am the only black person who is a permanent member of the Board of the Business Council.
Speaker 2: This is a magazine, part of a magazine article that was done--in a magazine called 'The Downtowner' which speaks of the three of us who were the original members of the Mid-South Minority Business Council.  On the left is Frank Gianotti.  At the time he was elected to the board, he was the president [sic, vice president/operations manager] of the largest engineering firm in the state of Tennessee [Tetra Tech Inc.].  The person in the middle is Larry Cox who is the president of the [Memphis-Shelby County] Airport Authority in the city of Memphis presently and to the right I'm standing with them.  We are the last three of the original members of the [Mid-South] Minority Business Council that was started about twelve years ago to foster the economic development of minority and women businesses in the city of Memphis.
Speaker 1: This is the last photo
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA: Okay, go on please
Speaker 1: Of the same three of us in another pose.  This picture was taken --(tape cuts off).
