Story_ID: 486632
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing are Julieanna Richardson and a host of other people (laughter) and I'm not gonna try and name everybody.  But, sir (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Do you want me to give you names?
Speaker 1: You, yeah, you can, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Alicia Mall [ph.].
Speaker 1: Alicia Mall.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ashley Howard.
Speaker 1: Ashley Howard.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jessica Saffold.
Speaker 1: Jessica Saffold.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And Denise Gines.
Speaker 1: And Denise Gines.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Leon DeCosta Dash, Jr., L-E-O-N, capital D-E, capital C-O-S-T-A, D-A-S-H [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any, do you have any nicknames or, or?
Speaker 2: No.  Some family members and close friends call me Lee, L-E-E, but very few people know that as my nickname, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 16, 1944, New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of journalism at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you have been an investigative journalist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Both here and abroad, right?
Speaker 2: No, more in the states.
Speaker 1: More in the states?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now, before we go into--oh, what is today's date, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Today is July 13th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers' headquarters at 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 486633
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, as you well know, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  The, they, they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried clams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Y- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fresh fried clams.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Kenya.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Help me, Lord.
Story_ID: 486634
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna get into your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth--I'm sorry, Ruth Elizabeth Kydd Dash [Ruth Kydd Dash].  Ruth is R-O, R-U-T-H, Elizabeth is E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-A- B-E-T-H, Kydd is K-Y-D-D.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 5, 1919, New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your mother's family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Eighteen thirty-three [1833] in Westmoreland County.
Speaker 1: Now, Westmoreland County is in--
Speaker 2: Westmoreland County, Virginia, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: One of the original areas established as a colony, as an area of the, settled as a, when the united, when the thirteen colonies were established.  The Yates family, I can give you the names, all the names later but I, I'm forgetting his first name.  I think it was Samuel Yates [sic. James Yates].  He was born into slavery and married after emancipation and had at least one daughter [Ella Yates Hall].  And then her daughter subsequently moved to Washington, D.C.--no, she moved to Washington, D.C. and she married a man named Ford.  I'm mixing it up.  She married a man named Hall [Thomas Hall], I'm very sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She married a man named Hall, and they had a daughter who was born in 1870, Elizabeth Hall [Elizabeth Hall Coblins].  And that is my mother's grandmother.  Elizabeth Hall married Robert Coblins.  Coblins is C-O-B-L-I-N-S.  That is not how he spelled his name originally.  He was born in 1863 in St. Eustatius [Sint Eustatius], in the Dutch West Indies.  And it, the original spelling of his name was C-O-B-L-E-N-T-Z, Coblentz.  But when he met, he came to the states in 1884 at the age of twenty-one and he met Elizabeth Hall.  She was working as a domestic in Providence, Rhode Island.  And they started dating.  But when, this is family folklore, I haven't established this to be accurate, but when he asked her to marry him, she said she couldn't marry a man with a name like Coblentz, so he Anglicized it to Coblins, and then they married.  I have found their marriage certificate in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your, your grandmother or why she, she ended up in, wound up in Providence?
Speaker 2: I think it's job related.  No, there's very little information about her.  I believe it's job related because also her aunt, Elizabeth Yates [ph.], ended up working as a domestic in Providence, and actually died in New Bedford, Massachusetts, in the, what was known as the colored old age home [New Bedford Home for the Aged] in the West End of New Bedford where most of the black population of New Bedford lived.
Story_ID: 486635
Speaker 1: New Bedford [Massachusetts], I, if I recall my history, had--didn't Frederick Douglass live, live there at one time?
Speaker 2: Right, he did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, he did, yeah.
Speaker 1: After he, shortly after he was emancipated from slavery or escaped from it.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the sequence, I don't remember whether it was before the Civil War or after the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Oh, before, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think it was after, I think it was before the, well before the Civil War and he was still in escape status.  I don't know that he had bought himself out of slavery by that time, the time he lived in New Bedford, I forget the years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was still, well, he would still be legally a slave depending--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on your philosophy of who's a slave and who isn't.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  That's right.  And this is a whaling town, right?
Speaker 2: New Bedford was the center of the whaling industry.  And that's how my mother's [Ruth Kydd Dash] father came to New Bedford.  His name was Lawrence, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, middle name Leopold, L-E-O-P-O-L-D, Kydd, K-Y-D-D [Lawrence Kydd].  He was born, if I remember correctly 1884, in Bequia [the Grenadines] in the West Indies.  Bequia is B as in boy, E-Q-I-A [sic.].  It's a Carib name meaning island in the s- island in the clouds.  Lawrence was one of ten children born to Samuel [Samuel Kydd] and I forget his mother's name at the moment.  No, Samuel and Leonora Kydd [Leonora Derrick Kydd], K-Y-D-D, in Bequia.  And Bequia was a small, poor fishing village, fishing island in the Grenadines.  And they had a tradition of whaling where they would take long, the whale pods would go by the, Bequia on seasonal trips.  And the people from, the men from Bequia would roll out to a whale pod and harpoon a whale and drag it up on the beach and butcher it right there and people from the St. Vincent and Grenadine islands would come o- come over there to buy whale meat.  So my grandfather had grown up doing that, and his father was a whaler.  And then my understanding is that he got on the--the whaling ships would leave New Bedford, Massachusetts, with half crews, the owners were trying to save money and they would go to places like Bequia or the Cape Verde islands and fill out the crew with people who came from a fishing tradition, young men.  And then they would go out and whale.  Now, you could whale for a couple of months or a year or more depending on how soon you were able to fill the ship's hull with whale oil and whatever else you were looking for.  And the whaling ships went back to New Bedford; they didn't take the people back to Bequia or Cape Verde islands.  And so that's how I believe my grandfather immigrated into the United States in 1905.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting scenario.  They, they would bring 'em, they counted on bringing 'em back, but they didn't take 'em (laughter) back down there.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't take 'em back home.
Speaker 1: They, they never took 'em home.
Speaker 2: And I don't think the men wanted to go back home.  Remember, I said this is a poor fishing island and they saw this as, this was a major opportunity to get off the island, work on a whaling ship, and then get to the United States.  I think for most of them, if not all of them, that was the long term objective.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know in the other interviews we've done in New England area a lot of people are from Barbados and Antigua and different islands.  I, I suppose a similar scenario, you know, is where they come to the North to work and then they, they're not--
Speaker 2: Come to the North?
Speaker 1: --they come to the North.
Speaker 2: Come to the states for work--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they come, come to the states.
Speaker 2: --for employment, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, come on up to Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: And well, my father's [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], well, we haven't gotten to it yet but my father's family came from Barbados.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, your grandfather Lawrence Leopold Kydd [Lawrence Kydd] was from Bequia?
Speaker 2: That's my maternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maternal grandfather.
Speaker 2: From Bequia.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And that's in the Grenadines.  Who, who, what European power ran the Grenadines?
Speaker 2: British.
Speaker 1: British, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So do you know, you know much about your grandfather?  Did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  He was alive, he was nineteen when I died [sic.].  And I admired him.  He, he was a very rough character as, as you would expect on a whaling ship.  And he had a reputation of being incredibly strong as a young man.  And he swore as a sailor would, um-hm.  And didn't care who heard him and in what company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I admired that characteristic.  Right.
Story_ID: 486636
Speaker 1: What about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, my mother's [Ruth Kydd Dash] mother, she was the second of four daughters born to her father and mother, Robert [Robert Coblins] and Elizabeth Coblins [Elizabeth Hall Coblins], Ethel Henrietta Coblins [Ethel Coblins Kydd] was her name.  And she was, let's see, she was the first in the family to go to college.  She did one year at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And that would be close to the end of the 19th century.  This is, this is a document I haven't gotten yet, close to the end of the 19th century or the beginning of the 20th.  And she--no, it would be well into the 20th, I'm, I'm just remembering her birth date was 1894, December.  So it would be well into the 20th century when she would as a young teenager do a year at Howard University.  And she actually was staying with her mother's family in Washington [D.C.], remember Elizabeth Hall was born in Washington in 1870, and she was staying with her relatives from, on her mother's side of the family when she attended Howard.  That was kind of far ahead of the other members of the black community in New Bedford, Massachusetts.  Most of the orientation in her generation was to go work in the textile mills.  (Cough) New Bedford was dominated by the textile mills.  In the early part of the 20th century, whaling was gradually dying, although fishing remained strong.  But the textile mills by the 1920s began to move to the South, but that was the major employer, and getting a job in the textile mill was the orientation of many of the people, white and black, in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did she end up doing for a living with a, with a year--
Speaker 2: She ended up working as a domestic in New Bedford in the homes of wealthy white people.  This is something that her father did as well.  Her father, Robert Coblins, who I told you about, came from St. Eustatius [Sint Eustatius], he actually worked for the Delanos who were related to [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  He worked as a butler or a valet--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the Delanos in New Bedford.  And she worked as a domestic.  She had opened up a tea shop, but that didn't, there wasn't the kind, the level of income in the black community to support that or the interest, so she closed that up fairly quickly.  And, and she worked as a domestic.
Speaker 1: Do, do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, she--
Speaker 1: --just, just a minute on this 'cause a lot of us have domestics in our background, and I was wondering if training and being well-spoken was a qualification for getting a job, say with the Delanos or a family like that?  I mean, do you have a sense of that that they--
Speaker 2: I don't have a sense of that, but I do know that Robert was part of, my great-grandfather on my mother's side was far s- was seen, was seen as a farsighted man.  In the black community this is one of the things that comes out in family history, his, he ran a boarding house on mill, on Middle Street, 810 Middle Street.  And that house was one of the first houses to have indoor plumbing.  And most of the African Amer- African American sailors who came to New Bedford stayed at that boarding house.  In fact, all of his four daughters, he had a son too who had drowned at an early age in a swimming accident, but all, all of his daughters married men who came there and stayed at that house who were sailors, right.  So, and he, he did a number of things, like he had a, a newspaper delivery system.  I can give you more information later, I have to go back and look it up, yeah.
Speaker 1: But he was an enterprising--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --man, so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And used his situation to build, build--
Speaker 2: And I've always thought that he provided his daughters with husbands.  I know the youngest of my aunts, the, the family folklore is that he actually arranged for her marriage with a sailor, her first husband, yes, um-hm.  But that was an arranged marriage, and I, I've always been curious about the other marriages including my grandmother's first marriage, but I don't know that that marriage was arranged, but she married a man named Tasker O. Mars, that was her first husband.  They married in 1913 but he died in 1916 and she had one son from that, my Uncle Tasker.  In fact, I'm mixing up the names again.  It's John O. Mars, M-A-R-S.  And his son was Tasker, T-A-S-K-E-R, O. Mars [Tasker O. Mars].  And I don't know what the letter O stands for.  My Uncle Tasker I knew quite well.  I mean, he died in 1984 [sic. 1986].  And then, sh- her second husband was my grandfather, Lawrence Leopold Kydd [Lawrence Kydd].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486637
Speaker 1: Now were any of the relatives on your mother's [Ruth Kydd Dash] side involve- involved in the Garvey movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my--both Lawrence Leopold Kydd [Lawrence Kydd] and my grandmother, Ethel, Ethel Coblins Kydd, were Garveyites.  And she talked about going to Garvey meetings and being members of the Negro Improvement, what was the name of his--
Speaker 1: The Universal Negro Improvement Association.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Universal--yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right, being members of that, right.  And they were quite excited about that period.  In fact, in fact, when I talked to her about it, it was almost like she became animated.  When I was discussing it with her, she was a woman in her late seventies or early eighties, and she was quite animated in this, remembering that period and how exciting that period was.  And she and her husband going to the meeting at the Elks club, when Garvey [Marcus Garvey] came to New Bedford [Massachusetts] to give a talk.  And my grandfather telling her, "Hurry up, hurry up, woman," (laughter).  "Get your clothes on," (laughter).  And she telling him, "Larry, be, be calm, be calm; we're gonna get there in time," you know (laughter).  So, that was quite exciting for the two of them apparently, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they hold positions in the, in the UNIA that you know of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so, I mean, she didn't mention that.  But they were firm supporters of the organization and they may, I mean, they didn't have any large incomes.  My grandfather, when he wasn't out on whaling ships--.  And he went out on quite a few whaling ships.  In fact, there's a great story about a, I can't think of the name again of a whaling ship that was very well known as one of the most successful whaling ships and captained by a very, a very good captain.  And on this particular, he had been on this ship several times, and on this particular voyage she asked him and begged him not to go, for whatever reason I don't know, and he didn't go and the ship left port and it was never seen again.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Good advice (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there, there, there were quite a few of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was surprised he listened to her advice 'cause he was very stubborn and hardheaded but she must have really convinced him that she needed him at home.  And then he did work in, in the mills and that work eventually petered out into nothing.
Speaker 1: That's in the textile mills, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there wasn't a lot of income that they had.  She worked as a domestic, he went out on ships and he also, when he stopped going out on ships, worked in the mills but they were financial contributors to that Garvey movement, what little money they had.
Story_ID: 486638
Speaker 1: With your grandfather's boarding house and all that, was that your grandfather or your great- that was your--
Speaker 2: That was my [maternal] great-grandfather [Robert Coblins] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) great-grandfather had a boarding house, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was her father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother's [Ethel Coblins Kydd] father, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  I imagine they had, there was some status in the community [in New Bedford, Massachusetts] associated with that kind of thing, I guess?
Speaker 2: I imagine so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I'm not clear on what the status was, but he, he my, my great-grandfather had a particular status because when he died there was this long obituary, which I've gotten.  He actually was killed in a railroad accident in Providence, Rhode Island, where his oldest daughter was living by this time.  I believe, the date is 1912, I'm not sure about that.  But I have, actually have the news clipping and there were two trains and he was crossing tracks and there were two trains coming in opposite directions, on separate tracks, they weren't headed for a collision, but somehow he got a, he got caught between the two of them and actually ended up beheaded.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 486639
Speaker 1: What does your mother say about growing up?  Now, she grew up in New Bedford [Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was, what were her circumstances growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she, and she has a younger brother named Collins, C-O-L-L-I-N-S [Collins Kydd].  They were a year apart, he was born in 1920, I forget the month, and she was born May 5, 1919.  They were hard times.  Oh, well, they were growing, there were three; it was their step- their half-brother, who they didn't consider a half-brother, Tasker [Tasker O. Mars], the older one, my grandmother's [Ethel Coblins Kydd] first son.  And then, and he was being raised by my grandfather [Lawrence Kydd] and my mother and her younger brother.  And she said a lot of the times were hard particularly after the Depression [Great Depression] hit.  She would have been ten years old when the Depression started in 1929.  And they both talked about--I never talked about these things with my Uncle Tasker but with my mother and my Uncle Collins I have talked about it.  In fact, I've interviewed them about it.  And they both said that it was rough.  There were a number of times when a man would come by and cut off the water because they hadn't paid the water bill.  They couldn't afford to buy coal because coal was a source of heat in the winter on some days.  It was a day to day existence.  My grandmother had bought a house which, which gave her a considerable status.  In fact, my grandfather married her after she had bought her house, so that it was her house.  But at times--and she, they lived on the second floor of the house and that's the house that I went to frequently as a child 'cause my parents would ship me out of New York City [New York, New York] up to New Bedford and so I knew that house quite well.  But, so, the house was hers and she had boarders on the first floor, in the first floor apartment.  But still there were days when there was no money in the house.  They never talked about going without any food, but there were times when there was no heat, and the water was turned off.  My mother does remember the first--she was entering adolescence or was in her early adolescence, she remembers when they bought a phone, installed a phone and it was a party line phone; it was the only kind of phone you could get.  And she was just fascinated by it 'cause she said, you know, this voice coming through the wires just fascinated her and her mother and father had to chase her away from the phone, "Ruth [Ruth Kydd Dash], leave that phone alone" (laughter).  And they were afraid that the other people on the party line, I don't know how many people it were, would hear her getting on and think that people are eavesdropping on, yeah, that they were eavesdropping on them or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For those who don't understand what a party line is, it's one phone, phone line fed a lot of different people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it was like an extension.  Now, if you pick up on it, you could hear them and their conversation.
Speaker 2: Exactly and you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you were supposed to, the etiquette required you to hang up quietly and wait 'til they got off the line before you used it, right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of times people didn't do that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people, some people eavesdropped too, I believe, (laughter) given human nature, (laughter) yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was not a line that you talked about family secrets on.
Story_ID: 486640
Speaker 1: Now, was that, I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I keeping thinking in mind was, was the house near the ocean?
Speaker 2: No.  It was, the West End of New Bedford [Massachusetts], the, it's, is the furthest part of the city away from the harbor, okay.  It's west of the harbor.
Speaker 1: Is there a correlation between most of the money being made at sea and the black people having to live further away from the, the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It could be because the large homes that you find, you, you know what a widow's walk is?  It's a part at the top of a very large house looking down into the harbor because the harbor is on low land and New Bedford comes up from the harbor like this (gesture) right, and then it plateaus out and the West End is over here, right, at the far end.  But on this hill you had these huge captains' houses and ship owners' houses, and the widow's walk is the area where the wife would walk waiting for her husband's ship to come back into harbor.  And sometimes you walked there for a long time because the ships never knew how long they were going to be out, particularly whaling ships.  Because they were ordered not to return until the ship's hull was full, right.  'Cause they butchered the whales right there at sea and boiled the oil down.  The oil was really what was used for cooking lamps.  This is before you had petroleum, right.  And then all parts of the whale were used.  The whale bones were used for women's corsets; everything was sold.  And but some ships didn't come back, they got caught in a storm and sunk.  And the widow's walk were these huge houses; they're very, they're quite, the, the houses that are up-kept are quite attractive, very attractive.  And it was one family's house.  Today they would be seen as a mansion, but they were just considered a house then, wealthy people.  And at the top is an area where the wife can watch the harbor and watch for her husband's ship to return.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And that's called widow's walk because many ships did not return.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as you, I, I remember seeing something about ghosts on television when they were talking about ghosts walking in New England, you know, and the widow's walk, now that you mentioned it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, widow's walk, right, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And those are some of the best, most attractive houses in New Bedford, yeah, the ones with widow's walks, and they all have widow's walks, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in New Bedford the black people lived on the West End basically?
Speaker 2: Most, most part.
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: And in the South End [New Bedford, Massachusetts], Cape Verdeans, you know anything about the Cape Verde islands off the West Coast of Africa, off Senegal?  Cape Verdeans mainly in the South End and West Indian blacks in the West End.  And now that has all been, that's all mixed up.  You used to, the two communities used to be relatively separate and mutually hostile, but a lot of that has been eradicated by subsequent generations.  There's a lot of intermarriage in my family among West Indians and Cape Verdeans, or West Indian Americans or the descendants of West Indians and so on, so.  All of that mutual hostility for the most part has evaporated because both communities see themselves as minority African American communities today.  And that wasn't the case in generation past.  West Indians saw themselves as better than Cape Verdeans.  Cape Verdeans saw themselves (laughter) as better, as better than West Indians and probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And both of them thought they were better than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --African Americans.
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and, and it was ridiculous.
Story_ID: 486641
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Cape Verdeans and the West Indians and the African Americans.  What's the relationship between these three groups who become African Americans I guess (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, in--today the, the three communities have merged.  I, you would be hard to distinguish between the three communities.  But, my understanding was, in the generation of my grandparents, that there were distinct communities of West Indians, African Americans and Cape Verdeans in New Bedford, Massachusetts.  And there was more interaction, I believe, in my grandparents' generation between We- black West Indians and black African Americans than there were between Cape Verdeans and the other two communities.  But today you, you, I don't think you can distinguish between the two.  If you were to distinguish you would be, you would distinguish by surnames, but--with the Cape Verdeans having Portuguese names.  Those--I don't believe those old prejudices and mutual hostilities still exist; or if they do, they have been minimized.  I visited the Cape Verde islands in 1981 as a reporter so I did stories on the Cape Verde islands and their--and the people in the Cape Verde islands.  One of the things that I discovered in that process was that most black Cape Verdeans were the descendants of black women who had been brought to the Cape Verde islands and there weren't a lot of Portuguese me- women who came to the Cape Verde islands so the black population is--descended from Cape Verdean, I mean, Portuguese men and African women.  And Praia [Cape Verde], the capital, was a major transshipment point for slaves coming from West Africa because any slaves that were ill were sold in the Cape Verdean capital, the major island, Praia, before the ship did the cross- Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] crossing to the New World.  So, it's clear that we're all descendants of Africans.
Story_ID: 486642
Speaker 1: Where did your mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] attend school?  Was it a segregated school system in--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in New Bedford [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: No, it was--the school system in New Bedford wasn't segregated.  She went to Cook elementary [Clarence P. Cook School, New Bedford, Massachusetts], which is a block, one block west of her house.  It's--my [maternal] grandmother's [Ethel Coblins Kydd] house was at a place called 6 Testin Street [ph.], which no longer exists.  New Bedford after a riot in '69 [1969] went through a lot of urban redevelopment and a lot of houses were torn down and a lot of the area of the West End [New Bedford, Massachusetts] was rebuilt.  But she went to Cook elementary school and Cedar Street School [New Bedford, Massachusetts] and New Bedford High School [New Bedford, Massachusetts], of course; she graduated from New Bedford High School at eighteen.  So wou- 1937, right?  And then she went off to, over her mother's protests, she applied to two nursing schools to become a registered nurse.  One was Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] here in Chicago [Illinois] and the other was Lincoln School of Nursing [sic. Lincoln School for Nurses] in New York City [New York, New York].  She did this without her mother's knowledge and when she was accepted at both nursing schools her mother opposed her going to either because anything outside of New Bedford, particularly Chicago, was the land of gangsters and New York City wasn't much better (laughter).  And they, and, and my mother was insistent that she wasn't staying in New Bedford; she was getting out of New Bedford and getting out into the world.  And so they compromised on New York City because my grandmother's youngest sister, my Aunt Christine [Christine Coblins] was living in New York City and so she felt that at least my mother would have a refuge to go to and someone to rely on in case of an emergency or anything like that.  So that's how my mother came to New York at age nineteen to enter Lincoln School of Nursing, which was a black school of nursing with--she described it as a black school of nursing with Jewish doctors.  Most of the doctors there were Jewish, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it associated with Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.  I don't believe so.  I'm not sure about that, but I don't believe so, yeah.  It no longer exists.  It's no longer there.
Speaker 1: I just wondered where they practiced, you know, I mean, were they--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know that much detail about it.  I know it was a three year course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever work for Harlem Hospital after she--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --when she finished the course?
Speaker 2: --when she became a visiting home nurse.  She worked, she actually retired from the New York City health department [New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene], but first she was a visiting home nurse for welfare mothers, young welfare mothers in Harlem [New York, New York], and she was headquartered at Harlem Hospital, right across the street from where we were living.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: And then she went back to school; she went back for additional schooling.  Well, I remember this as a kid growing up, she went to Columbia University [New York, New York] to get a Bachelor of Science degree because she wanted to move up in the New York City health department, and she needed more education to be able to do that.  And then she went to Columbia, no, NYU [New York University, New York, New York], sorry, for a, a master's [degree] in something to do with health science; I don't remember exactly what it was, but it was connected with her work with the New York City health department, yeah.  And finally she became an administrator of a clinic in the Bronx [New York] and that's what she, she retired from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So she, she progressed, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --up through the ranks and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --attended, you know, finished, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --kept rising in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --terms of her education.
Story_ID: 486643
Speaker 1: Let me go now to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Right.  The same as mine--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, where does the DeCosta come from?
Speaker 2: The DeCosta is from the Jewish side of our family.  And this is something that I've discovered doing research on my family in Barbados.  I went back and forth to Barbados, '92 [1992] to '95 [1995], doing research, research in the archives.  And I knew from my father's older brother, his godfather had the name of--he was a black man but he had the name of Proute, P-R-O-U-T-E.  Hm, I just thought it was an English name because the Proutes were from Barbados.  And, but when I went to, I went to Canada some years ago in the summer of 2000 and--to visit a cousin who told me no, the Proutes were the Jewish branch of our family.  These were, and they were traced back to Jews who fled the Netherlands in the 17th century, and fled to Brazil to a little enclave that was controlled by the Dutch in Brazil.  And then the Portuguese, this is an area of Brazil (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that Suriname or, or--
Speaker 2: No, not Suriname.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's not it, that's north of, that's north South America, this was on the Atlantic Coast of Brazil.  And I believe the city was called Recine, R-E-C-I-N-E, but I may be wrong.
Speaker 1: Recife [Brazil]?
Speaker 2: Recife.
Speaker 1: Recife.
Speaker 2: Right, it was right on the coast.  And this area, this enclave had been conquered by the Dutch from the Portuguese, and then the Portuguese reconquered it in 1654 and expelled all of the Jewish population.  And that Jewish population then went into the New World and part of them came to Barbados and established the first synagogue, the same year, 1654.  And that synagogue is still standing.  And that's how, my understanding, is how the Proutes came to Barbados.  And the speculation that actually that this Jewish population brought the windmill to Barbados which became very part, an integral part of producing sugar from sugar cane, crushing the sugar cane and so on.  And they, this, this Jewish population established itself in Barbados and became plantation owners as well as slave owners and intermingled with the slave population to produce black offspring, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, I'm sorry, I didn't ask you, what's your father's date of birth and place of birth (laughter)?  I think we know the place.
Speaker 2: He was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: July 4, 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  New York City.  And his, his roots are in Barbados?
Speaker 2: His father and mother both were from Barbados.  His father was Willis Hamilton Dash, who had been born in Barbados in 1894.  And his mother was Ivy Bishop, B as in boy, I-S-H-O-P, Dash [Ivy Bishop Dash].  I forget the year of her birth but she died after, my brother ha- my father had an older brother, Lester Dash, Willis Lester Dash, who is still living, then my father was the second child, the third child was Gordon Hamilton Dash.  He was born in 1918 and his mother, my grandmother, Ivy Bishop Dash, died during the Spanish influenza pandemic; she was killed by the flu in 1918.  And then my grandfather, Wil- Willis Hamilton Dash, sent his three sons to live in Barbados until he remarried.  And after he remarried, my father and his two brothers were then brought back to New York City.  All three boys were born in New York City (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they spent a lot of time in Barbados?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: Apparently.
Speaker 2: --they spent a couple of years there.  And then my grandfather remarried a woman from Barbados named Sylvia Cumberbatch, C-U-M-B-E-R-B-A-T-C-H [Sylvia Cumberbatch Dash].  And then they were brought back to live with my--their father and their stepmother in New York City, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he grew up in, in Harlem [New York, New York] basically?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they grew up--116th Street and west of 5th Avenue.  I think it's betwe- it was between, in New York City, it's between Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard] and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] on 116th Street, yes.
Story_ID: 486644
Speaker 1: There any stories in your father's [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] family about, about life in Barbados or, or--?
Speaker 2: My father, my youngest, my father's younger brother had no memory of the visit.  But there is a story about my father and his older brother getting into devilishness, that's what it was referred to, being devilish.  They, they were being raised by, and they were living with their maternal grandmother, their mother's [Ivy Bishop Dash] mother, Jane Warren Bishop is her name and they called her Granny Bishop.  And there's a, I think it's called confirmation, there's a big thing in Barbados in the Anglican church or was at this period, when a girl is confirmed or brought into the church, and she's about eleven, twelve, thirteen, and she wears a white dress and they were living with my grand- my grandmother, my great-grandmother, their grandmother, and a girl in, in the neighborhood that they were living in was coming out of her house on this Sunday on her way to this confirmation ceremony, which was a major ceremony, and my Uncle Lester [Willis Lester Dash], no- and I've asked them all, I've interviewed them about that and the only one who, who didn't remember it was the youngest one, Gordon [Gordon Hamilton Dash].  But Lester saw the girl coming down the lane and there was a big mud puddle right in front of the area where she would walk, and so he instigated the youngest one, Gordon, who has no memory of this incident, to, he said to the, Gordon, "Go push her in the mud."  And Gordon did it.  The girl walked by and then Gordon ran up behind her and pushed her and she fell face forward into this big mud puddle.  And she got up crying, of course, and went back up the hill to her mother.  And the mother came down the aisle pulling her daughter with her, and my, my father imitated the, the Bajan accent that the woman had, pulling her daughter behind her and saying, "Ms. Bishop, Ms. Bishop, you see what your Yankee brats, your Yankee brats have done to my daughter?"  And my father said if looks could kill he knew (laughter) he and Lester were dead.  And he was trying to protest his innocence and she said, "I don't even wanna hear it."  She didn't do anything to the youngest one but Lester and my father got a severe whipping with her strap, yeah.  They didn't push anymore little girls into the mud puddles, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So they were Episcopals, I guess, here in this country, right?
Speaker 2: Episcopal, it would be the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Episcopal church, which I think there's a distinction, those who follow the Anglican rituals are called high Episcopal.  And they're generally--
Speaker 1: Perhaps, but, but I know the Episcopal church basically--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is related to the Anglican church.  They--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they both--
Speaker 2: Directly--
Speaker 1: --honor the Archbishop of Canterbury--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they have, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it's, and that worldwide Episcopal and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Anglican Communion and all that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They're all together.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is your, is your mother's [Ruth Kydd Dash] family Episcopal as well?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was raised in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church in New Bedford [Massachusetts] and later became a Pres- Presbyterian.  And I was raised in a Presbyterian church.  I'm not a Presbyterian today but I was raised in the Church of the Master in Harlem [New York, New York], 122nd Street and Morningside Avenue.  By--the, the minister that I grew up with was James Robinson [James Herman Robinson] who was the founder of Crossroads Africa [Operation Crossroads Africa].
Story_ID: 486645
Speaker 1: Where did your father go to school in New York?
Speaker 2: My father went to school in New York City [New York, New York], he went to elementary school.  I remember him, I remember at one point we had a conversation and he was talking about going to Cooper Junior High School [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School], and he was saying--and Cooper Junior High School was in Harlem [New York, New York], but he was saying when he went to Cooper Junior High School it was predominantly white, you know.  But I had this image of Harlem being all black--
Speaker 1: All the time.
Speaker 2: --all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I subsequently read [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis' 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' and I really understood then the transition in Harlem began in 1905 and was a slow transition as blacks were funneled into Harlem, right.  So, so it made sense to me then that Harlem was mainly, well, Cooper Junior High School was mainly white when my father attended.  And he went to DeWitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York] after that, but he didn't graduate, he didn't finish high school.
Speaker 1: DeWitt Clinton is that in Brooklyn [New York], is that--
Speaker 2: No, it's in Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: The Bronx, okay.
Speaker 2: In the Bronx.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what happened that he, he didn't graduate?  Was there a story about that?
Speaker 2: I never understood that and I don't know why.  I, I except that to, I could only speculate that he felt the need to go out to work 'cause he went to work with the U.S. Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right away?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, but he didn't finish high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was he, did he--
Speaker 2: He got a high school equivalency degree while he was in the [U.S.] Army during World War II [WWII] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I was just gone ask about the Army.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So he was in World War II, right?
Speaker 2: But he didn't, he didn't graduate from high school and I don't know the, I don't know the, what was going on.
Speaker 1: Did he join--while still in high school, did he join the Army?
Speaker 2: No, he was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, his younger brother knew about the racism in the [U.S.] Navy and that blacks were being drafted into the Navy to work as cooks and stewards, not as fighting men, as fighting sailors.  So remember my uncle's name is Gordon Hamilton Dash, so they both were drafted at the same time but were reported, were ordered to report on different days, and Gordon was to report before my father.  And so, when the, during the re- the oath process, when it was clear to Gordon that they were trying to make the oath so that he would go into the Navy, he refused.  Said, "I'm not going in the Navy."  And they tried to coerce him, he said, "I don't care what you do, you can put me in jail, I am not going into the Navy."  And they argued with him and, you know, he just stood his ground.  He said, "You put me in the Army or I'm not going into the service, but I'm not going into the Navy."  And he was very clear about why he was not--, "I'm not working as someone's cook or steward."  And so they relented and put him in the Army.  The next day in walks my father, now these are the same officials, and they said, "What's your name?"  He said, "Leon DeCosta Dash [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.]."  They said, "Are you related to Gordon Hamilton Dash?"  He said, "Yes, that's my younger brother."  They put my father in the Army.  They didn't wanna start another argument (laughter) and another scene.  And my father knew what had happened, you know, but at the same time he was determined not to go into the Navy either, but they didn't even give him an argument; they just put him in the Army.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486646
Speaker 1: I forgot--
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to ask you I think what your grandfather did for a living?  What, what your father's [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] father did for a living?
Speaker 2: What did, what about him?
Speaker 1: What, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, Willis Hamilton Dash, he worked at, I'm trying to think of the name, one of the sugar manufacturer companies in New Jersey.  I don't know what he did there, but he worked there.  And they hired him, he was one of the few blacks that they hired.  They hired him on the assumption that he understood sugar because he was from Barbados, right.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was a color bar there in terms of employment but they made an exception for him because he came from a sugar producing island.
Story_ID: 486647
Speaker 1: Now when your father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] joined the [U.S.] Army did, did he go overseas?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was drafted.
Speaker 1: Drafted, okay.
Speaker 2: Drafted in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry.  But did he go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, he ended up going, he ended up in a, a Quartermaster outfit [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps] like most black men and actually rose to a master sergeant in this Quartermaster outfit.  And--
Speaker 1: And for those who don't know what that is quartermasters are, I mean, the Quartermaster Corps is--
Speaker 2: Handle the supplies.
Speaker 1: --the corps that handles supplies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and distribution.
Speaker 1: Clean up and (unclear) latrines and all.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  And so he was the, in the second wave or the third wave, I'm not sure, coming into Normandy [France]; not in the first wave.  And he was with the group that established the major depot, I believe, in Antwerp [Belgium].  The depot that the Germans were trying to get to during the Battle of the Bulge in December of '44 [1944], right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was a major supply depot for the rest of the Army (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, 'cause my father when he saw that the Germans were headed for Antwerp, which was a major supply depot for the U.S. Army, with gasoline, tanks, and cars, and ammunition and so on.  And he, he thought the Germans would get to Antwerp and he was, he said he remembered saying 'cause he had gotten word--I was born when he and--was on the troopship, the second day out on the troop ship on their way to England, that's when I was born, March 16, 1944.  And the Red Cross [American Red Cross] sent word to the ship that I had been born and everything was fine.  But when the Germans were headed toward Antwerp he didn't think he was gonna make it out, he said, "Oh, we're, none of us are gonna get out of here alive," that was his attitude.  So he was happy the Germans didn't make it to Antwerp, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was fairly fierce fighting, you know.
Speaker 1: I wanna go back a minute here before I forget this.  Now, this is--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --this is important.  Your, your parents have met before he goes into the service, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, my parents actually married in October of 1941.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how, how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause my, my--remember Aunt Christine [Christine Coblins] was why my grandmother, Ethel Coblins Kydd, relented on my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] going away to New York City [New York, New York] to go to nursing school.  And so my mother would, and she would bring some of her girlfriends with her from the nursing school to my Aunt Christine's house, where they would socialize and party.  And my Aunt Christine had a lot of parties, you know.  And my Uncle Gordon [Gordon Hamilton Dash] and my father were always at these parties, so that's how my parents met.  And my father at the time, they both told me this story, began dating my mother and he also was dating another woman named Ruth [ph.].  And my mother found out--
Speaker 1: So that's two Ruths?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).  So my mother found out, she said, "No, no, no, I don't play that," (laughter).  "You make up your mind."  And my father quickly made up his mind.  So they began dating while she was still at Lincoln School of Nursing [sic. Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York], and then they married in October of '41 [1941] at, at her mother's house in New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he was working, already working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  So then when he, she became pregnant with me in '42 [1942], they were both living in New York City.  Right after he was drafted, she went back to New Bedford to live with her mother, and that's why I ended up being born in New Bedford.  I have a younger brother [Alan Dash], but he was born in New York, nine years later, yeah.
Story_ID: 486648
Speaker 1: Did your father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] have, ever tell any stories about what happened in the, well, we were talking about the Antwerp [Belgium], his--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --anticipation--
Speaker 2: The Battle of the Bulge, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that the Germans were gonna, you know, seize the supply depot, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seize the supply depot, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what, I, I kind of interrupted that story so what--the Germans didn't get there apparently but what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, nothing he, he went through the war.  He was not in a combat unit, so he was not involved in any fighting, and he just went through the war.  Let's see, he didn't have a lot of stories to tell except when Paris [France] was conquered and he visited Paris.  And, of course, he was in Belgium as the Germans were being pushed out and that kind of thing.  But outside of him not thinking that he was gonna survive the Battle of the Bulge, no, he didn't have any stories to tell, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he never really reflected on how the, the [U.S.] Army treated the black soldiers or, or--
Speaker 2: He didn't, no.  But one of his best friends who he met in that Quartermaster unit [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps], a man who is well known here in Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Timuel Black, well, he and my father were very close right up to my father's death.  In fact, Tim delivered the eulogy at my father's funeral in February of 2005 down in Champaign, Illinois.  Well, there is this story that has some humor to it.  Tim is a well-known activist but Tim was not excited--I've interviewed Tim too and Tim was not planning to join the Army.  In fact, when Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was bombed, Tim didn't know, like most people didn't know that we had a major [U.S.] military base there, he thought Pearl Harbor was a woman who had, who had got, drank too much (laughter).  And said well--
Speaker 1: Bombed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's how he felt that she ended up bombed.  But, and he later found out that it was actually a major naval base.  But any rate he and, and my father tell a version of this story and there's probably a germ of truth on both sides.  When my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] was getting close to labor with me and my father knew that (unclear) were gonna be shipped out just before I was due, my father planned to go AWOL, Absent Without Leave [Absent Without Official Leave].  And Tim tells the story that he kept my father from going AWOL.  And my father didn't see it as, I asked him about it and he, my father didn't see it as any big deal.  He said, "I was going to go AWOL and go to New Bedford [Massachusetts] to see your mother and then come back; I wasn't planning to desert, but I didn't see it as any big deal."  But the other, Tim and the other black soldiers kept him from going, yeah.  Not physically restrained him, just talked him out of it.  (Cough) And on my father's side he said, now, Tim doesn't tell you that I kept him from deserting, he was planning, (laughter) he was planning to leave, he said, "I'm not gonna go fight in this man's war."  And so that was a big point of humor, whenever the two of them got together I would bring it up and they would tell versions of that story and embellish and change it (laughter) as time went on, you know, it was quite funny but they remained good, very good friends from that experience in World War II [WWII] right up to my father's death.
Story_ID: 486649
Speaker 1: Any other stories about the war?
Speaker 2: World War II [WWII], no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So would he, did he come in '46 [1946], '45 [1945] or '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945] or '46 [1946].  By the time he came back I was two, I believe, so that would be '46 [1946] or maybe late- yeah, '46 [1946].  Because it, there is a, a family tale that when he came back from World War II and came up to New Bedford [Massachusetts] to get my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] and I, when he would sit next to my mother on the couch, I didn't like that and I would go and push myself in between them and sit up and look at him with a scowl on my face like, you know, who are you, you know.  And they thought that was quite hu- funny, yeah.
Speaker 1: You probably didn't then (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess.  Now, now, what did your father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] do at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]?
Speaker 2: When--for, for a good part of my life he was a post office clerk, sorting mail at the main post office building in the Bronx [New York].  And he, where we lived in Harlem [New York, New York] was right near the 138th Street bridge [Madison Avenue Bridge], and he literally would walk there which was on a 149th Street, and walk home.  We lived at 135th [Street] and 5th Avenue in Harlem, so he walked to work and walked home.  And then he gradually was promoted later in his life and became the Bronx superintendent of mail for the entire borough.  Which he explained to me, from his point of view, was the highest that he could get without becoming, playing politics, institutional politics within the post office, or being active in either the Republican or Democratic Party.  He didn't, that was not, never an interest of his to be active in, either institutional politics, or either of the political parties.  So, I believe, that is as high as he could go with civil service appointments.  He was still selected to become the superintendent of the Bronx that's, you know, that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he retired in the mid-1970s as superintendent of distribution of mail in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, he's somebody who is, he's somebody that starts at the post office, becomes a master sergeant in the [U.S.] Army--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --then a superintendent at the post office--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did he ever go back to school at all (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he got his general equivalency degree [General Educational Development (GED)] while he was in the Army, but he never went back to school.  He supported--my mother tried to get him to go back to school particularly when she decided to go and get her bachelor's [degree].  And his, his response was, if I get this right, no, he said, "I want you to go ahead and do that."  And he, he felt, yeah, he said it was too late for, it was too late for him.  I don't think it was but that was the attitude so he just supported her both in getting her bachelor's degree and her master's [degree].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that but, but I suppose, you know, being a superintendent in the post office is a pretty good job in the black community for most people?
Speaker 2: It was, oh yeah, it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First he became a station master in one of the elite sections of New York City [New York, New York] called Riverdale, which is in the Bronx.  People in the, people who live in Riverdale never say they live in the Bronx.  (Laughter) And I always make a point of saying, "You live in the Bronx."  But they always say, "I live in Riverdale."  I say, "Oh, that's the Bronx" (laughter).  And he used to have, people would come in complaining about their mail not getting to them in time or being lost and not receiving mail that they were expecting.  And he would say, "Well, what did you put on as your return address or your address?"  He s- and they would say, "Riverdale."  He said, "Well, that's not, that's not an address, you're supposed to put Bronx, New York, not Riverdale, New York."  (Laughter) He took great delight in doing that.  He would do it with a straight face, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 486650
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] personalities and their talents and their proclivities and temperaments and--who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take a, a mixture of both.  My mother was--my father was a relatively stern person, disciplinarian, believed in hard work and doing things correctly and being on time.  My mother was the same in that respect in terms of work but was a soft, was a softer personality and is a softer personality.  She still lives, she's still living; she lives with me.  And they played off each other very well because she had a tendency to be able to soften his edges, and his edges were very sharp in terms of what, what you should do and what you shouldn't do.  And, and rigid in some respects in terms of what, how he viewed how one should go through life.  She had this tendency and an ability to soften those edges at different times.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say he wasn't party affiliated at all or did, didn't believe--
Speaker 2: No, no, he wasn't politically active, yeah, but I imagine he voted all of his life Democratic, in the Democratic Party.  But he wasn't a registered Democrat, yeah.  He voted for those candidates, yeah, both in city politics and in national politics.
Speaker 1: Were your parents involved in, in--
Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --clubs or organizations in, in, in Harlem [New York, New York] aside from--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the church [Church of the Master, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 2: No.  Outside of church, no.  They were not club--my mother had, my mother belonged to a woman's club that she was one of the founders of and it was a group of friends.  And I only became, I only remembered it in recent years 'cause one of the members sent me a photograph of them as young women, young adult women.  And I, I can't remember the name, but, you know, that petered out after a short while, but she never was active in any other organization.  She was a scout master or, not a scout master, was--den mother in my Cub Scout troop and she was literally the den mother of my section of the troop.  And we would all gather at my house on Saturday when I was in the Cub Scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if it was every Saturday or every other Saturday or once a month, I forget the sequence, and do merit badge work and organize activities.
Story_ID: 486651
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a younger brother, and my brother is Alan, A-L-A-N, Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Dash [Alan Dash].  And he was born June 20th, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's pretty--
Speaker 2: Nine years between us.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nine years, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Okay.  So you were, you were the only child for a long time?
Speaker 2: For a long time I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] question.  Give me the, your earliest school memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is sort of a hysterical kindergarten teacher.  Actually, my earliest memory is preschool, but nothing stands out.  And I, I remember when it was located--that block has all been torn down now through urban renewal--on 135th Street, between 5th [Avenue] and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard].
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the preschool.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember kindergarten very clearly, P.S., I went to P.S. 133 [Fred R. Moore School], which is at 132nd Street and 5th Avenue [New York, New York].  And I believe the, my kindergarten teacher's name was Ms. Redhead [ph.].  And she actually had red hair, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ms. Redhead?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, I remember that very clearly.  And I remember her breaking down crying because there were a group of us in this kindergarten class and we all lived in the same housing development called the Riverton, R-I-V-E-R-T as in Tom, O-N [Riverton Houses, New York, New York].  And we all had been at preschool--this is how it played out because she was very frustrated that she couldn't get our attention and we were running around and not paying attention to what she was doing and so on.  So, something I didn't know that they had a room, a small room there with a one way mirror, and she asked our, our parents, and there were three or four of us who were like this, and she asked our parents to come to the school and watch us in the classroom 'cause she, she was, I think she was brand new, I mean, this was her first teaching assignment, and we were driving her crazy because we wouldn't, we were, we would get up and do things in the middle of the lesson or whatever she was trying to do; we weren't attentive to what she was trying to do.  And all of the parents, my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] was there, all of the parents came to the conclusion these were all children of two parents, both parents were working, so they had already been in preschool.  And our preschools, we had done everything that she was trying to do in kindergarten, we had already done that, we already knew the alphabet, we were already at early stages of reading, and whatever she came up with it was something that we had already done, and so we were bored.  So they put us, they put all of us I believe, I know they put me out of kindergarten and put me in the first grade and my teacher's name was Ms. Wright [ph.].
Story_ID: 486652
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Remember her, still remember her very clearly.
Speaker 1: Was, were, were, were your teachers [at P.S. 133, Fred R. Moore School, New York, New York] all black or was--
Speaker 2: No, Ms. Redhead [ph.] was white.
Speaker 1: --Ms. Redhead was white, okay.
Speaker 2: Ms. Wright [ph.] was a black woman.  And I was her pet, to be frank.
Speaker 1: Okay now--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was always, I was always getting into trouble, very mischievous.  And whenever she stepped out of the room I was always doing something.  And then when she came back she'd, something, you know, something like throw the eraser at some other boy in the room and she would ask, "Well how did the eraser get over there?"  And they'd all point to me, "Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] did it."  And so that was every time something went wrong.  And she said, "Leon can't be doing all of this by himself."  (Laughter) And they said, "Yes, he is."  (Laughter) And there's a funny story there too.  That I, I don't remember doing this, but it sounded like me.  At one point she called my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] to school, or there was a regular teacher, mother, parent conference, and she was nervous around my mother, my mother couldn't figure out what was wrong with her, you know, why are you standing, you know, why are you so nervous around me?  Well, she expected this tough, cigar chomping woman to show up, but apparently she had asked me, what did my mother do for a living?  I said my mother drove a taxi 'cause I thought taxi drivers were the greatest people in the world, so I wanted my mother to be a taxi driver, not a visiting home nurse, I mean, how boring.  And so, she expected, you know, there were women taxi drivers in New York City [New York, New York] and they were some of the toughest women (laughter) had to be, in the world.  So, eventually Ms. Wright asked my mother, "Do you drive a taxi?"  My mother said, "No, I don't drive" (laughter) "any taxi."  And she told her, "I'm a visiting home nurse."  (Laughter) And so they both had a great laugh.  Then my mother figured out that I had told Ms. Wright this because I loved taxi drivers.  And I loved riding in taxis, you know.  In fact, whenever my mother and I were traveling, when we were getting ready to go home I'd run out in the street and yell, "Taxi!"  She said, "Get over here" (laughter) "I'm not taking a taxi," and take the bus, you know.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had a real, you had a real active imagination, I mean, in terms of being able, it's almost like a Walter Mitty thing in one ways, you, you, you projected your mother as a taxi driver because you liked taxis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Walter Mitty sort of--I don't know if I agree with that because Walter Mitty sort of imagines himself, he has fantasies about himself, but I wanted my mother to be a taxi driver.
Story_ID: 486653
Speaker 1: How did you do in school?  Were you a good student (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a, I was an average student all the way through school.  I never really applied myself.  And it was always a frustration for a number of my teachers.  I applied myself in classes that I liked, in subjects that I liked.  And I, I coasted in all other subjects.  I did fairly well.  There was a really function between a C and a B average.  But--
Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Reading and history, literature, those were--writing, composition were some of my favorite- math was something I just did because you were required to do it.  I, early on I became interested in civics.  Hm, don't, I don't, don't ask me to explain why that became an interest of mine, and human interaction.  And that really began to grow when I was in high school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did, were there any teachers that served as mentors in high, I mean, in grade school [P.S. 133, Fred R. Moore School, New York, New York], I mean, I mean, grade school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes, one, one, woman really rescued me because by the fourth grade I had fallen behind in my reading, don't know why, I don't understand what was happening except that when I look back at it now, I knew there were some teachers who really didn't have our interests at heart.  And I subsequently--see my, I couldn't get into a lot of trouble at my elementary school because my godmother who lived in our building [Riverton Houses, New York, New York] was the secretary to the principal of my elementary school, Dorothy Walker [ph.], Dorothy Quon at the time, Q-U-O-N.  And all she had to do was get word.  Our principal her, she was a woman named Ms. Douglas [ph.].  All she had to do was go home and there was a report that I had been misbehaving at school.  And my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] believed in spanking with a hard brush on a bare bottom (laughter).  So, you know, it was but so much acting out I did at school.  But what, what was the, I'm sorry, I've lost the question (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm just asking you who were the mentors, I guess, in grade school that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I wanted to bring up Miriam Sloan, she was a, the, the wife of a surgeon [Samuel Sloan] in New York City [New York, New York], prominent surgeon and she was my fourth grade teacher.  And somehow I was measured in my reading, and I was behind in my reading.  I was in the fourth grade maybe reading at a third or second grade level.  And she gave, she took me under her wing and she gave me an incredible amount of what I considered extra work to do, and it all revolved around reading.  And she worked with me for that year.  And, by the time she finished with me, I was reading at a fifth or sixth grade level, by the time I was getting ready to move to the fifth grade.  And that that that just kept up.  I never fell behind again.  So I remember her very clearly.  She was a white woman.  And, but I can still see her face the day she told me I was reading above grade level, and the big smile on her face 'cause she knew she had accomplished that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was very serious about, there's a humorous story that I learned years later, and I don't have a memory of this either.  At one point Ms. Sloan, my teacher, sent me to the principal's office on an errand, and my godmother, of course, was there and I referred to her as Aunt Dorothy.  And I delivered whatever I had to deliver to my Aunt Dorothy, and then my Aunt Dorothy asked me to run another errand in another part of the school and she said, "Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], can you go and do--?"  I said, "No, no, no, Ms. Sloan would not appreciate that."  And I turned on my heel (laughter) and went right back to Ms. Sloan's class.  (Laughter) And all my godmother do, could laugh 'cause she said, he said he's determined he's not gonna get in trouble with Ms. Sloan, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 486654
Speaker 1: I just want to know, what, what would be a typical, I guess, day in the family with your parents are both at work and then you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you go to school.  Who, who, who tended to you when you came, came home?
Speaker 2: I came home for lunch, I walked home from lunch.  There's a story there too I'll tell you about.  But I, my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] worked at night, so he was home during the day, and when I came home for lunch he, he fed me for lunch.  And my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] worked during the day.  And he worked late at night 'cause he was there for dinner.  And we were expected to have dinner at the dinner table, whatever I was doing, I was expected to be home at dinnertime.  Dinnertime was generally six o'clock.  And if I weren't home then there, there was repercussions for me not being home on time.  And my father and mother were both sticklers in terms of being on time.  And they wanted to have a dinner.  And so what I learned about the family, I, I, I learned at the dinner table, myself and my brother [Alan Dash].  And that was very important to them that that was a time for family discussion, and, and instruction for me or me learning something about the family and so on.
Speaker 1: Was there a formal structure to it, did they ask you, did you have to explain what happened to you during the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did, did anybody have a turn or--?
Speaker 2: There was never any agenda.  It was all, whatever came up, whatever was of the moment, you know.  There wasn't a specific, no, it wasn't an agenda, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But for years it was just you and your mother and your father in, in the household?
Speaker 2: For the first nine years of my life, yeah.
Speaker 1: None of your grandparents lived with you or anything like that?
Speaker 2: My mo- my [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Coblins Kydd] came to live with me later, but it was after my brother was born so it was sometime in the mid-'50s [1950s] when she no longer, she had this big house that she, but she had this big house that she lived in [in New Bedford, Massachusetts] and she was losing her ability to look after herself and so she actually ended up selling the house and moving to live with us in Harlem [New York, New York], hm, I'm trying to figure the period.  I would say shortly after my, my brother was still an infant, maybe before he began walking or shortly after in '55 [1955], '56 [1956].  Well, he would have been two or three years old by that time, in that period, in the mid-'50s [1950s], she came to live with us, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 486655
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can remember when--I remember my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], I don't remember the actual moving, but when we, when my father came home from World War II [WWII] we went to live with one of his father's [Willis Hamilton Dash], his father's oldest sister, my great aunt, Ada Dash Gollop, was her last name, G-O-L-L-O-P.  And we lived in their, her brownstone in Brooklyn, New York--
Speaker 1: So you were about, you about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Bedford-Stuyvesant.  Huh?
Speaker 1: --you were about three then, right?
Speaker 2: I'm about three, two or three, between the ages of two and three.  And at the time there was a severe housing rental shortage in New York City [New York, New York]; we couldn't find a place to rent.  And the Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York], where we ended up moving after we left Brooklyn was being constructed and, of course, the G.I.s had priority in terms of getting a rental apartment in this unit.  Now the Riverton was being built at the same time as Stuyvesant Town [New York, New York] by Metropolitan Life Insurance [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] because they wanted--.  Metropolitan Li- Stuyvesant Town is on the Lower East Side of Manhattan [New York], and they were built literally at the same time because Metropolitan wanted to keep blacks from applying to live in Stuyvesant Town.  And so the mayor at the time, Fiorello La Guardia [Fiorello H. La Guardia], insisted, 'cause Stuyvesant, this had not been their plan to build Stuyvesant Town and the Riverton at the same time, but La Guardia insisted that they build a unit for blacks, a housing complex for blacks.  And so they found some derelict property in Harlem [New York, New York], and that's where the Riverton was built in East Harlem [Spanish Harlem, New York, New York], 135th [Street], east of 5th Avenue--5th Avenue is the dividing line between east and west in Manhattan.  And so I remember living at my great aunt's house in Brooklyn.  And I remember very clearly her dog, Chico [ph.], it was a mean little dog but I think that he understood that he would die a sudden death if he bit me, so I was always pulling on the poor dog (laughter) pulling him by the ear, yeah, so whenever he saw me, he ran (laughter) 'cause he couldn't bite me and he couldn't keep me away from him.  And I remember that and I remember falling out of the window, second story--
Speaker 1: How did--
Speaker 2: --into her, into her flower garden in the back.  Don't ask me how.  I, I remember tumbling out the window backwards.
Speaker 1: No screen, I guess?
Speaker 2: There were no, there were no bars, and there was a screen there, the window was open and the screen was down, the window, double hinged window was down on top of the screen but I pushed my way somehow through the screen or the weight of my body knocked the screen out and I went right out behind it.  And I tumbled into a flower garden and wasn't hurt, you know, and they realized that I was missing and they ran out back and there I was in the flower garden.  I don't think I was unconscious or anything, yeah.  And I remember falling backwards through the window. I don't remember the flower garden.
Story_ID: 486656
Speaker 1: Now is the Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York] the--I think I can almost visualize where it is, I believe, does it look like--there are projects near that look just like it, is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there're--public housing project called Lincoln housing project [Abraham Lincoln Houses, New York, New York], and they're right across the street from each other, right across 135th Street.  Lincoln is south of the Riverton, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So then in 1947, March, when the Riverton opened, just around my third birthday, March, 1947, we moved into the Riverton.  And I can still see, I can still smell the fresh paint, this is how new the building was, 2235 5th Avenue, it was one of the first buildings that opened.  I can still smell the fresh paint, the shellac on the wooden parquet floors.  And I can still see in my mind's eye, the closet doors stacked up in the living room, they had not hung them yet, and that's how new they--and, and that's how the, how fierce the housing pressure was, you know, because once they got permission or the, the apartment, it was 7, Apartment 7C, once they got permission to move in my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] were ready to move in.  They were ready to get out of my great aunt's [Ada Dash Gollop] house and into a, a place of their own.  So we lived there until I was fifteen, from three to fifteen, right.  'Til 19--we moved May 1, 1959--
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: --from there.
Speaker 1: --what I consider the cultural heart of Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You've got the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] nearby, you've got Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] in there; a lot of public activity goes on in that, that area.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what, what are some of your, what--I was asking about sights and sounds and smells of--yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Schomburg was something I became aware of early in my teens but it wasn't the building that the Schomburg is housed in now.  It was an old converted New York City library building [New York Public Library, New York, New York] that's still, the building is still there on 135th Street.
Speaker 1: The Countee Cullen [Countee Cullen Library, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah--well, no, the Countee Cullen was on 136th Street because I used to go there to get books.  And I think the two of them are attached--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --between, you know, but the Schomburg was on 135th, the entrance to the Schomburg and the entrance to the Countee Cullen was on 136th.  I don't believe, outside of school tours from my elementary school [P.S. 133, Fred R. Moore School, New York, New York], I don't believe we went into the Schomburg, I don't remember myself going into the Schomburg as a child because children weren't allowed to go in there and do things.  I mean you, you know, you had to be an adult.  I was a member of the New York City library system, but in the Countee Cullen Library they had a children's section and you could take books out of there.  So, that was my experience as growing up in Harlem.  I was a member of the Boys Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York] on 135th Street, that's where I learned to swim.  I was in the very competitive, we had competitive swimming teams.  And I imagine this began when I was around seven or eight, I don't remember exactly the age, and I, I joined the Sharks, of course, 'cause that was the fiercest fish in the sea (laughter).  And, and I, that's where I learned to swim at the Boys Y in Harlem, 135th Street.  There were a lot of activities in the Riverton, there were organized activities for children and it was headed by a, a man, named--I only know his nickname Dali [ph.] was his nickname but he--Dali King, K-I-N-G, but he apparently was a well-known basketball player at some point but now he was in charge of recreation for the Riverton.  There was a screening process to get into the Riverton, it was, the Riverton, the manager of the Riverton, it was a man who Metropolitan Life [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] had hired and made manager, it was a man named, I don't remember his, I don't know his first name, his name was, everyone called him Mr. Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Sr.].  And you may know of his son, Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] who was the first black secretary of the army.  But, Mr. Alexander set up a screening process, and when you applied to get into the Riverton, a team from the Riverton came out to where you were living and examined your living circumstances.
Story_ID: 486657
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were talking about Mr. Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Sr.] and the screening process for the Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, they wanted to be sure that the people ca- who came into the Riverton were an urbanized population and had, I mean, I would guess aspects of middle class living before they moved into the Riverton.  And so they examined the circumstances of my great aunt's [Ada Dash Gollop] house and how it was kept before they approved my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] to move into the Riverton, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did that with all of the--they did that literally with every family that moved into the Riverton.
Story_ID: 486658
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were a lot of sights and sounds when I was a child.  Myself and my friends did a lot--we traveled all around Harlem [New York, New York] by foot, long distances.  And, there were produce stores, my favorite place was a local chain of bakeries called Cushman's [Cushman's Sons, Inc.], which is right at the corner of 135th [Street] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard].  I think the chain went bankrupt or was bought up or something.  But they had the greatest--when you walked in there, the smell that of pastries and everything, you know, was overwhelming, you know.  And, you know, you had, you know, as a child growing up you had very limited amount of money so I'd have a nickel or seven cents and I could buy one turnover or one of this and one of that, you know, and whenever I had that opportunity I did that.  Right down the street from Cushman's, again between 5th Avenue and Lenox Avenue was the Lincoln Theater [New York, New York].  And that was a Saturday event with popcorn, big bag of popcorn for very little money.  And serials, when I say serials like 'Batman' serial, and they ran every Saturday at, you know--it never finished so you had to come back next Saturday (laughter) to see the next part of it.  'Batman,' 'Superman' serials, a lot of westerns, a lot of full length cartoons.
Speaker 1: Is this the age when your parents would give you money on a Saturday and you spend all day at the movies, or, or--
Speaker 2: Or spend the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Afternoon, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple of hours in the afternoon.  Or we would go around and collect, those are the days where you could get the big soda bottles and you could return to the store and you get a nickel on each soda bottle.  Some of us did that to get, some Saturdays I did that to get money, movie money or help friends get movie money by doing that, collecting old soda bottles.  And the smell of the fresh popcorn the minute you got into the theater, that was the first counter you went to before you got your seat.  A lot of small mom and pop stores that I used to love to go into because they had a lot of open barrels, the open barrel of pickles, different things, and the smell, and they always had saw dust on the floor, wooden floors, with saw dust.  That's all that comes to mind at the moment, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about, with all the street traffic at Harlem, wide sidewalks, and all the different kinds of people, did you ever encounter any of the sports celebrities or baseball players or the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --musicians or any--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Story_ID: 486659
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] into music?  Did they--
Speaker 2: They listened to a lot of music.  And they had a taste for eclectic, I mean, they listened to--my father did appreciate and enjoy opera.  And they had a lot of Paul Robeson's records.  They had been to the theater to see any number, I think 'The Emperor Jones' [Louis Gruenberg] they had those, the records that came from that.  They had 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] the original records of 'Porgy and Bess.'  And they played them often; I listened to them.  I enjoyed the opera and the 'Porgy and Bess' and 'The Emperor Jones' records more so than the jazz that they played.  Jazz for me came much later when I was an adolescent.  I, I got into jazz before I moved out of Harlem [New York, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: Was, was the radio a popular feature?
Speaker 2: Radio was, was also, we, you know, I used to listen to, 'cause it was past my bedtime, I would have to keep it down low and under the bed covers so they wouldn't hear me listening to 'The Shadow' (laughter) on Sunday night.
Speaker 1: "Who knows what evil lurks--?"
Speaker 2: Yeah "--what evil lurks in the hearts of men?  The Shadow knows!"  And it was always some mystery that he was solving.  And there were some other TV--radio programs I would listen to that came on after my bedtime.  But I got very good at keeping it low so they didn't hear it and bedcover over me and the radio, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a lot of newspapers in the house or, or, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My father was, they, we subscribed to the Herald Tribune weekly [New York Herald Tribune] and the Herald Tribune and The New York Times on Sunday.  He was fiercely appoint- opposed to the New York Daily News, and felt it was overtly racist.  He felt that's a, he had very strong feelings about the New York Daily News, opposed to it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any specific story that he used to refer to when he--
Speaker 2: No, he just felt its coverage really demeaned blacks and that, and that the paper took every opportunity to demean blacks, that was his feeling.  Now, I wasn't sophisticated enough to distinguish, I don't believe, the stories that angered and alienated him, but that was his general feeling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you get any of the black papers?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't subscribe to those.  Those I would read on my own, the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] is one.  The New York Age is another.  I also played basketball, I remember a photograph of myself and the basketball team called Snookie's Sugar Bowl 5.  And it was run by Mr. Walker [John R. Walker] who had the, a very popular fountain operation, called Snookie's Sugar Bowl, that's what it was, 137th [Street] and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, New York, New York].  Very, very popular among teenagers.  And even before I was a teenager, when I was playing for his basketball team I think I was ten or eleven, I don't remember exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a--
Speaker 2: We were very young.
Speaker 1: --a league at the Boys Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they took a pic, the big deal was the New York Age took a photograph us, of us at Abyssinian Baptist Church, 138th Street [New York, New York].  And so we all went and got pages, you know, got the paper and our photograph was in there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what, what position did you play in basketball?
Speaker 2: Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was always taller than the kids my age, the boys my age, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I thought, I thought that was probably true--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And I wasn't a, a stellar basketball player.  I mean, I knew the moves and so on but I, I wasn't anything, like any sort of star.  I played basketball for that team.  I played, of course, a lot of basketball on the street and in the Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York], and whenever I went up to New Bedford, Massachusetts.  And I played basketball in high school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], but I don't consider myself a star basketball player, no, no.
Speaker 1: Well (unclear) you play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just average.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy playing?
Speaker 2: Oh, I enjoyed playing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 486660
Speaker 1: What about religion, this is, this is one, another like a sort of Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I grew up as a--
Speaker 1: --question.  What are your earliest memories of (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --I grew up, I grew up, my earliest memory is at Church of the Master [New York, New York], and Reverend Robinson [James Herman Robinson] being the minister.  And I would imagine that's as early, five, six, or seven in that area.  And my parents going to church on Sunday and going to church with them.  Me, maybe I was too young 'cause I don't remember starting out in Sunday school.  I eventually made it to Sunday school but I remember sitting in the pews and being very bored and fidgeting and my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] shushing me and my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] telling me to sit still.  And then eventually I started attending Sunday school at Church of the Master and going there on my own.  And then when my brother [Alan Dash] was a little older, me taking him to Sunday school and we were in different classes 'cause I was considerably older and he would be in one class, I would be in the other.  And, and then we would go back home together, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you like church?
Speaker 2: I didn't dislike church.  I felt it, it was an obligation.  And eventually I had to take confirmation classes.  And I remember I was in, I was--now I was in junior high school in the Bronx [New York], Olinville Junior High School [M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School].  And I would be, what they have in the New York City public school system called release time [released time] or religious time, anyway the acronym was RT.  And, I would be released from school early, this is when I was thirteen, and I'd travel all the way from the North Bronx [Bronx, New York] down to Morningside [Avenue], probably get off at 125th Street and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and walk over to a 122nd [Street] and Morningside and attend these religious classes.  They weren't taught by the main minister, Reverend Robinson, they were taught by Reverend Stevenson [ph.].  And I gave him a headache 'cause I was always questioning what he was telling us.  And he was--
Speaker 1: What, what, what kind of questions did you ask, for instance?
Speaker 2: Well, they always had some sort of religious significance and I would question the concept of an immaculate conception.  And I could see I was getting on his nerves but that didn't stop me (laughter).  I was always asking questions about the limits of God's power.  And, why would this entity flood the Earth and drown everybody except f- the people who got on this ark, on Noah's ark, you know?  That didn't, you know, that, it didn't settle well with me.  And he wasn't a, he didn't have a literal interpretation of the Bible, but it was close to it.   And he was there to instruct us, not to engage in a debate.  And I asked a lot of questions, and I, and I was dissatisfied with his responses often, not all the time, but often.  And anyway I went through the confirmation process, I mean he didn't kick me out of the class or anything, he didn't get antagonistic, but I would just annoy him and you could see the annoyance on his face.  That didn't stop me from asking the questions.  But then I had to memorize the Apostles' Creed, I believe.  And we had to recite that during our actual confirmation, and then I became a member of the church.
Speaker 1: About how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: Thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause this is '57 [1957], '58 [1958].  And I don't believe I ever attended the church after I was confirmed, yeah.  I, I became dissatisfied with religion or the religion that I had been raised in, this Presbyterian branch of Protestantism.  And I began attending a lot of different churches.  Catholic churches with friends of these different religions.
Story_ID: 486661
Speaker 1: The Episcopal church--well, I really attended the Episcopal church after we moved to the Bronx [New York], and I attended that church because all of my friends that I made in this North Bronx neighborhood [Bronx, New York] were members of St. Luke's Episcopal Church [Bronx, New York].  And this genuflecting that they did before the cross didn't settle well with me, you know, I didn't like it.  But I attended the church because all of my friends attended, boys and girls.  And I joined the Young People's Fellowship there.  And they, we met every Sunday night for fellowship.  The boys went because the girls went, and the girls went because the boys went (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it was a social--
Speaker 1: They just wanted to get out of the house, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a social avenue, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But when you look back, back, though is it--
Speaker 1: But I went to a number of churches in this period right up until my late teens.  I had a friend who was a Jehovah Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses], I went to the Jehovah Witness hall.  I tried any number of churches.  And--
Speaker 2: Were, were you searching for, for spiritual (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I imagine I was 'cause, yeah, I was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --guidance or was it more of a social--?
Speaker 1: No, no, that was a spiritual search.  And, 'cause I found the Presbyterians to be dry and boring.  And I, you know, I didn't feel spiritually connected to them.
Speaker 2: Now, who, what do you consider now, as you look back on it, to be the source of your own moral code and, and ideas of right and wrong and, and how the world is?
Speaker 1: Ideas of right and wrong and moral code really came out of my family.  I still believe in Christian philosophy, but I don't accept Christ as the Son of God.  And I don't know that I ever did, genuinely; I pretended to.  And that came to a conflict in, when I was attending St. Luke's Episcopal Church.  It was a father who went there and at this point I was head of the Young People's Fellowship, this is a couple of years now after I'm living in the Bronx.  And he said something about us all being Christians and I said I'm not a Christian.  I don't accept Christ as the Son of God.
Speaker 2: And you were head of the fellowship, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he was very upset with me.  And he later told, he disbanded Young People's Fellowship.  'Cause he didn't like me challenging him anyway and I challenged him all the time, any time he attended the Young People's Fellowship meeting.  He had very strong opinions about what we should do and what we shouldn't do and I would argue with him.  And at some point he disbanded the fellowship.  And then he told a girl that I was dating at the time that we could reorganize--he told her that the fellowship would be reorganized, but I was not to be told 'cause he didn't want me to come back into the fellowship.  And by this time I was headed away to college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] so I wasn't, you know, didn't, I was amused by the fact that he was telling the other teenagers, you know, don't tell Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] (laughter) that we're gonna put this back together.  And I didn't, I wasn't interested, I had outgrown it by that time, you know.
Speaker 2: So it didn't bother you then?
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --no.  I was amused by his sort of banning me from the Young People's Fellowship.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, now what about--
Speaker 1: I was better prepared to give him a harder time (laughter) by that point but--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --I wasn't interested.
Story_ID: 486662
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in these days?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a set of friends in Harlem [New York, New York] that I had grown up with, and I'm still in touch with those who have survived.  Because when I say survived many of them got swept up in the heroin epidemic that swept through Harlem in 1960.  And I had moved the year before to the North Bronx [Bronx, New York], and came back to see them, and they, you know, periodically, and they were all into cocaine and heroin, and I wasn't interested in either, and nor did the kids that I hung out with in the North Bronx were they interested in that.
Speaker 1: Do you think you would have had a hard time not being in it if--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --had you been there?
Speaker 2: --I question that.  I wonder if the heroin epidemic or the, the pervasiveness of heroin and cocaine would have swept me up into it if I had stayed in Harlem and not moved to the Bronx [New York].  I don't know; I don't have an answer for you.  But my friends and I we drank, usually cheap wine and that's all we had the money for.  In fact, my first drink was Thunderbird wine in Harlem when I was fourteen.  And the three fellows, the two, my two best friends there, Gary Sandell [ph.], who I'm still in touch with, and Billy Bennett [ph.], who I also am still in touch with, can you imagine this Thunderbi- we were on our way to a party, we were on our way to a party to Billy's girlfriend's house, her name was Margaret [ph.], I forget her last name, on 137th Street.  And the idea to buy some wine, I don't know who, who came up with the idea so I'm not gonna assign blame, all right.  But between the three of us we had a dollar and twenty-three cents, and a pint of Thunderbird wine cost sixty cents.  And we were all under age; we were all fourteen and the legal drinking age at that time in New York State was eighteen, you could drink legally after you got draft card.  That has since changed, they changed the law to twenty-one, but at that time (cough)--.  So we didn't, it was no way we could legally drink but we wanted to buy some Thunderbird wine.  And so we went to, right up on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], a liquor store there, and out in front was a wino and we asked him to go in and buy us a pint of wine and he said yes, he'd buy us a pint of wine, and we had to buy him a pint of wine.  So we had exactly enough money, a dollar and twenty- we had a dollar and twenty-three cents to buy two pints of wine for a dollar and twenty cents.  And we told him make sure our wine is chilled (laughter).  Can you imagine that?
Speaker 1: Do you remember the old rhyme: "What's the word?"
Speaker 2: "Thunderbird."
Speaker 1: "What's the price" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "What's the price?  Thirty twice."  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What's the reason (laughter)?
Speaker 2: What's the reason, I've forgotten that?
Speaker 1: I think it's apple season or something.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I--
Speaker 1: And who drinks the most?
Speaker 2: Colored folk.  Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I do remember that, yeah.  But then we got our pint of wine and we went down around the corner.  I remember it was winter because there was, this is what you see in New York City [New York, New York] after the snow has fallen, it's a couple of days later, the, the white snow is covered with dirty soot; it turns black.  And we went down into one of the alleys and in, in this part of Harlem to go into an alley you had to go down a flight of stairs, wooden stairs generally, generally very rickety.  And we went down the stairs 'cause we didn't wanna be seen drinking the wine.  And I remember the first swig I choked on, I mean, I wasn't, you know.  Of course, Billy and Gary made fun of me, you know, choking on the wine.  We passed the bottle around and it, it took us a while for the three of us--they weren't drinkers either--the three of us to finish a pint of wine.  And then we went on to Margaret's party.  Well, that was great because for me I was very shy and that ended the barrier of, oh, it was like a, an elixir, you know, it was, do you remember Captain Marvel?  He would say "Shazam!" and this bolt of lightning would come out and he would change into this super character and he had a crutch before and now he flew around the world, well, that was how, how I felt about it.  It was an elixir that changed my mood and personality, yeah.
Story_ID: 486663
Speaker 1: In those days, what was the, were you, were you, were you caught up in the popular culture, things going on, television and, and rock and roll was starting to emerge as--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very much so.  You know, Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers, his big hit, 'Why Do Falls Fall in Love'--'Why Do Fools Fall in Love.'  It either came out when I was thirteen or fourteen.  My first record was The Chantels' record, 'Maybe,' the first record I ever bought, rock and roll record.  And, of course, we went around to a lot of parties, there were a lot of house parties.  In terms of popular culture outside of school, we were all busy with rock and roll.  And oh, we had this (laughter) you know, we all thought we were gonna be rock and roll stars, so we always had, Gary [Gary Sandell (ph.)], I don't think Billy [Billy Bennett (ph.)] was in the singing group, a guy named Raymond Robinson [ph.], a couple of other guys, we would sing what we called doo wops, and we always chose a hallway where you could get the echo chamber effect.  And people were always, "Get out of here" (laughter) "with all that loud noise," you know, chasing us away.  So we were always struggling to find a doo wop, a, a, a hallway or somewhere where we could practice our rock and roll songs.  And we were writing songs and so on in the hope that we would be discovered one day, yeah, it never happened, yeah.
Story_ID: 486664
Speaker 1: First time I ever saw you was in a film ['Savimbi's 1977 Campaign against the Cubans and MPLA: Observed for 7 1/2 Months, and Covering 2,100 Miles Inside Angola'], and you were in Angola.  And when I saw it, I thought about the old television shows I used to watch as a kid with Lowell Thomas--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Africa and different places.  Did you see that kind of thing when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember watching films like that.  I don't, I don't think, I think that came later in my life though when I was living in the Bronx [New York] and when I entered my te- late teens, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it's one of those kind of documentaries that were on television the most--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --back in those days, yeah.  I was wondering if that, you know, if, if you'd watched those things and, and wondered about what it was like to--
Speaker 2: Probably in my late teens, not in this period in Harlem [New York, New York], not when I was fourteen, but maybe when I got older in my, older and would watch a te- television special about an adventure, a, a true life adventure movie or something like that.  I'm guessing, none, none, none stick out in my mind.  When you bring up Africa, the two people who interested me in Africa was the minister at my first church, Church of the Master [New York, New York], Reverend Robinson [James Herman Robinson], 'cause I would at, beginning at age ten I would go down, ten or eleven, would go down to Crossroads Africa's [Operation Crossroads Africa] office and do volunteer work: stuff envelopes for fundraising activities, I did some typing, I was taking typing at Frederick Douglass Junior High School [J.H.S. 139, Frederick Douglass School, New York, New York], which I entered at age eleven.  And so he was one of the people that interested in, me in Africa.  And mother's mother, my grandmother [Ethel Coblins Kydd] who was the Garveyite interested me in Africa.  She would bring me photographs of African leaders particularly, this is before Ghana won independence, photographs and information about Kwame Nkrumah and the move toward independence.  And I think independence came in '57 [1957], which I, at that time I would have been thirteen, so even before independence came to Ghana, she was talking to me about it.  And I remember a packet of photograph, I mean a packet of postcards that she gave me that had ancient and contemporary African leaders, photographs of them, Azikiwe [Nnamdi Azikiwe] in Nigeria, I don't remember them all, and some ancient leaders or--Haile Selassie in Ethiopia.  And that was my introduction to these names through her.  And then the aspect of going to work in Africa as a college student through Crossroads Africa, I became aware of that because I would, I would in, in the office of Crossroads Africa, I would meet the young people--they were much older than me, they were college students and I was junior high school, and they were on, black and white kids, on their way to Africa for the summer to do work.
Speaker 1: And they were sponsored by the Presbyterian church, I suppose, right?
Speaker 2: Was Crossroads Africa--I don't know that it was sponsored by the Presbyterian church, was it?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I'm asking (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know that, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: But Reverend Robinson was a pastor of a Presbyterian church?
Speaker 2: Presbyterian church, of my church, but I don't know that the Presbyterians as a national body were making a contribution to Crossroads Africa.  It might have been, I just don't know it, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking that it seems something that a big denomination would fund, you know.
Speaker 2: Was, was backing it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  You, you know more than I do, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know, I, I don't know I'm speculating at this point.
Speaker 2: I know he was busy beating the bushes raising money for it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause most of the kids who were going couldn't afford to go unless they raised the mo- the, the lion's share of the money outside of whatever they were able to bring in personally, the individual college students.
Story_ID: 486665
Speaker 1: So you went to Frederick Douglass Junior High School [J.H.S. 139, Frederick Douglass School] in Harlem [New York, New York] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to Frederick Douglass Junior High School in Harlem.  I went to P.S. 133 [Fred R. Moore School, New York, New York] right through the sixth grade.  Then I went to seventh and eighth grade at Frederick Douglass Junior High School.  And then my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] moved me suddenly to the North Bronx [Bronx, New York] to Olinville Junior High School [M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School].  And he tells me this story, I don't remember the conversation, he said--.  I was doing fairly well, still my, my operation between C and B student.  He asked me a civics question one day when I was in the eighth grade.  And he said, he didn't remember my response, but he said that my response was so far away from anything that was realistic that he became alarmed at the level of education that I was receiving in the public school system.  And at that point he said--now this would have been in the eighth grade so this would be between '56 [1956] and '57 [1957] somewhere in there--he said at that point he came to realize that the school system in one generation, the school system in Harlem in one generation had deteriorated.  And through a friend, an [U.S.] Army buddy of his who is actually my father, my brother's [Alan Dash] godfather, James [ph.] Withmey, W-I-T-H-M-E-Y, we used his address in the North Bronx for me to go to Olinville Junior High School.  So I did the ninth grade in, at Olinville Junior High School in North Bronx, 217th Street and Barnes Avenue.  And then he got me to take an entrance exam and I went to Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School] from the tenth grade to the twelfth grade.  And Rhodes Prep is at, it's in two, was in two building at 10 and 9 West 54th Street between 5th Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, down in Midtown Manhattan [Manhattan, New York].  So I graduated from Rhodes Prep in June of 1961.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that, that transition, you know, leaving Harlem and going to school at, at Olinville?
Speaker 2: At Olinville Junior High?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I thought it was a pain because I had to get up earlier in the morning, you know, and (laughter) in the dark and take the train all the way up to the North Bronx, subway, you know.
Story_ID: 486666
Speaker 1: Did you start high school in the regular public high schools before you went to--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went from Olinville Junior High School [M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School, Bronx, New York] to Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so--
Speaker 2: It's called Rhodes Preparatory, in short Rhodes Prep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Olinville took you to the, through the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: The ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And that's still junior high?
Speaker 2: And that was--
Speaker 1: From tenth grade on to--
Speaker 2: Right.  That was the first time I attended a majority white school, Olinville Junior High School.  It was mainly Italian American that was the largest group at the school at the time, with some Jewish students and some Polish students.  That was my first time interacting with them.  I was very naive in terms of, I used to, you know, I just saw all white people as the same, but I came to recognize in that year that there was antagonism and tension between the Italian--some of the Italian American students and the Polish students and the Jewish students over issues of some of the Italian American students using derogatory names to characterize them and so on; ethnic slurs.  Now, I never heard the N word but there was some tension between black and white students too but it wasn't, it wasn't really exaggerated, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I, I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --think, think a lot of black students in all white settings start discovering that white people are not just white.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, that there are ethnic divisions.  I, you know, I had, I was friendly with two guys in my class, an Italian American guy, who was the tallest guy in the class, and a Jewish guy.  And sometimes in the lunch period I hung out with them.  And then I remember the Jewish kid who's last name was Weinberg [ph.], I can't remember his first name, complaining to me about something that the Italian American had said to him about Jews in America.  And I was sort of startled; I was taken aback by it.  And that conversation I think really led to me being exposed to whites themselves having these ethnic prejudices, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did it give you a sense about what they thought, or might think about you?
Speaker 2: Well, I suspected that they, they harbored some of the same feelings or beliefs about me but it was never overtly expressed, no.
Story_ID: 486667
Speaker 1: Was the Civil Rights Movement discussed in your household a great deal or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] had a very conservative reaction to the Civil Rights Movement.  He was more along the lines of those he felt that we should prove ourselves by being inside these institutions and changing them, or being examples of decorum and dignified behavior.  And when I began participating in demonstrations, he didn't forbid me, but it was not--it didn't settle well with him, and probably because he was fearful that something would happen to me.  But it was not something that he would have done, demonstrating.  But my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash] was of the other persuasion that things had, you had to have a direct confrontation and the nonviolent approach was the best approach.  My father wouldn't have supported any demonstrations, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were, were there any demonstrations in, in the New York [New York] area when you were growing up or--?
Speaker 2: The one that I remember that he was opposed to me going to and I ignore- I ignored his opposition was desegregating, not in terms of service but employment at White Castle.  And it was a White Castle that, near my house on, in the Bronx [New York] on Boston Post Road where they didn't hire any white, black staff.  And the CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] I believe, the New York chapter of CORE was holding demonstrations around this White Castle and there was also a large police contingent there.  And at this time it was still a majority Italian American neighborhood so there were some youth who were driving by in their cars yelling at the demonstrators, epithets, and I don't think there was any violence, but the New York City police [New York City Police Department] were there in large numbers to make sure that there was no violence, you know.  And I remember one time, I was--I had to--
Speaker 1: Is this about 1961 or so or '60 [1960], '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962], in that period.  I remember going up to, I remember pe- participating in a demonstration and one night getting there very late before the demonstration, the demonstration had already started, the picket line (cough).  And a guy who I later met years later in Africa was the, in charge of the line and he was the liaison between the demonstrators and the police, his name is Eric Robinson [ph.].  And, and I came up and I said, "I wanna get into the line."  And he says, "Well the police, you know, have put, you know, a ceiling on the number of people who can participate, let me check with the captain."  And he had to go over to this New York City policeman who was in full uniform with all these brass buttons and brass decals and, and the captain said, "No, no, no, no, you, you know, you've got enough demonstrators, he can't, he can't get into the line now," you know, I remember that.  And we both recalled that years later, yeah.
Story_ID: 486668
Speaker 1: How would you characterize yourself at the time that you enter high school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York]?  I mean what were you, what were your major interests and what kind of person were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a, well by the time I entered high school that would have been 1957, I'm sorry, 1958, I was fourteen, I was still living in Harlem [New York, New York]; we hadn't moved to the Bronx [New York] yet.  Naive is, comes to mind right away.  Naive about ethnicity and the role it plays in America still, even though a year in a majority white school, in a working class neighborhood in the North Bronx [Bronx, New York], I was attending school up there at Olinville Junior High [Olinville Junior High School; M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School, Bronx, New York] in the ninth grade but still very naive about the issue of ethnicity in America, understanding that there was deep prejudice against blacks.  Had not really experienced it yet but would experience it by the next year at this private school.  And I don't know that I had a particular ambition or a particular vision on where I would end up and what I would end up doing; that had not developed.  My focus was I knew my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] wanted me to go to college that's why I was in a private school to do the best I could in my grades and to pass the New York State Regents Exams [Regents Examinations] in different grades because in order to get an academic diploma, you had to have, you had to pass the New York State Regents in all the major subjects, or required subjects: foreign language, English at a certain level, science, math, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say you were a B and C student, you know, kind of mediocre student (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in, in Harlem, and when you make this move to Olinville, it seemed like that would be a big challenge.  Would, did, did your grades go up or down?
Speaker 2: No, I think they remained the same, yeah.  Our homeroom school, our homeroom teacher Mr. Saleski [ph.] was also my history teacher.  And my, hi- my interest in history was developing in this period so I did well in that class.  Ms. Rooney [ph.] was our algebra teacher and I just did the minimum I needed to get through to pass algebra.  I remember my English literature teacher, I can still see her face, I don't remember her name, at Olinville Junior High.  That continued, that sort of lackluster approach, just doing enough to pass the courses that I didn't care much about, and doing well in the courses that I had a particular interest in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But during that same period you were involved, getting involved with the church in terms of the, the study classes and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Well, while I was at Olinville Junior High--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right, I did the confirmation classes at Church of the Master [New York, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486669
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school.  Now, this is, was that like a--
Speaker 2: High school was like being thrown into a tub of cold water.  These were very wealthy kids, most of whom were Jewish, wealthy in, in my eyes.  I remember that first year a kid who had just turned sixteen and lived out on Long Island [New York] and would commute, a lot of kids that lived out in Long Island and Connecticut and would commute in on these commuter trains.  And this kid had just had his sixteenth birthday and his parents for his sixteenth birthday in New York Ci- in New York State outside of the city limits you could drive at a younger age than you could in the city.  And he drove to school in a brand new convertible Chevrolet, and I was floored; I couldn't believe it.  He got a brand new Chevrolet convertible for his birthday, sixteenth birthday and had a driver's license and drove it to school and had the money to park it, downtown Manhattan [New York].  That, you know, that that that level, (laughter) that level of wealthy, this was my first time being exposed to that and, you know, it was, so I was sort of speechless that people had that kind of money.  He was a year, he was a junior, I was a sophomore, but that people had that kind of money it was just amazing to me.  And--
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I would say maybe 3 to 4 percent of the student body was black in all classes, and Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] went from the seventh grade to the twelfth grade.  So it was majority white, majority Jewish, but you had Polish Americans, Italian Americans, Greek Americans, this is the first time I encountered Greek American students, German Americans, all in the school.  And, of course, the ethnic complexity of white America was reflected in the school because people spoke in terms of themselves being Irish American or Italian American, right.
Speaker 1: Now, this is contrary to what I heard someone say yesterday.  That no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which is?
Speaker 1: --that no other group uses an adjective to describe their American status.  And I hear a lot of young people say that but--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I use the term Irish American, and the kids would say I'm Irish, right, or Italian and or Polish.  They didn't put, they didn't put the hyphenated name on there, that's what they would use, I'm Greek, you know.  So, or I'm German but they were all born in the U.S., you know, and so they were, I'm putting, I'm adding the, the American onto it.
Story_ID: 486670
Speaker 1: This is--in this period really I decided I'm not a Negro, and I don't like the word Negro.  And I don't know if the idea was introduced by Malcolm X because I'm listening to him in Harlem [New York, New York] and I'm listening to the Black Muslims in Harlem, you know, we would go down to 125th Street and they would stand up on the corner and they had this rhetorical cadence that I found attractive.  And their whole position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I wondered about, about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --their whole position I found attractive.
Speaker 2: Now, now, he would often speak in front of the National Memorial African Bookstore [sic. African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York], Lewis Michaux's [Lewis H. Michaux] store.
Speaker 1: Yeah, on 125th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], right across the street from the RKO Alhambra [New York, New York].  And that was another theater that I went to for the Saturday shoot 'em ups and serial movies.  And, and I remember first listening to Malcolm X, I didn't know his stature, but at a 125th Street rally, and I felt that his, his, his, his what he had to say and his philosophy made sense to me.  And I, I, it may have been, I don't, I haven't made the connection, but it may have been (laughter) the first time I heard the term so called Negro, right.  And so by the, by the time I'm at Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], I'm still living in Harlem, I'm no longer a Negro, people refer to me Negro, I correct them.
Speaker 2: What did you say?
Speaker 1: White or black, teachers or non- or students.
Speaker 2: What did you claim?
Speaker 1: I, I said I'm black.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: You know.  I didn't use the term African American; I said I'm black.  And one of my teachers wrote home about that, wrote home to my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] about that characterizing me as irascible, quick to anger.  And I don't, I didn't see that and he didn't like me standing up to him in class.  And now he was my first anthropology teacher, I took an anthropology course from him.  And it was very challenging because, you know, say, you would say the, I said, "You know, this is, this whole, this textbook and this whole class is very contradictory."  And he said, "Well, what do you mean?"  And he said, I said, "You said the major significance in, in distinguishing race was skin color, but you're characterizing black skinned people in South Asia as white, as Caucasoid, you know."  And he said, "Well, there is, there is--."  You know, he, he acknowledged that.  I said, "Well this is ridiculous." You know, that was my position.  And I said, "There really isn't no, there really is no characterization of race.  There are different ethnic groups."  I don't know that I used the term ethnic, but I began to distance myself from the concept of race in that class because I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I remember those--
Speaker 1: --I saw, I saw that it was really bogus and it was outgrowth, as I became more sophisticated about it, of 19th century racist anthropology, you know.  So that, and so I, he was always (laughter) trying, it was just like Reverend Stevenson [ph.], now, though I'm much more vocal now and my voice has changed now, and it's deeper and, and I'm arguing with him in class and he's trying to teach from the textbook, and I'm saying the textbook is wrong (laughter) and bogus, so, you know, this is--.  So he writes a letter home to my parents, calls me irascible and, and Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] needs to calm down if he's gonna make it in life, you know.  In, in other words conform and be so less argumentative.  So my father is asking me about it and I told him, I said well, you know, it was all bogus and I told him about it and I probably upset him, and that was it.  He just let it go.
Story_ID: 486671
Speaker 1: The major thing for me was the exposure to really elite whites, Martha Raye's daughter for example, Melodye [Melodye Condos], her, her name wasn't Raye, but she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Martha Raye the, the actress, singer, comedic, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: The actress, singer, yeah.  She and I were friendly.  I'm meeting, you know, that's the only child of a well-known celebrity that I knew at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].  But I'm meeting people who are in the theater, these are children of people who are actively in the theater, the sons and daughters of writers, this was when I really get exposed to poetry.  I became very friendly with a guy named Harold Lee Hague [ph.] who was a year or two older than I am and he was a poet, and went on to be, he's dead now but he went on to be a poet, a minor poet in the American, in American poetry.  And, you know, he invites me to a poetry reading down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].  Well, you know, if you're a teenager and the Village is full of beatniks, you know, and this is very attractive to me too.  So I'm hanging out down in the Village as a sophomore, coffee shops, sneaking into the jazz clubs illegally 'cause I was underage, Village Gate [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: So were these (unclear)--
Speaker 1: You weren't supposed to be in there, these were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they sold, they sold liquor in there, and I was fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: I mean, did you go down there with, your white school friends at--
Speaker 1: Some of them, some of them.
Speaker 2: --at Rhodes?
Speaker 1: My, my friends in the, my, my friends in Harlem [New York, New York] and my friends in the Bronx [New York] were not interested in the Greenwich Village or in going to poetry readings.  They would always look at me strange.  And they'd say, "Well, we hope you're not doing anything else down there."  What are you, (laughter) I said, "What are you trying to say," (laughter), and, you know, what they were trying to say.  They thought I was transitioning into a gay lifestyle, and they wouldn't have called it gay, right.  And they said, "Why are you going to a poetry reading?"  And I said, "I enjoy it," you know.  So that was, and they, they, I would invite 'em to go with me.  I remember one of my friends Lionel Bryant [ph.], he said, "No, no, Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], you, you go to the poetry reading, tell me what it's like when you get back."  (Laughter) You know, so this is one of my friends in the North Bronx [Bronx, New York] who later was killed in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  But, so I'm, I'm moving into a different world.
Speaker 2: Was, was, was LeRoi Jones on the scene then, in--
Speaker 1: He was but I don't know that he had made, no, he had not made the transition when I was in high school to Amiri Baraka (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know that.
Speaker 1: No, yeah.  He was LeRoi Jones.
Speaker 2: He didn't do that until '66 [1966], I think, or '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: He was LeRoi Jones, but I never attended any of his readings.  The guy, nor Ginsberg [Allen Ginsberg], Ginsberg was big at the time but I never attended one of his readings.  I think you had to pay for those readings, I think, and two or three dollars was a big sum of money, I wasn't going, I, I went to free poetry readings (laughter) you know.  I didn't get to, I didn't go to the readings where you had to pay to get in, yeah.  So this is my, this is a major transition for me now because I'm doing things that a number of the kids that I hang out with are not doing and, and not interested in (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 486672
Speaker 1: What is the source of this courage to be different?  Because here you're challenging a preacher, you're willing to challenge a teacher in an all-white school, you're, you're willing to go to Greenwich Village [New York, New York] when your friends are saying, you know, I wouldn't go there because I might, they might, think, think you're gay, they might think you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm also going out with white girls which my friends were not doing, they were not into that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, and they thought I was kind of crazy.  And that leads to some conflicts 'cause I'm on the basketball team at Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], and some of the blas- basketball players are Neanderthals when it comes to ethnicity and race.  So there's some tension there, but didn't care.
Speaker 1: Was there any source, I mean, do your, your parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] give you that kind of courage?  How, how did you get that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think, I think that sort of individuality to be frank with you came from my admiration of my maternal grandfather, Lawrence Kydd.  He didn't care who you were in terms of how he treated you.  He treated you based on what he thought of you as an individual.  And he was, he was a nonconformist.  He also was an alcoholic.  And I liked his ability if you got on his last nerve to cuss you out no matter who you were.  I, I admired that.  In some respects when I see it now, it's self- sort of his behavior, particularly mixed with the alcohol was self-destructive but he would fight you physically or verbally.  And very few people could beat him, very few men, almost none, could beat him at either.  And I believe that that individuality streak in myself came from my, my admiration of him.  Now, everybody didn't admire him.  He had older brothers, in particular his oldest brother, Uncle Herbert [Herbert Kydd (ph.)], who literally shunned him because of his behavior.  And, and Uncle Herbert was a stalwart or, or, or had high status in the black community in the West End of New Bedford, Massachusetts, where my grandfather didn't, and didn't care for, care about it either, um-hm.  And these were two brothers but very different, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So when I've examined it that's where I think that has come from.  Of course, I couldn't go around cursing out the Reverend Stevenson [ph.] and my teacher.  My, my grandfather swore like a sailor and, at a certain point in my life, I swore just as he did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's a, there's a, there's, and the thing about the grades too so you really don't seem to care that much about the--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: --the grade?
Speaker 2: No.  And, and it's very individual.  The things that I enjoy are things that I'm gonna put an effort into, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so you played basketball and you're, you're--
Speaker 2: I played basketball in my senior year.
Speaker 1: In your senior year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486673
Speaker 1: I wanna tell you this because I see it as a defining moment in terms of ethnicity in America.  I enjoyed biology, was fascinated by biology and it's a required course in the tenth grade.  And I, and I, on the state Regents [Regents Examinations], in the spring of '59 [1959], I got 95 on the state Regents, which was a very difficult test.  And people at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] were just, particularly my biology teacher was just ecstatic, it was the highest grade of any of her students had got on the state Regents.  And Rhodes would advertise weekly in The New York Times Magazine, they had an ad that ran.  I don't know if it was weekly but, you know, I would see the ad all the time in The New York Times Magazine.  And my biology teacher in the fall, beginning of the fall semester of '59 [1959], the previous spring is when I got the 95 on the state Regents.  She called me to her classroom and said, "I want you to go in Mr. Smollin's [ph.] chemistry lab because they're going to take the photo of the students for The New York Times' ad and I want you in that ad, I want you in that photo.  And I've already told Smollin, Smollin that you're coming; I've given him your name."  So I went to the lab, and I think when I came in through the doors, Smollin realized for the first time that I was black.  I don't know what his assumption was in terms of a student who got 95 on the state Regents, but I think he, my name didn't give it any indication, Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash].  There were a lot of Jewish families who were, who were Dershowitz, and they Anglicized their name to Dash.  So, but when I came in and walked up to the group and told them I had been sent by, I forget the biology teacher's name, he made it clear that I was not gonna be in the photograph in the, the nastiest way possible, and his face was beet red 'cause now he was angry and embarrassed, but he was, there was not gonna be any black kid in this ad, in this photograph.  And the kids that I knew who were students that were going to be in the ad--there were three or four, I think, it was a girl and two boys--these were students I knew and they were standing there smirking at my embarrassment, and so I just turned on my heel and walked out.  I never went, I never told the biology teacher, he might have told her, but I--she never raised it, I would run into her, this school was relatively small, but she never raised it again, and I never raised it.  Years later people asked me did I ever tell my parents and I said no, because I knew it would have hurt their feelings.  I'm not, to this day I haven't, I never told my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] and I've never told my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash], yeah, yeah.  But I think that really for me was a defining moment in terms of race.  And my understanding that my father's position of merit will get you through was not the case.  Now, here I was, here I, here, here I'm in a situation where I have achieved, and I'm turned away in the most humil- humiliating way because of my ethnicity.  So it was clear to me that, you know, this was part of American racism, um-hm.
Speaker 2: So what, what did you do with that energy that--?
Speaker 1: I think some of it became self-destructive.  There was anger that I had to work my way through, and that didn't come until, really until my adult life 'cause there was an anger that I carried with me, yeah.  I don't know if it had an impact on my studies.  I'm not seeing it, you know, to be all that it was touted to be in terms of ethni- I don't know that.  I didn't consciously not study, but I think I just continued at the same level.
Story_ID: 486674
Speaker 1: I think I know the answer to this, but did, were you involved in school activities or clubs and that sort of thing at the--
Speaker 2: Not so much.  The most, the most things that, the thing that I was most active with in my senior year was the basketball team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you weren't a member of the various clubs around subject matter like biology club or something like that?
Speaker 2: No, that didn't--
Speaker 1: You didn't run for class office, either--
Speaker 2: No, none of that (unclear).
Speaker 1: Were you considered a popular person at, at school?
Speaker 2: I think, I think I was, I think I was.  There were a lot of parties on Sugar Hill [New York, New York]; Washington Highlands [sic. Hamilton Heights] in New York [New York] where the, most of the kids, most of the black kids who went to Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] either lived in Washington Highlands, or in Queens [New York], St. Albans is one place.  And I remember some of the students at Rhodes who lived on Sugar Hill or Washington Highlands, would refer to me as the boy from the valley.  And that's how they saw that section of Harlem [New York, New York], you know.  And, and I would just laugh.  I mean, they, it wasn't, it was a put down but it wasn't, it wasn't, I didn't consider it malicious.  And I said yeah, I'm from the valley and I'm proud of it, yeah, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where the best black people live (laughter).
Story_ID: 486675
Speaker 1: I wanna take you back really to around the time that you were sort of nine years old.  And I--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --wanna have a sense of what type of person you were on the outs- inside, you know, what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't particularly know.  I, I know I was a happy child and very adventurous, very comfortable with everything that I was doing.  I can tell you as I entered adolescence, I became very insecure, I don't know where, where, where that came from, where this came from, and I developed an inferiority complex early (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Inferiority complexes don't come out of nowhere.
Speaker 2: They probably don't, but I can't, I haven't, I've looked for it, but I haven't found it.
Speaker 1: And your father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], your mother [Ruth Kydd Dash]--messaging?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You were an obedient child, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my parents were very supportive of me, so that wasn't the source of it.  But my, as I entered into adolescence I became what, most boys my age became awkward in terms of interactions and, and interacting with girls.  I was very shy around girls.  Don't know why that developed, I've never been able to, to pinpoint the source of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So were you, you said you were always shy, so is that, what were you thinking though?
Speaker 2: The shyness really developed with adolescence.
Speaker 1: Shyness developed with adolescence?
Speaker 2: With adolescence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And in this, is it, you think it was a direct correlation with the girls, you know, were there friends of yours, you know, up in, was it either Harlem [New York, New York] or the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: Harlem, this is in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Harlem.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't move to the Bronx until I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: They were quicker with the girls, the girls, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were, of course, there were guys who were a lot smoother, had better social skills, were much more self-confident.  And I would watch them and envy them but I couldn't operate like they did, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: Did, did, did the boys, did you guys play the dozens at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was very good at the dozens.  And you played the dozens and if you were good at it, and the other boy that you were competing with wasn't good at it, if he couldn't handle it, then he'd wanna fight, then that was okay too because I was big for my age so if he couldn't handle it, then, then he shouldn't get into the game.  And it was a sort of a sign of weakness if you wanted to fight, if you had entered a competition of playing the dozens or joning, and you couldn't handle it or you weren't quick enough to come up with a reply or something like that.  Because, you know, you did that in front of other boys and, of course, they were instigating on the sideline, which I did a lot of also, you know.  They'd say, "Oh, you're gonna let him get away with that?"  You know, so they would egg you on.  And I never got to the point where I lost my temper but a, a number of other boys did, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was a sign of weakness really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At least among the kids that I grew up, yeah, to be angry, don't enter the competition if you can't handle it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So would you fight?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, you would fight.  Oh, good.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's like your [maternal] grandfather [Lawrence Kydd] too, he fought?
Speaker 2: Right, but I never, I don't believe I ever started a fight.  But, you know, I wouldn't shy away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But would you win your fights?
Speaker 2: Most of them I did, yeah.
Story_ID: 486676
Speaker 1: The other question I have for you is, at this time, so the fourteen, fifteen, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, that's Harlem [New York, New York], that's, no, that's the--
Speaker 2: Well, that's--
Speaker 1: --the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: That's high school--
Speaker 1: That's high school.
Speaker 2: --that's Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], starting out in Harlem and at age, two months after my fifteen birthday moving to the North Bronx [Bronx, New York], but still attending Rhodes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask about the Rhodes experience because you, how did that, how did that happen that you ended up going to Rhodes?
Speaker 2: My, that's something my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] determined.  I knew about it in terms of being sent there by my father to take the entrance exam.  And I understood that this was a move to get me into Rhodes and then being told that I'd passed the exam and I would be attending Rhodes in the fall.
Speaker 1: Did he, did you question in between that period what Rhodes was like or why your parents wanted you to go, or you didn't wanna go?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I just accepted that this is a private school.  And I think I understood that I would get a better education than I was getting in public school, and this is the place that my parents wanted me to go, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know other friends of the family that kids were going to private school?
Speaker 2: No, and that was, I, I learned later that a lot of my family and my parents' friends would signify about the fact that I, they had sent me to private school.  And other people didn't see it, I'm talking about adults now, and these are conversations that I was not privy too, but when they were around their friends and members of the family, these things came up in adult conversation, and they would signify about wasting money by sending me to private school when their children was attending public school and it wasn't costing them anything.  And my parents' attitude was they didn't defend it or react to it and they knew what they were doing, and they let the signifying come and go without commenting on it.
Speaker 1: So your brother [Alan Dash] though at this time and he's only about five or four, four, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  When I'm fourteen--
Speaker 1: He is--
Speaker 2: --he is five.
Speaker 1: --five.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he's, he's a--
Speaker 2: Right.  So he attended public school up until I think the end of elementary school and then he went to--and by this time we were living in the North Bronx and he went to a private Lutheran school called Our Saviour Lutheran [Our Saviour Lutheran School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: So in, in no instance are you getting, your parents were getting financial aid to help support--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --this is out of their hard earned--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they're, they're doing it for their sons?
Speaker 2: In fact, when we moved to the Bronx my father took on another job as a night security watchman to both, 'cause we moved to the Bronx not to rent but to, we bought, they bought a home, and--a row house in the North Bronx directly across the street from the school that I had attended in the ninth grade but now I was in the tenth grade and going to school in mid-Manhattan [New York].  So paying the mortgage, sending me to private school, and eventually sending my brother to private school, for a couple of years my father had to work two jobs.
Speaker 1: And what is the messaging at home?  What are your parents telling you?  What are the things that you're--
Speaker 2: They're emphasizing my education and doing the best I can when I'm at Rhodes.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Because they--
Speaker 1: Why did they say that?
Speaker 2: --they, they're saying that they're going to send, their intention is for me to go to college, right.  For be- myself to go to college and that's why they, that's why we've put your brother into a private school.
Speaker 1: Do they mention anything about what college they'd like to see you go, their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't had no, they had no idea.  My going to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was my choice.  They didn't have any suggestions about what college I should go to.
Story_ID: 486677
Speaker 1: When you go to Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], can we describe like your first day at Rhodes?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can try.  I knew beforehand from a letter that was sent to the house where I was to report to for, what do you call it?  The home classroom for attendance is taken.  And from there I had a list of, I don't remember registering, though I assume that's part of the process, 'cause I know by the senior year I was selecting the courses I wanted to take because I had finished most of my requirements.  But moving around the building was relatively simple.  It was crowded, but it was simple during change of classes.  And I probably stumbled around looking for where my classes were.  I remember, I remember I was taking Spanish, biology, geometry, the first semester of geometry, an English composition course and perhaps an English litera- I was taking an English literature course too, yeah, world history, another course.  And world history I took from Don Keates [ph.], who was the basketball coach.
Speaker 1: This is a different experience than you've had before, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I'd already been through an experience where the majority of the students were white at Olinville Junior High School [M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School, Bronx, New York].  Now, the majority of the students are white, but I don't know the different ethnicities; that I come to learn over the course of the time.  I think by the fall I began to learn the different ethnicities because all of a sudden I'm told that we won't be coming to school on such and such day.  And it's not a holiday that I'm accustomed to; it's Yom Kippur.  And I'm saying well, "Why do--why are we off?"  And another student, a Jewish student, I can see his face, he was a very friendly guy, I can't call his name, tells me, well, it's a Jewish holiday, a very important Jewish holiday.  And I said, "And?"  He said, "Well, you know, most of the students here and most of the teachers are Jewish."  I said, "Oh, I didn't know that."  I just saw them as white people.  I knew there were different, white ethnicities but I didn't make that distinction.  And so I thought I had died and gone to heaven.  We were going to get the regular holidays off and Jewish holidays off, this is great, right.
Speaker 1: So what, what also about it, it's, it's the kids are, they're wealthier?
Speaker 2: They're wealthy but that doesn't occur, really begun, begin to, I think the first time I understood how, how much money they possibly have, compared to my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], was the following spring and that would have been the spring of '59 [1959], when a kid that I knew and was friendly with and was a year ahead of me, came to school on his birthday or the, a few days after his birthday with a brand new car that his parents had bought for him on his sixteenth birthday.  And he lived out in Long Island [New York] so that meant he had a full-fledged driver's license rather than a restricted driver's license which is the license at sixteen that you get in New York City [New York, New York].  And that to me was stunning, I, you know.  I couldn't put that together.  Here is this kid, and he would, of course, he was showing off and driving, I remember the weather was relatively warm because he had the top down and it was a brand new Chevy [Chevrolet], that year's Chevy, yeah, '59 [1959] Chevy.
Speaker 1: But Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], these kids are accepting you as, as, as you are though too aren't they?  Are they accepting you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but there's some snideness and there's, you know, you could, you pick up the subtle comments that that indicate that they have a particular view of blacks, you, you begin to pick that up.
Story_ID: 486678
Speaker 1: By the next year, one kid--
Speaker 2: Next year is your sophomore year, right?
Speaker 1: My junior year--
Speaker 2: Junior year, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in high school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].  One --
Speaker 2: And that's 1960?
Speaker 1: That's '59 [1959] to '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So when, when this particular incident happened I remember, I can still see the kid's face, Irish American kid and he said to me, "Mr. Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], why don't you go down south and get--go down to Alabama and get yourself lynched?"  And when he said that I grab, we had to wear jackets and ties to school, shirts, I grabbed him by the front of his shirt and I realized then, 'cause he just looked frightened, but if you're gonna step out and say something like that you should be prepared to defend yourself physically was my attitude.
Speaker 2: Right.  And that was what you were used even with the dozens--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --that we had talked--
Speaker 1: Right.  And I pulled him toward me and I realized that if I hit him that I would be the one expelled.  And I just let--John [ph.] was his name, and I just let him go.  I looked at him, he never did that again and always tried to avoid any interaction with me, yeah, after that.  That was fine with me.  He was in my class, we graduated together.  I probably can find him in my yearbook.  But, so I mean, you know, there was, that was the one incident that stands out and that was in my junior year.
Story_ID: 486679
Speaker 1: What subjects are you gravitating and what are you reading and, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, very interested in history and anthropology.  And, and it was in my junior year or it was my senior year, I don't remember, I think probably my senior year 'cause I could take a lot of electives, and I took a course in anthropology.  But I'm, I'm beginning now to read philosophers.  Everybody, this is faddish, you know, everybody was reading Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche], and so I had to read Nietzsche and to, to try to understand and talk about existentialism when we hung out in the Village, Greenwich Village in Manhattan [New York] at the coffee shops.  At least be, I didn't know necessarily know what I was talking about, you know, but at least be conversant enough to say that I had read Nietzsche too.  And I'm introduced to Dylan Thomas because I'm introduced to him through a friend of mine who's Harold Lee Hague [ph.], who was very interested, who was a poet himself and he introduced me to Dylan Thomas, I began to read him.  And I don't know that I necessarily understood him but I had to say that I read such and such and I read so and so and Ginsberg [Allen Ginsberg].  And I've become aware of the beat poets.  And a lot of the kids that I'm hanging out with at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], I gravitated toward and, and that is a distinction when I look back on it, and other people commented on it particularly other black students at Rhodes, that I hung out with kids who were orientated toward literature and to discussing, the discussion of literature.  I found that intellectually invigorating.  It was not something that I could discuss with the guys that I was growing up with in the Bronx [New York], or that I was still friendly with in my neighborhood in Harlem [New York, New York].  It was not something that most of them, if not all of them were interested in, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it's a split existence, you have friends--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --and that, that's normal, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --you have friends that serve different purposes.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I'm going into another transition.  A couple of my friends in the Bronx, I tried to interest in coming with me when I would go downtown to a poetry reading, and, and they would sort of look at me askance and say well, I, I should tell them what the poetry reading was like when I got back, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, are your parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] noticing any change in you?
Speaker 2: There may have been, there's no discussion of it.  Yeah, no, no overt discussion of it.  Not that I remember.
Story_ID: 486680
Speaker 1: Okay.  Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], let's go to the, the whole discussion with you and Larry [Larry Crowe] about the, you know, the exam and the, you know, winning the score of 95 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the New York State Regents Exam [Regents Examination]?
Speaker 1: Right, the Re- and then the, the teacher, I forget his name.
Speaker 2: Smollin [ph.].
Speaker 1: Smollin.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who and--
Speaker 2: The chemistry teacher.
Speaker 1: Right, the chemistry teacher.  And you said that you sort of, I, I don't wanna say you shut down, but it was--something shut down in you, I think.
Speaker 2: I think so, I think, when I look back on it.  At any rate I had gotten 95 at the end of my sophomore year in '58 [1958], spring of '58 [1958], 1958 on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I don't need you to--
Speaker 2: You don't want, you don't want to go through all of that.  All right, okay.
Speaker 1: --I don't need you to repeat the story.  I'm more interested in picking up with what shut down and the fact that, you know, you also around that time were, you know, you, I in the age fourteen, fifteen, you were starting to drink Thunderbird, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I started when I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.  Hm, well, actually the drinking really got out of control before this incident because I can date the first time that I drank too much, and that was July 4, 1959.  And the incident was, with this Smollin didn't pla- take place 'til that fall.  But I'm hanging out with the, in the Bronx [New York] with a guy whose two years older than I am, a guy named John A.D. Porter [ph.], he's dead now.  And July 4th he's taking me around this North Bronx neighborhood [Bronx, New York] to barbecues in different, at different homes and he knows everybody.  And, and he introduces me to Mr. Gordon's lemon flavored gin and he's buying the gin; I didn't have any money.  And I drank too much of it and, and I remember getting woozy, and, but that was the extent of it.  I was able to get home and get upstairs and get to bed.  And, and we went around to a, a variety of barbecues.  But eventually that began to increase and I began drinking more and more.  So I began having problems with alcohol before I graduated from high school but it was weekend drinking, it wasn't any drinking during the week, it didn't hold me back in terms of finishing high school or have an impact that I'm aware of on my grades.
Speaker 1: And no one, and your parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], no comment about that either?
Speaker 2: They're not aware of it.
Speaker 1: They're not aware.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm aware of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not acknowledging that I'm developing a problem with alcohol, you know, or developing into an alcoholic, you know, that came much later.
Speaker 1: So how much were you drinking?  I mean, how much--
Speaker 2: It was at parties.  It was always at parties.  It's always at a social gathering.  I'm not drinking--when I'm not at a social gathering, I'm not drinking anything.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what is your personality when you're drinking?  You had mentioned how--
Speaker 2: Fairly wild, and--loud and wild.  I would characterize it as such, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you went from the introvert, the quiet sort of understated guy--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to loud and wild?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Very much so, yeah.  And a lot of my friends from the North Bronx were acting in the same way; we all were doing it, yeah.  In fact, while friends of my peers in Harlem [New York, New York] moved into drugs, the group that I ran around with in the North Bronx saw heavy drinking as a rite of passage into adulthood, really, because we would have drinking contests.  And it was all part of being, it was all tied in with manhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: And was that the same thing, what, what about your friends at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York]?  Same thing?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, they were not heavy, none of, I don't remember any heavy drinkers there.  No, unh-uh, no drinking.  I mean, they had, I went to social functions but if there was, I'm trying, I'm trying to think if there was any heavy alcohol available, there probably was, I'm not aware of it, but it was usually wine, some kind of wine.  And, and I would have a couple of glasses and it was not a problem, yeah.
Speaker 1: But do you think you were really aware even back then that you were, you know, you were ca- you had a drinking problem?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you think, you didn't have, I mean--
Speaker 2: No, I was not aware of it then.
Speaker 1: No, no, no--
Speaker 2: I'll be--
Speaker 1: --I mean it was fun times and--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, it's what you did on weekends and--
Speaker 2: Right.  And I didn't see it as damaging to me, yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 486681
Speaker 1: So when you are in your senior year, what are you, what are you, your, you, I mean, sports were never a big thing with you, I mean what are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, although that senior year I'm playing for the school's basketball team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I'm really the second string center, you know.  No big star or anything, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you had spoken of, you know, sort of low esteem, has that abated some or do you, you know, is it, the fact that you maybe have found yourself through drinking or you find yourself through friends that you, you know, you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --no longer are feeling--
Speaker 2: By the senior year of high school, maybe even by the junior year I had transitioned out of that.  And whether I was--
Speaker 1: You were getting a sense of yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Whether I was drinking or not I was much more self-assured.
Speaker 1: Self-assured, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm dating, I'm playing the field, collecting phone numbers, don't have time to call all the people, all the women who, all the young girls whose numbers I've collected, might wanna call but there's none, there's only twenty-four hours in a day.  No, much more self-confident then and not shy at any situation, whether I'm drinking or not, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the other question I had was, you know, you had, you know, we were, we had talked about the fact that, you know, it was around, sort of around the same time, this is going back a little bit, maybe a year, you know, where the, you know, you sort of turn off what's, whatever his name Som- what his name is, the science, the chemistry--
Speaker 2: Mr. Smollin [ph.].
Speaker 1: Smollin who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you had, you had gotten, the group had disbanded because, you know, the religious group had disbanded, the church group (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Young People's Fellowship [at St. Luke's Episcopal Church, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a little later.
Speaker 1: That is a little?
Speaker 2: That's like at the end, that's like in the spring of my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Smollin is the fall of my junior year.
Speaker 1: But they're sort of similar so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there--
Speaker 1: --religion is like forget it at this point.  You were--
Speaker 2: Well, no, by, by my junior year I know that I no longer believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
Speaker 1: Now why do you come to that decision?
Speaker 2: I felt that he had been, I had read enough, I felt that I had read enough and knew enough to know that he had been created the Son of God by Christians, by his followers.  That he indeed, I didn't deny his existence, just like I wouldn't deny the existence of Muhammad, but I was aware that religions had prophets and that these prophets were real flesh, human beings who their followers might elevate subsequent to their deaths to the level of an entity, or some sort of supernatural being, and that's what I felt had been done with Jesus Christ.
Speaker 1: And who were you having these discussions with?
Speaker 2: Mainly with students, other students at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York], that's very clear.  I'm not having these discussions with friends in Harlem [New York, New York] and the Bronx [New York]. I'm having these discussions at the coffee houses in the Greenwich Village [New York, New York], a lot of interaction with a lot of kids who are coming to the same conclusions, or who are going through the same questioning.  And religion becomes, I don't know if it was a big topic of discussion, but becomes a topic of discussion with classmates and schoolmates at Rhodes, some older, some younger, yeah.
Speaker 1: And really this is a time that the Village is really the Village that we--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --got to know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's a lot of things, this is the beginning of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, the, time of social unrest.  I mean, a lot of things are happening around this time.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I had a very, at this point I had a very close white friend at Rhodes, Richard Hahn [ph.], and he'd always want us to go down to the Village together 'cause that, it made it easier for us to pick up girls if we were seen as a black and white friend, you know.   And girls were attracted to that, at least the girls who came to the Village.  And in a number of instances we were quite successful (laughter).
Story_ID: 486682
Speaker 1: In sch- when are you thinking about, 'cause you said it was, that was the whole purpose of Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] on the part of your parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] was to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To go to college.
Speaker 1: --to go to college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You said you only were thi- you had only thought of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: I only thought of Lincoln because of Reverend Robinson [James Herman Robinson].
Speaker 1: I see because, okay.  What's--
Speaker 2: 'Cause he was a, I knew he was a Lincoln graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Crossroads [Operation Crossroads Africa] is where, where in this period of time?  Is it your--
Speaker 2: Crossroads is behind me.
Speaker 1: It's junior year is Crossroads?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I--Crossroads is really, Crossroads Africa--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I had become aware of when I'm ten, eleven.
Speaker 1: Te- oh, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm living in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm attending church [Church of the Master, New York, New York] on a regular basis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he tells you back when you're ten and eleven about Lincoln or he tells you, you--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, he had a biography written ['Road Without Turning: The Story of Reverend James H. Robinson,' James Herman Robinson], and I remember we discussed it at the dinner table.  And my mother, I remember she saying something about Reverend Robinson that really struck me and stayed with me, that he was so poor and so hungry when he was a student at Lincoln University, I don't know if whether he was an undergraduate or when he went into the seminary that was at Lincoln, that he had to eat grass in place of food.  And that, that really, I mean, you know, that stayed with me.  I mean this, it stayed with me as a point of determination and a point that he had overcome this level of poverty, and now is a well-respected minister in the world, really, 'cause I could see he was very worldly; we read about him often in the newspapers.  But that he had come through all of that to be where he was today.  But, that's the, I remember that, that was one of the discussions at the dinner table.  My mother had read his biography, and he, and there was this description in there that him eating grass off the campus green 'cause he didn't have enough money to be in the dining hall or whatever.
Speaker 1: So it's because he went there is why you went there?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I also became aware that Azikiwe [Nnamdi Azikiwe] had gone there and Kwame Nkrumah had gone there.  And I said, wow, you know, Lincoln is the place to go.  So applying to Lincoln was my decision, not my parents' decision.
Speaker 1: And no one at Rhodes influenced that decision at all?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't even know Lincoln existed.  They wanted me to apply to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I didn't wanna go south, you know.  South was a, a--
Speaker 1: Backwards.
Speaker 2: And also a very dangerous place to go into.  I had already been told by another good friend's father who had grown up in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I had talked to him, his name is John Landry [ph.], his father's name was Louis Landry [ph.], this is up in the North Bronx [Bronx, New York].  And I remember Mr. Landry, John Landry's father saying to me, I was talking to him about Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] 'cause I had also heard about Xavier.  He said, "Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], I don't think you wanna go south."  And I said, "Why not?"  He says, "Because you talk too much, and I don't wanna see you get lynched 'cause you won't back down from a white man."  And I said, "Oh, yeah, that's, that's something to consider."  'Cause he was telling me you can't talk the way you talk and not put yourself into danger; you can't be your own person.  And we, it was a long conversation because John was agreeing with him, my friend.  And he was telling me how you had to survive as a black male in the South where he had grown up in New Orleans and come to New York City [New York, New York] as an adult man and experienced freedom for the first time.  He was an engineer for the New York City subway, he drove the subway trains.  And that was a good, a long conversation.  So, Lincoln University to me was in the North, it was in Pennsylvania.  In many ways that area is very southern, but it's out in the rural area southwest of Philadelph- forty-five miles southwest of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but to me it was in the North, Pennsylvania, so that made all the sense in the world that I would go where Reverend Robinson had gone, yeah.
Story_ID: 486683
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school in 1961, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  But I didn't get to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] until 1962.  I first went to, I'm glad you said that 'cause I first went to City College of New York which is now City Uni- part of City University of New York [New York, New York].  I went to, we never said City College of New York; we always said CCNY.  And I went to the Bernard Baruch School of Business [Bernard M. Baruch School of Business and Public Administration; Baruch College, New York, New York].  Big mistake.  Don't know what I, I know what I was thinking about, my Uncle Gordon [Gordon Hamilton Dash] had a, a cosmetic company called the Dash Incorporated [ph.].  And my long term goal at that point was to be in a position to take it over and turn into Revlon [Revlon Products Corporation; Revlon, Inc.] or, you know, that was a fantasy.  But I went to the Bernard School, Bernard Baruch School of Business on East 22nd Street and I said, oh, lord, (laughter) what was, what were you thinking about?  'Cause my, there was nothing that they were doing that I was interested in, you know.  I wasn't really interested in business, I wasn't interested in getting a business degree.  And so after one semester I stopped going and that's when I applied to, I think, it was that fall that I applied to Lincoln while I was still at Bernard Baruch.
Speaker 1: So when you were at, at Rhodes [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] your senior year you really hadn't formulated where you were gone, you thought you wanted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I applied to CCNY.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I got in so, you know--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --go to CCNY.  I really didn't have really strong direction and I wasn't getting any direction from my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.], they just wanted me to go to college.
Speaker 1: What about counselors at Rhodes?  What did they, what role did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they wanted me to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wasn't interested in going to Fisk.  And they listed that in the yearbook as the school that I was going to but I had never applied to Fisk, you know.  And, I can still see the counselor's face, the woman.  And they were really, I didn't know, I didn't realize this at the time, really assigning the student at Rhodes to go to historical black colleges [HBCUs], mainly in the South.  And I think we were so naive collectively we didn't understand what was happening, and I certainly didn't.  And I think I became aware that Fisk was a historical black college, but I had no intention of going to the South particularly after my conversation with Mr. Landry [Louis Landry (ph.)].  And anyway I applied to CCNY and I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then said this is a big mistake.  And Rho- I mean, Lincoln popped into my mind and I said I really need to go to Lincoln and that's when I applied while I was still at Bernard Baruch School of Business.
Story_ID: 486684
Speaker 1: Did you start Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], I mean in the fall?
Speaker 2: The fall of '62 [1962] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What I did is I got a job at NYU Medical Center [New York University Medical Center; NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York].  And I thought about going to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] because if you worked for NYU--I worked as a stock boy--if you worked at NYU, you could go to NYU for reduced tuition and I thought about it for a hot minute and I said, no, I don't wanna work and go to school; I wanna go to school full-time.  So that April of '62 [1962], I got a job at Freedomland [Freedomland U.S.A., Bronx, New York], which was an amusement park, it's closed now, it's--Co-op City [Bronx, New York] was built on the land that if you know Co-op City that Freedomland was based on.  But it was a great summer time job.
Speaker 1: Freedomland?
Speaker 2: Freedomland.
Speaker 1: That was a--
Speaker 2: It was an amusement park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I worked there every summer that I was at Lincoln.  I would come back and I'd get the same job back.  So the first summer was '62 [1962] and right after, just after Labor Day I went down to Lincoln, classes started the day after Labor Day.  And I met a guy who I had known all my life, he was registering the same day, a man named Vaughn Thomas.  And, and Lincoln, I stayed at Lincoln for about two and a-half years.  I left at the end of the fall semester of '65 [1965] and transferred to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't wanna cut, well, what was the last thing you were gonna say and I wanted to go back to something.
Speaker 2: Well, what, well, while I was there I was a English major and a minor in history.  And I became dissatisfied with Lincoln and what was available.  And I was more--again this past of mine is beginning to influence my decision making at least at this point because I wanted to take contemporary subjects on Africa and black history.  I didn't have any in the New York City public school system nor at Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].  And, Lincoln had one course taught by a Reverend Stevenson [ph.] again--not the same Reverend Stevenson [ph.] that did the confirmation class [at Church of the Master, New York, New York]--called Negro, Negro History and it was a one semester course.  And I was reading and talking about people like Chancellor Williams who was teaching at Howard.  For some reason I thought that E. Franklin Frazier was still teaching at Howard but I think he had already died.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in charge of African studies at one point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 486685
Speaker 1: And I had read 'Black Bourgeoisie' [E. Franklin Frazier] in '58 [1958] or '58 [1958] into '59 [1959] while I was at Rhodes Prep [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].  And that had--'Black Bourgeoisie,' now that I'm thinking about it, had a tremendous impact on me and it's had an impact on me up until today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Reading that in high school.
Speaker 2: How were you introduced to that in high school?  Was it a part of the high school curriculum or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't, wasn't--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a part of the high school, either I became aware of it about reading about a book review of it, or someone told me about it.  'Cause I remember reading it in high school and it had just come out.  And I think it came out in '58 [1958], I'm not sure, but I don't think I read it until my junior or senior year.  But I was, the, the, the, I thought E. Franklin Frazier had really captured the hypocrisy of the black middle class and the position of living in a society that rejects you and then creating institutions that reflect the society because you can't get into the white institutions.  And I began looking at that and I was stunned because that was all around me, I could see it then, and he really opened up my eyes.  But--
Speaker 2: Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] must have really confirmed a lot of what was in "Black Bourgeoisie", I guess, I would guess?
Speaker 1: Well, I saw it--remember I told you about the kids from the Washington Highlands [sic.] who referred to my neighborhood as the valley in Harlem [New York, New York]?  Yeah, I saw (laughter) a lot, I'm thinking of a particular young woman, I'm not gonna call her name, I'm, I'm still friendly with a group of kids from, from that period.  The, I could see, I could see her in the book, and she was a year ahead of me at Rhodes and it was amazing to me, you know, I mean, that she, she carried all of these characteristics, and her description of her mother, the way sh- I had never met her mother but her conversation about her mother, talking about her mother was right out of the book, you know.  So that book had a tremendous impact on me then.
Story_ID: 486686
Speaker 1: So when, you know, when you learn that E. Franklin Frazier is at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I, I didn't know he had died, yeah, and I knew of Chancellor Williams and his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, how did you find out about him?
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't remember, I think it was somebody at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  I think one of the history professors at Lincoln, and if not one of the history professors, no, because all my history professors probably wouldn't have discussed Chancellor Williams; they were all white at Lincoln, all of my history professors.  I don't think that, the guy that I was closest to was the head of the English department, Dr. Farrell [H. Alfred Farrell], but I was an English major.  And I was the editor of the school newspaper and that was a lot of fun 'cause I stirred up a lot of controversy.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the paper?
Speaker 1: Lincolnian, what else (laughter)?  I had a lot of fun with The Lincolnian but--
Speaker 2: What kind of controversies did you stir, stir up?
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, there were all kinds of things going on at Lincoln, there was a lot of antagonism between the African American students and the African students.  And, both sides had stereotypes about the other.  And, and I would solicit opinion columns that got into these issues, and all- inevitably whenever an edition came out we had to have a campus meeting to resolve the anger over the column, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How long when you--
Speaker 1: I was the editor for a year.
Speaker 2: --were you there before you--
Speaker 1: Became editor?
Speaker 2: --became the editor?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think I became editor, I know I was an editor, editor of The Lincolnian of the, of, for two semesters.  And I don't, but I was only there for, I left in the middle of my junior year so it had to be the second half of my sophomore year and the first half of my junior year, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You were editor when, when, when you left then?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that--
Speaker 2: Well, what did this--
Speaker 1: --was exciting.  And me writing editorials criticizing this and criticizing that, I was having a good time.  Criticizing the administration for doing this, and not doing that and whatever I could find that I thought that they were not doing, I'd write about or they should be doing, I'd write about that, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is at a time when on white college campuses, and it's agitation for more personal freedom and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: I think that comes--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --after this.  I think '62 [1962] to '65 [1965], maybe I'm wrong, but I'm not that aware of it at Lincoln because we're relatively isolated.  And--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I, you know, the paper that was sold on campus was the Philadelphia Daily News, and I don't know how good that was in terms of covering what's going on in the student movement in the U.S.
Speaker 2: So you think it really hadn't started to move yet (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I became more aware of that when I moved to Washington [D.C.] and I started reading on a daily basis The Washington Post, and even the Washington Evening Star.  But I don't think the, the only paper on campus that was available on a daily basis was the Philadelphia Daily News, and I don't, and I read it, I, I read it sporadically, you know, and I glanced through it, but I don't remember those kind of issues covered in the New York Daily--I mean the Philadelphia Daily News.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But at any rate, I don't remember who made me aware of Chancellor Williams but it was either at Lincoln or in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't think his book was out yet.
Speaker 1: No, 'The Destruction of--' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Destruction--
Speaker 1: --'Black--' ['Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. to 2000 A.D.,' Chancellor Williams] of Africa--
Speaker 2: Well, 'Black Reconstruction in South Carolina' [John G. Williams] I think was out.  Was that, was that it?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't remember that.
Speaker 2: No, okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember reading that at that period.
Speaker 2: But you remembered him, him in regard to Africa history discussion or--
Speaker 1: Or in contemporary African issues.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  It might have been going on in New York City that I had this thing so I knew he was teaching at Howard, contemporary African history.  And I looked up Howard's curriculum and there were a number of contemporary African courses being taught to undergraduates at Howard, and I made up my mind to transfer.
Speaker 2: Now, did you--
Speaker 1: Which didn't make my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] happy.  I mean, they were very upset about it and I explained to them that I was no longer happy at Lincoln, and I was transferring.  And I didn't wanna burden them so I said I'll pay my own way through school when I transferred to Howard.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: So in other words, you know, I'm going to transfer, I've made up my mind, and I'm taking over responsibility for putting myself through school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you can divert your source- your resources to Alan [Alan Dash], my brother.
Story_ID: 486687
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, there are some other issues going on there too I think, I think from what I was reading in the materials I had that, that you become a father at age eighteen, is this true?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I, actually, that was a summer romance from the period that I graduated from high school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York].  I graduated from high school June, '77 [1977], I mean, June, '61 [1961].  I met the mother of my oldest daughter [Darla Dash Washington] at a record hop in New Bedford, Massachusetts.  I was seventeen, she was twenty-one.  And I saw it as a summer romance.  And from, from that summer romance, my daughter was conceived and was born in June, June 4, 1962.
Speaker 1: Is it, is that part of the reason that you decided to go to City College [Bernard M. Baruch School of Business and Public Administration; Baruch College, New York, New York] and maybe stay around and I, I don't know, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, no, not actually because I didn't know about my daughter's existence until she was five months old.  So, her mother had gone through the pregnancy, and her mother had decided to contact me at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in November of '62 [1962].  Now, I had not seen her since the summer and the early fall of '61 [1961], and she called me long distance in the freshman dorm at Lincoln, and I was stunned.  Why she was calling me--when I met her she was separated from her husband and they already had a child, and then she had reconciled with her husband, and now he wanted to know all about the second daughter, the second daughter.  And so she called me, and I told her that I would have to come to New Bedford [Massachusetts] to see if the child was mine.  And I didn't go until my [maternal] grandfather [Lawrence Kydd] died in the fall, September of '63 [1963].  And I went to New Bedford and I asked my grandfather's youngest son, John [ph.] Kydd, K-Y-D-D.  And John and I were very close, we were months apart in age.  He was my uncle, but we were, we, we really treated each other as brothers.  And I told him, I asked him, I said, do you know where so and so is living?  He didn't know but he got in touch with her.  And, and I went over there and she lived in a part of New Bedford that I didn't know, so John had to walk me there.  And when we turned into the house--we had to go there at a point where her husband was not there, so all that was worked out.  And, I'm coming up the street, and in the front yard is a playpen with a little girl in it.  And so when I get up to, we turned into the yard, and, and we get up to the playpen, I looked down and the little girl looks up and I guess the expression in my face alerted John that I knew this was my daughter 'cause she looked just like my mother [Ruth Kydd Dash].  And John just looked at me and looked back down and said, "Yes, she just looks--she looks just like you."  And so we went inside and John left, and I picked her up and took her inside.  And when her mother opened the door, I guess, I'm guessing, that my face revealed everything because she began laughing, you know.  And we sat down and she said, "Well, why don't we leave it like it is now?"  Her husband was raising my daughter as his daughter, she knew I didn't have any money for child support and so we left it right there.  That was in September of 1963, yeah.
Story_ID: 486688
Speaker 1: Over the years were you, did you ever see her again or did you--
Speaker 2: I didn't see her again until she was eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was looking for her after the third trip to Angola.  By this point, '77 [1977], when I left in '76 [1976] for that trip with the, seven and a-half month trip with the guerillas, I was in a, a year into my recovery from alcoholism, and then I did that project [for The Washington Post] and I came back and I began looking for my oldest daughter [Darla Dash Washington] in the summer of '77 [1977], right after the series ['A Long March in Angola'] ran in August.  And I went to a cousin of mine, who I was very close to in New Bedford [Massachusetts], and, this is a female cousin, Donna Duwatt [ph.] and she said, I said, do you know so and so?  I'm studiously not calling the mother's name, right.  And she said, do you know so and so?  And I said, I asked her and she said, "Yeah."  I said, "Do you know her second daughter?"  She said, "Yeah."  And I said, "Well, that's my daughter, and I want to contact her and I wanna be a father to her."  And so she looked for my oldest daughter on my behalf for a year because the parents, actually the mother, the grandmother wouldn't tell my cousin where the daughter was, where her daughter was and where my granddaughter was.  Then the father of my daughter's mother died, and where, and where she was living, she came back to New Bedford and she was living far away from New Bedford.  She came back to New Bedford and Donna saw her at the funeral and told her that I had been looking for her for a year.  So when she went back home she called me and told me where she was living, and I said, "I'm coming."  And that's how my daughter and I re- we, well, united really for the first time.  She was then sixteen.  And then that was in the summer, that was July of 1978 and my daughter came to live with me that December.  Then in March of '79 [1979] she moved with me to live in Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a story.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that does--at least a, a happy ending--
Speaker 2: Right, 'cause from--
Speaker 1: --reuniting, yeah.
Speaker 2: --from, from what happened with her in Africa, and I paid for her--.  Well, she was very angry with me for a long time because when I met her she was a junior in high school.  And I went to her vice principal and looked at her academic records and I said, "No, she has to go back through high school and starting in the tenth grade."  So when she moved with me to live with me in Abidjan in the Ivory Coast [Cote d'Ivoire], I made her start in tenth grade.  But I was terrible from her point of view, you know.  She was a junior in high school, now I'm making her repeat the tenth grade, repeat the eleventh grade.  But I had it arranged an extension course with the University of Nebraska and they had an overseas, and I hired tutors and took her back through the tenth grade and the eleventh grade.  And then I sent her to private school for senior, for her senior year at a Marymount--a school run by Marymount nuns [Religious of the Sacred Heart of Mary].  That didn't settle too well with her either.  But at the end of that she was ready to go to college and she went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  She entered Howard in the summer of '82 [1982] and graduated in May of '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 486689
Speaker 1: Let's get you back at, making a transition from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so you heard about Chancellor Williams somewhere and Chancellor Williams is the, was then the head of the history department at Howard, I believe, was, was he there?
Speaker 2: I don't think he was.  Alfred--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Elsie Lewis [Elsie M. Lewis] was head of the history department.  When I got to Howard, Chancellor was teaching in the history department, but he was, Elsie Lewis, Dr. Elsie Lewis was the head of the history department.
Speaker 1: Well, Chancellor--
Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was out of Little Rock, Arkansas.  And she was straight out of the 'Black Bourgeoisie' [E. Franklin Frazier].  She was straight out of E. Franklin Frazier's book, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: She, she used to tell me about growing up in Little Rock and that the, she didn't have to be humiliated by going to the department stores to shop and being denied the opportunity to try on clothes, that the clothes were brought from the department store to her house, yeah.  And for her that was acceptable, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she any relation to [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis by any chance?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I think Lewis is her married name.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And I don't think, I, I've never heard of any connection between the two of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his, his father [John H. Lewis] was the principal at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School] in Little Rock [Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for years before he went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Oh, really?  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.  Well, maybe there is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Maybe there is a connection, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I wonder.  But so you spent a lot of time at Howard and--
Speaker 2: At Howard?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I graduated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From '65 [1965], I went there, I started in the fall of '65 [1965] and I graduated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were working the whole--
Speaker 2: In between--
Speaker 1: --time?
Speaker 2: --in the spring semester--when I went to transfer, I worked that spring semester in New York City [New York, New York] and went to Howard that fall, yeah.  First I was steam cleaning buildings at night to pay my way through school.  (Cough) It's the first job I got.  When I went to the job site, I saw the job advertised, and when I went to the job site the guy said, "Well, you get $4 an hour if you work on the ground level, and you get 7.50 an hour if you work on the scaffold.  Have you ever--," he asked me, "Have you ever worked on a scaffold before?"  I said, "I'm from New York."  That was not, I didn't answer his question.  He said, "Oh, okay.  Go ahead."  (Laughter) And the other scaffold guys told me how to work on a scaffold, yeah.  And there was a safety rope in case the scaffold fell and all of that, yeah, yeah.  So I was steam cleaning, I did that from late August until the weather began to change in, in mid-October and I said to myself, steam cleaning buildings at night in the winter is not, is not gonna make it, you know.
Story_ID: 486690
Speaker 1: So I began looking for an indoor job.  So one of the places I went to was Robert Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] office.  He was the senator from New York.  And there were no jobs there, but the, one of the staff people told me about a job that opened up at The Washington Post that they saw advertised that day for the night shift at The Washington Post, 6:30 in the evening to 2:30 in the morning for a copy boy, and that's what they were called.  And now that's politically incorrect, they're called copy aides now, but copy boy in '65 [1965].  And I went and applied for that job.  I went from that office to The Washington Post and applied for that job and got it and started working November 5th of '65 [1965] as a copy boy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Is this the kind of job that would enable you to study on the job, that sort of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And in between running errands, 'cause that's what a lot what copy boys do, and I closed up the newsroom at night, when everyone had gone home, I shut off all the wires and all the stories that had been written that day, I had to collect and take them up in a box and date them because they were put in a warehouse, and they were kept for five years in case there was a lawsuit for libel or defamation then they could go and find the original story, yeah, and see how it was edited.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you, that was what I did to close up the newsroom every night.  But in between that, (cough) there was a lot of time to study, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that was like 6 P.M. to 2--
Speaker 1: 6:30 in the evening to 2:30 in the morning.
Speaker 2: 6:30 to 2, okay.
Speaker 1: 2:30, 3:00.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sometime there were late editions like when Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was overthrown I was there in the newsroom, and they stopped the presses to put, put that story on the front page.  And that was the first time I had seen the, you know, I, I thought that was a myth that you saw in movies, you know, stop the presses.  They literally said, "Stop the presses."  Nkrumah was a big figure, and so they stopped the presses.  When was he overthrown?  January of '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was January, February of '66 [1966], I was still a copy boy.  And I had to deliver the pink slip to the cop- to the press room to stop the presses, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were--
Speaker 1: --wanted some of the last run, but it was late at night so they wanted some of the last run to have that as a front page story.
Speaker 2: So it's simul-
Speaker 1: And as they let, if they let the presses run while they're putting that story together then too much of the paper is gone, yeah.
Story_ID: 486691
Speaker 1: Well, this is the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --period of time, early '60s [1960s] when a lot of the African countries were, late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] are achieving independence for the first time.  The names in the news, Kenyatta [Jomo Kenyatta] and Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], Nnamdi Azikiwe, and you can go on and on all the different--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --heads of state, newly emerging states.  And this starts I guess about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nigeria has gotten its independence, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And so at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] you're at a school where Azikiwe went there, Nkrumah went, went to school there, but were the people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but there wasn't, there wasn't a lot of, as I mentioned it was a lot of antagonism between the African American students and the--.  Well, there was antagonism three ways, African American students, African students and students from the Caribbean.  And it was hard to get people to see that this was a false division.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone on campus or, or any place around you where there was a rhetoric, a rhetoric of Pan-Africanism or, or--
Speaker 2: No, not at Lincoln.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --not in this period.  There wasn't even any intellectual acknowledgment of Pan-Africanism, no.  Except maybe among a very few students and those would be the intellectual students, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most of the students were there to get a, at least the African American students were there to get a college degree to get a good job, that was their orientation, and do whatever was required to achieve that.  They weren't necessarily examining these contradictions among the, the student body, and it was a small student body.  I would guess no more than a hundred students maybe as small as four or five hundred students--
Speaker 1: So at--
Speaker 2: --I actually don't know.
Speaker 1: --at the time when you were--
Speaker 2: It was a very small campus, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you knew everybody from every class, yeah, while you were there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So at the time that that you were editing the paper [The Lincolnian], were you consciously aware of trying to bring these students together through--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --agitation in the paper?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was.  And pointing out in sarcastic way, them having a different world view.  I mean, the students who came from the British West Indies saw themselves as superior.  The Africans saw themselves as superior.  The African Americans saw themselves as superior over both groups.  You know, it was the same kind of thing I had run into in New Bedford [Massachusetts] between the West Indians, the black Americans, and the Cape Verdeans, same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same thing played out again, yeah.
Story_ID: 486692
Speaker 1: Let me, before we, we get deep into The Washington Post I wanna go back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a second, the history department at Howard.  Was Joseph Harris [Joseph E. Harris] there, he should have been there then?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Not, no (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember Joe Harris.  My history teachers were Elsie Lewis [Elsie M. Lewis]--
Speaker 1: Chancellor Williams.
Speaker 2: --Chancellor Williams, and his first name is Marc, I'm blanking on his surname, he later went on to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  Harold Marcus [Harold G. Marcus].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were my history professors.  And there was another, it was a guy from Scotland who I took a course on the American Civil War, took a course from him.  Those four, oh, no, wait there was a, there was a woman who was, who was, I can see her face and I'm blanking on her name.  So because I had switched my major from English, at, at How- at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] I was an English major with a minor in history, and at Howard I switched my major to history with a minor in political science.  Part of that it was because I had become more interested in history, and also I wanted to prolong my student deferment as an undergraduate 'cause you could get an undergrad- you could get a deferment from going into the [U.S.] Army, being drafted into the Army as an undergraduate.  And so that's what, literally what I did, yeah.  I changed to another major, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: History, major in history, minor in political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what history courses did you take and what, what aspect of history or period attracted you the most?
Speaker 2: American history really attracted me, and a realistic assessment of American history.  So I took Negro history, two semesters of Negro history from Elsie Lewis.  And she really taught me how to be a very good researcher.  I mean she was very demanding and very exacting, and made us spend a lot of time in the Moorland-Spingarn room [Moorland-Spingarn Collection; Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.], which is a collection of African American history and the original documents at Howard.  She wanted us to use primary sources, learn how to use primary sources rather than secondary sources.  And that was very good to take those classes from her.  And from Chancellor Williams and Harold Marcus, I took African history and contemporary African problems, post-independence Africa.  From Chancellor Williams, I took a course in guerilla warfare in Africa and not knowing that later on I would go to live with guerillas and (unclear)--.  When I, when I went to live with them the first time and the second time I went back, that course came back to me because he talked about how guerillas operate and so on and so on.  And I was seeing it played out, I was living it because I was traveling with them by foot.
Story_ID: 486693
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) now you mentioned Chancellor Williams the other night and as someone who had a tremendous impact on you--
Speaker 2: He did, yeah.
Speaker 1: --if I'm not wrong.  And he's someone who--
Speaker 2: I can still--
Speaker 1: --a lot of people are still reading 'Destruction of Black Civilization' ['The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. to 2000 A.D.,' Chancellor Williams] is the number one seller of Third World Press--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which is right here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about Chancellor Williams and--
Speaker 2: He was a very serious man; very stern; very open to interacting with you, but always very formal; always suit and tie in class; had very poor vision; very strong voice, I can still hear his voice.  And I remember when he, he lectured us and he wanted us to--and he told us take these notes because you're not gonna find this in any book.  And he would read from his notes and we would just copy, when he was reading.  And he had to hold his notes up to his face as he read 'cause his eyesight was so poor.  And then you would go and see him in his office during office hours, and he would engage you and talk about Africa in a very enthusiastic way but he also was realistic about some of the contemporary leaders and their shortcomings.  And he wanted you to be aware of that.  We talked a good deal about Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] and he felt that Nkrumah had bankrupt Ghana before the coup, and that was in part the reason for the coup.  And he agreed in that respect with the coup makers and he was sorry to see it happen to Nkrumah, but he recognized Nkrumah as having shortcomings as a human being.  He was realistic about Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure] and how brutal Sekou Toure and paranoid Sekou Toure had become as the leader of Guinea, Guinea-Conakry.  So in listening to him he didn't sugarcoat anything when he talked about things, men in, in, in Africa who had great promise but had revealed deep flaws when they came to power.  I, that had, that had, I think that had a tremendous impact on me and the way I covered Africa years later.  That I wouldn't, you know, I would not sugarcoat anything that, you know, you had to present this factually as close as you could get to, factually.
Story_ID: 486694
Speaker 1: I remember a fel- an erstwhile friend who had this hero worship of Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure] and became very upset about the way I characterized and wrote about Sekou Toure from going to Guinea-Conakry [Guinea].  I was surprised I got a visa to go into Guinea-Conakry and actual interviewing and having dinner with Sekou Toure because in, from this man's point of view, he had seen Sekou Toure as a genuine her- hero from 1958 when he told the French he'd rather be enslaved than be subjected to French neo-colonialism.  Well that was a very strong position to take, but at the same time he had significant flaws.  And I fell out--
Speaker 2: Now this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with him, Sekou Toure, you know; he was not a hero of mine, particularly after what he did to Diallo Telli, the first secretary general of the African, African, not the African Union, the Organization of African Unity, you know, and put him on this starvation diet, so that--he, he called it the black diet which meant that you didn't eat and, you know, he starved the man to death in prison.  All because Diallo Telli had become an African wide figure, and he felt by, somehow that his status was threatened by that so he killed the man.  You know, I mean, you don't ignore that.
Speaker 2: Now Sekou Toure became--I don't know if at the time if you knew Stokely Carmichael, who later changed his name to--
Speaker 1: Kwame Ture (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Kwame Ture--
Speaker 1: I visited Stokely Carmichael--
Speaker 2: --in honor of Sekou Toure.
Speaker 1: I visited Stokely Carmichael in Guinea-Conakry at his house.
Speaker 2: But did you know him at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So was, was he still a student when you were a student?
Speaker 1: No, he was no longer a student when I got there in '65 [1965], but he always--
Speaker 2: He was in Alabama then with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], right, in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Well, I had, we had, we were at a party together, I might as well tell you this story, and I got into a fight with a guy that was bigger than me and won the fight, and so he was always reminding me of that.  It was, you know, it wasn't any long, drawn out fight or anything like that, but he remembered that, and he always brought that up 'cause I interviewed him many number of times as a reporter.  And he'd always bring--.  And then the story got, he would embellish the story literally more and more, it was more involved (laughter), then I'd say it wasn't all of that (laughter) as, you know, whenever he recalled it.  And there were other people there and he'd tell them, you know what this man blah, blah, blah (unclear) and it was, you know, some student party in the '60s [1960s] when I was a student at Howard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't, it wasn't something that lasted a long time, you know.  You know, this male testos- testosterone is what it is, you know.  He looked at me the wrong way or I looked at him the wrong way and I don't even remember how it started (laughter).
Speaker 2: A little Thunderbird didn't have anything to do with it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then there were words and neither of us could back down 'cause there was an audience, you know.  You, you know, that situation, you've seen it, yeah, yeah.  You've been in it probably, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I try to stay out of those but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: But so, so Stokely Carmichael would come back to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I would take him up to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Howard?
Speaker 1: --my house to eat.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  So that I could interview him exclusively for stories I was doing.
Speaker 2: You mean in--
Speaker 1: Stokely.
Speaker 2: --during the Howard days?
Speaker 1: This is before--
Speaker 2: I'm talking about during the Howard days.
Speaker 1: During Howard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is long before he changed his name to Kwame Ture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So quite a few--
Speaker 1: But I saw him as Kwame Ture in Conakry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Later on.  Well, we'll get--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to the later on part of it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I just wanted to establish what's going on at Howard when you were there.
Story_ID: 486695
Speaker 1: So figures like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was a lot of turmoil--
Speaker 1: --and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 2: --you know, oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: There were some other SNCC people coming back and forth too right, telling stories.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah and then there's, there's the killing of the students in Orangeburg, South Carolina, and that's February of '66 [1966] is it or '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: Cleveland Sellers?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's either '66 [1966] or '67 [1967], I'm, I'm sort of hazy on the date, I believe it, maybe it's February of '67 [sic. 1968].
Speaker 1: Right.  Were Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] students involved in that?
Speaker 2: No, but he came back to hold a rally--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the quad and told, he gave a, a detailed description of the, the, the students who were demonstrating in Orangeburg and how the state troopers had shot 'em in the back, and their wounds were in the bottom of their feet, to show that they were running away and there were no threats to the state troopers; they just opened up on them.  And I remember that very clearly because he held a rally right in front of the Fine Arts Building [Lulu Vere Childers Hall].  And I'm a member of a fraternity, and--
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: The one that's the most conservative, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's the one that's--.  That was referred to as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Isn't that the one that's the most conservative?
Speaker 1: The ones they call the Que Dogs?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what they--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And you could tell from my personality what I would gravitate to.  But at any rate I had pledged at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  But at any rate, he's giving this description of what happened in South Carolina, and the sororities and the fraternities are still demonstrating.  And I'm, I was with the crowd listening to what he was gonna tell us about, and he made reference to his Greek brothers and sisters who were still out on the main quad dancing and demonstrating the, the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and the Ques, the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].
Speaker 1: They were demonstrating their affiliation with their group, right?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they--no, they were dancing and singing like they did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, having--
Speaker 2: --every Friday afternoon.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it was, you know, it was embarrassing to me that the Ques were over there, you know, dancing and singing around The Dial, and we're in over, standing over here listening to what this man had to say, you know.
Speaker 1: Is that the, the--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --I, I may be getting 'em up mixed up but that's not the incident, Robert Williams was involved in Greensboro [sic.], North Carolina, I think, right?  Robert F. Williams and the 'Negroes with Guns' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The one that fled to China?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think that's what, what he was involved in.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I get the greens and oranges mixed up.
Speaker 2: Well, no, it's, it's--
Speaker 1: It's not, yeah, Orangeburg.
Speaker 2: --it's South Carolina with Cleveland Sellers.  He's now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --head of African American--I've seen him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's now the head of African American studies, or the equivalent of it, it could be black studies or something at the University of South Carolina in Columbia [South Carolina].  And we talked about, when I saw him there two years ago, we talked about that day.  And I reminded him about his sarcastic remark about his Greek brothers and sisters should come over and hear what he had to say (laughter).  And he, and, and we, we laughed about it, I mean, you know, because he understood that the singing and dancing was more important to them than to hearing what had happened at a major civil rights event, or the denial of civil rights, you know.  And it was, the singing and dancing was much more important to the sororities and fraternities.
Story_ID: 486696
Speaker 1: But even in that, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in those days was probably one of the most politically focused of the black schools [HBCUs] in the sense that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was always a small coterie, coterie of the students.
Speaker 1: It was the only school with a black s- with an African studies department, you know.
Speaker 2: Was it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Howard at the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --Hansberry [William Leo Hansberry] was the first to start one, I think it was the only one that had one.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Hansberry mentored Chancellor Williams.
Speaker 2: Lorraine Hansberry?
Speaker 1: No, William Leo Hansberry--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: --mentors Chancellor Williams.  Yeah, so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.  All right.  I, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: The African, what do you call it the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think I was aware of this.
Speaker 1: --Africa House [Washington, D.C.], Africa House at Howard was set up by William Leo Hansberry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He, he's the uncle of Lorraine Hansberry.
Speaker 2: All right.  I don't think I was aware of those issues at the time.  But, it was clear that the majority of students were there, like the majority of students at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], to get their degrees, to have a social life, and to get out into the world and do well.  And, being active in the Civil Rights Movement, or even empathetic, empathetic, I mean, they were not unaffected by what was happening, but they were more interested in following the social agenda than listening to something of, of substance and that was to me embarrassing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did the students become more politicized as we approached 1968?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later in '67 [1967], that same year, because a lot of demonstrations began at Howard, but again it was a small group of students, as always, who were very intellectually focused, felt Howard was going in the wrong direction, thought James Nabrit's [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] leadership at Howard, the president at the time, was--the outlook was--.  Well, they, they would describe Nabrit in very negative terms as being old school and kowtowing to congressmen on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] so that Howard always got its annual appropriation from [U.S.] Congress because Howard is a line item in the federal budget and it gets a direct appropriation, I think, first through Health, Education, and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], and now through the [U.S.] Department of Education, but it's not a part of the education budget but the line item is financed through the education budget.  So they were saying Nabrit was passe, and they needed more leadership.  And, so, Nabrit was burned on, an effigy on campus.  Then there were a number of demonstrations.  Lewis B. Hershey [Lewis Blaine Hershey], the then head of the draft board was hounded off the stage at Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.].  I knew that that was gonna happen ahead of time, so I was the only reporter there and we had, The Washington Post had the only photographer there.  I had become, I told you that I had begun working at The Post in '65 [1965], and by June of '66 [1966] I was in The Washington Post internship program.
Story_ID: 486697
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, how did that take place?  Now, you, you're, you're a copy boy and then how do you make the transition?
Speaker 2: I think it's because they anticipated a riot in Washington [D.C.] the summer of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Now that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't say that to me, but that was what I felt.
Speaker 1: And that's what the, all black reporters from your era--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --say the same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The riot got 'em a job.  Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] said that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A lot of people think they were in the back water until the riot and then they got hired by--the major media started hiring black reporters.
Speaker 2: Right.  So I believe that they felt there was gonna be a riot in '66 [1966].  So in April of '66 [1966] the then city editor, Stephen Isaacs, approached me about going into the summer, would I be interested in going into the summer intern program that June, June of '66 [1966].  And, you know, what my question to him was?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: How much does it pay?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he told me and it was more money than I was making, I said okay, fine.  Okay, fine.  Then--
Speaker 1: So you didn't see that, you didn't, you, you, you're saying that you were kind of naive about the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My intention at that time, my intention at, let me tell you, well, let's be clear, my intention at that time was to finish my undergraduate education and go to law school; that was my interest, I was gonna go to law school.  I didn't know, I, I thought I might wanna do constitutional law because I was becoming more and more interested in constitutional law.
Speaker 1: So, so you didn't see any continuity between being the editor of The Lincolnian and--
Speaker 2: And being a copyboy at The Washington Post?
Speaker 1: --being a copyboy, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  It was a job that I got because I didn't wanna steam clean buildings at night.
Speaker 1: Did you see yourself at that time as a good writer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But not as a reporter, and, you know.  I had already done a lot of fictional writing and some, some autobi- autobiographical writing.
Speaker 1: What did you, what kind of fiction did you--
Speaker 2: I had won an essay contest at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] on home rule, you know, that kind of thing.  And I was--
Speaker 1: Home, home rule for D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Home rule for D.C.  And what I, while I was a copyboy at The Post.  And, but, I went into the intern program that June, and they had a lot of kids from, black and white from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Ivy League schools.  These were all, particularly the white kids in this intern program were people who I felt were wired from birth.  So I had some disdain for them because I didn't think they had to work for anything.  I think their--my attitude was in listening to them that they were sort of entitled and preor- preordained, yeah.  A number of them were quite wealthy.  I remember one girl whose father owned, I don't know how many, it was mentioned about how many thousands and thousands of acres of forests in Canada that was used to produce newsprint.  I said, boy (laughter) you know.  I might have resented them, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: So there was (laughter) the source material for the paper actually in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why I figured she was in the intern program, yeah, that's what I felt the connection was, you know.  Richard Blumenthal who's the current attorney general of Connecticut was in that intern program, June of '66 [1966].  So, but all of a sudden I got turned on.  One of the, my first front page story was on [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry when he was the chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: Now, about what, this is '66 [1966], right?
Speaker 2: Six [1966], summer of '6 [1966], June '66 [1966].  The first story I'm sent on turns out to be a front page story on Marion Barry, and he was doing community organizing through block parties.  And it was a big, it ran with a big photo of him with a Panama hat and a dashiki.  And he gave me a very hard time, you know.  He told me I was a reporter from the white establishment press.  I wanted to interview him about black power, he said, "I'm not talking to you about black power."  He just was unpleasant and difficult.
Speaker 1: Well, how'd you feel about that?  I mean, how did you--?
Speaker 2: It angered me.  But I couldn't show the angry 'cause that would be unprofessional, yeah.  It angered me.  But it all came back (laughter) when he ran for mayor in six- '78 [1978], I was assigned to him, and I reminded him about how he treated me in '66 [1966], he said, "I don't remember that."  I said, "I do."  (Laughter) You know.  But I didn't do anything unfairly to him; I just wanted to put him on the defensive, yeah.
Story_ID: 486698
Speaker 1: Soon, I was into it and I forgot all about law school.  I became very interested in what I was doing.  I also was very naive; I thought that we could right a lot of wrongs, a lot of wrongs could be righted if we covered them in any depth, and revealed the aspects of it, or how people ended up like this, and writing about it could, and, and looking at it as a reporter and getting the details of it could change it if you were able to explain it in the writing.  And that continued in terms of me wanting to use my writing as a civil rights tool until, this is '66 [1966], maybe until, I'm trying to think exactly, maybe '78 [1978], when I saw, it, it might have been earlier, I, I, I can't date it, when I saw the stories that I had done repeat themselves.  And I said how can this be?  This is story that I've done, I, I, I covered an Arthur Cappick- Arthur Capper public housing project [Washington, D.C.] and cataloged all the deficiencies in this public housing and the lifestyle of the people and what was happening, sometime in the '60s [1960s].  And now--and there was a big effort to correct the physical plant and to do more social programs for the people living in this public housing project.  And then I think ten years later, it would have been '78 [1978]--so I would have done that maybe in '68 [1968]--'78 [1978] there was another reporter doing the same thing at the same housing development and everything had fallen apart again.  And I said, oh, man, you know.
Speaker 2: So you were disappointed at that juncture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was very disappointed.  And--
Speaker 2: I mean, do, do you now feel--
Speaker 1: --I had moved on to other subjects now so I wasn't covering that, that kind of thing.  But my focus then changed to what you really, really need to focus on and keep your focus on is informing people, just informing them.  Now, how it, what comes out of that you don't have any power over.
Speaker 2: So rather than change, being able to change 'em you can--
Speaker 1: Inform them.
Speaker 2: --inform 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Change can come from information but--
Speaker 1: But my focus was really information, yeah, yeah.  Informing people, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, I didn't, I didn't ask you about this one.
Speaker 1: But that was a gradual change and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that that housing project was the catalyst for me, yeah.
Story_ID: 486699
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about, about the, the assassination of Malcolm X in '65 [1965] and how that affected you?  That's about the time that you started at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, that was, that was probably, that was a significant impact on me because watching the coverage of his assassination in particular--number one, I was hurt.  And some friends of mine were sophisticated enough to know that the, that he had been killed by Black Muslims.  I didn't wanna believe that so I was being naive in that respect.  This is in February of '65 [1965].  And my father [Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] made a comment on the intensity and the level of the media coverage of his assassination.  And his comment was, boy, they were really afraid about that man.  They were really afraid of him because the coverage was so extensive of his assassination.  And it went on in New York City [New York, New York] for a while, yeah, um-hm.  And then, of course, the people who were arrested and eventually convicted of his murder were Black Muslims, yeah.
Speaker 1: From New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At any rate, well, did you read Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal] on a regular basis in those days?
Speaker 2: I did.  And I remember, I remember friends of mine commenting on that in a disparaging way.  "Why are you reading Muhammad Speaks?"  And I said, "Why not read it?"  You know, you, you pass a Black Muslim selling it on the street and I'd give him whatever it was and I'd read it and I'd carry it with me, you know, quite openly.  But I remember friends of mine making disparaging remarks about reading it.  And I said I read everything, you know.  As in, yeah, but I did read it, yeah.  I thought most of it was propaganda, yeah.  But I, I read it anyway, I enjoyed reading it.
Story_ID: 486700
Speaker 1: I'm thinking of an instance where I was traveling downtown with some friends of mine on the subway, and I was reading 'Listen, Yankee' [C. Wright Mills] about Cuba and this woman was, kept looking over my shoulder, she was white.  So I finally just took the thing and put it up in her face (laughter) and she said, "I ought to slap your face."  (Laughter) And my friend said, I remember (unclear) Gale Hutchers [ph.], said, "Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], what are you doing?  Will you leave that woman alone?  Come over here."  (Laughter) I was a teenager, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was at Rhodes school [Rhodes Preparatory School, New York, New York] then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was quite taken with how the U.S. government was treating Cuba, this small island, because the--what are they so afraid of, you know, that could come out of Cuba and, and undo the American government, you know, it seemed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do, do you remember--
Speaker 1: --and it still seems ridiculous, and it was ridiculous when I was a teenager and it's ridiculous today.
Speaker 2: Was it about, about that time, was it when Castro [Fidel Castro] came, came to Harlem [New York, New York] was it about this--
Speaker 1: That was '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: That was before this.
Speaker 2: Before that, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know he visited--
Speaker 1: He came to Howard [sic.] in '50 [1950], no '60 [1960] early '60 [1960] 'cause he stayed at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Theresa, he sure did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  It might have been my senior year of high school when 'Listen, Yankee' came out but it was all about the Cuban Revolution, yeah.
Story_ID: 486701
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966] or thereabouts we're talking about The Washington Post and you were covering [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and going to school at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time?
Speaker 2: I was going to school full-time (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And trying to evade the, get out of the draft.
Speaker 2: Evade the draft, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I would register while I was at Howard for a c- full course of, full course load.  I think it was fifteen hours and then I'd drop two courses, get it back to nine hours after they sent my information off to my draft board in New York City [New York, New York], in the Bronx [New York].  'Cause I was, when I registered with the draft I was eighteen and living in the Bronx so my draft board was in the Bronx.  And then I would have my two years of, two year, I would have my one year student deferment for that period.  And, and I continued to work at The Post full-time and go to school full-time, well, go to school and take nine hours, take three courses probably.  By '67 [1967] student activism really erupted at Howard and that became my assignment by default because the student activists would tell me what they were planning to do in terms of a boycott of classes, in terms of taking over the administration building.  In terms of having a demonstration when Lewis B. Hershey [Lewis Blaine Hershey], who was then head of the draft board, would come to spe- came to speak at Howard.  I, often I was, oftentimes I was the only reporter there, particularly at the beginning.  And we had the only photographer there 'cause I would make sure, make out a photo assignment to get a photographer there.  And there was a lot of activism at Howard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who--
Speaker 2: --in '67 [1967] and '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: --who were the student leaders at Howard?
Speaker 2: I, I don't remember, like I said, I can see their faces, Ewart Brown who is now prime minister of Bermuda was one.  Yeah.  His nickname was Yogi [ph.].  He was a student activist and also covered sports for The Washington Post (laughter).
Speaker 1: Prime minister of--
Speaker 2: Bermuda today.
Speaker 1: Bermuda today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ewart Brown, E-W-A-R-T, Brown without an E.  And JeRoyd Greene [JeRoyd W. Greene, Jr.; Sa'ad El-Amin] was another, he was a law student.  And JeRoyd had--was it J-E, capital J-E, capital R-O-Y-D.  I don't remember, I can see their faces but I don't remember all the names, all right.  Tony Gittens [Anthony Gittens] was one.  He's very active in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] now with the black film art festival [Washington, D.C. International Film Festival; Filmfest D.C.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was another one.  And at a certain point they took over the administration building and they held it for several days.  That was exciting and interesting.
Story_ID: 486702
Speaker 1: Then they wanted to, there was, it must have been the fall of '67 [1967], Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] elected its first a- homecoming queen with an afro, Robin Gregory.  And all of a sudden she was up for disciplinary hearings after she was elected homecoming queen.  And the students disrupted the meeting, disrupted the disciplinary hearing and pushed the security guards out of the way.  Well that was a difficult story for The Post [The Washington Post] to run--I wrote it, it was a front page story--because guess who's standing in most of the photos, up front where the security guards are being pushed aside, laughing?  (Laughter) Me.  I'm in the photo, so they had to show, they had to go through the photos and say you're making this very complicated (laughter), and choose a photo at least where I'm looking and not laughing, or whatever.  But there was a lot of fighting and tussling in, in, in that particular scene.  And, you know, I thought it was, you know, I thought it was, I thought the students were right; I covered it fairly, but I thought the students were right.
Speaker 2: So they were, they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they were being, the administration was being unfair toward her to hold some disciplinary hearing about her being expelled because she had been involved in some other demonstration.
Speaker 2: Is it because they didn't like her image?
Speaker 1: They really didn't like the fact that she was a, a black woman with an afro; that was very clear.
Speaker 2: And this--
Speaker 1: And that she--
Speaker 2: --to put this in historical context, heretofore black beauty queens were--
Speaker 1: All, all black woman with straight hair or straightened hair.  And the epitome of being the reflection of the white society, the mirror of the white society, how we, you know, the double consciousness, that we're always looking at ourselves through the eyes of whites, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] had written about that.  So, well, at any rate I continued covering the demonstrations (unclear).  And then I ended up on a disciplinary list, Ernest Goodman [Ernest E. Goodman, Sr.] who was in charge of public relations for Howard University, and I worked with his son at The Post, he and I both, his son Ernest Good- Goodman, Jr. [Ernest E. Goodman, Jr.] was a copy boy with me.  And he hadn't made the transition to reporter but he wasn't interested, he was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], he wanted to go in the [U.S.] Air Force and fly jets.  And he was heading for Vietnam, and I accused him, "All you wanna do is get up there and drop napalm in Vietnam on babies."  (Laughter) He said, "Oh, man, why you, why you--?"  (Laughter) You know, that, you know, that was the rhetoric of the period, you know, why, why you wanna go in the U.S. Air Force and fly in Vietnam dropping bombs on innocent people?  What's wrong with you?  Huh?  What if they come over to Northeast Washington [D.C.] and drop a bomb on your house?  (Laughter) You know, all of that.  That was all part of the rhetoric of the period.  And we got along well, I mean, we've been in touch since then.  He, he didn't see the world the way I did but that's, you know, that's how we presented it.  But at any rate, Ernest Goodman (unclear), Ernest Goodman, Sr. called me, I forget whether it was in the office or at home, to tell me I was on a disciplinary list for people who were being considered for expulsion, students, for disrupting the normal operation of the university that was the regulation we supposedly broke.  So I contacted the dean of students, Dean Blackburn [Armour J. Blackburn], and I went to see him.  And I told him, you know, I--when you see me at these demonstrations I'm there as a reporter, I'm a student here, but I'm at these demonstrations as a reporter, and if you look at the byline on the story, you'll see my name.  And I expected him to ask me--but he never did, and I respected him for it--I expected him to ask me in that meeting how is that you know where the demonstrations are going to be before anybody else knows?  And how is it The Washington Post always has the one photographer present there, that the other news organizations have to get the photograph from The Washington Post?  But he didn't ask me that.  He just sort of smiled and looked at me knowingly and said, "Well, Mr. Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], you know, we're not going to, you, you don't have anything to worry about."  In other words, you know, I'm not going to be expelled.  He was not going to make an issue of me being present at the demonstrations and have that run as a story in The Washington Post also.
Story_ID: 486703
Speaker 1: Then soon after that I got a letter from the academic dean, Dean Snowden, and I went there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's Frank Snowden [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.], whose--
Speaker 1: Frank Snowden who did 'Blacks in Antiquity.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was important to a lot of historians, black ancient historian, a classicist, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the few.
Speaker 1: And he talked about blacks--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Greek society and so on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Right.
Speaker 1: That's what, I had never read anything that he's done but I knew that was the gist of his research and what he was known for.  And he told me that I was graduating, that I had enough credits.  Now this conversation is taking place in late fall of '67 [1967].  Now, whenever they send around the documents or notices for you to sign up for graduation, I never filled those out, never, you know.  I was planning to be an undergraduate for the rest of my life (laughter) as long as the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] was on.  But he, he showed me my transcript, I started to say curriculum vitae, transcript and said, "You have enough hours here both in history and English with a minor in political science to graduate.  Well, what else--?"  (Laughter) "You're graduating in January."  So I graduated in January and I actually walked that June of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I was finished in January of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: My concern at that point was I no longer qualified for a student deferment.  So that February I joined the Peace Corps.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was accepted in June and The Post [The Washington Post] gave me a two year leave of absence.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had like two questions here to go back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a minute.  Did you know [HistoryMaker] Lena Williams, had she started at that point?  She was a reporter.
Speaker 1: No, I don't know the name.
Speaker 2: She, yeah, she became a reporter for The New York Times and one of the members of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] but--
Speaker 1: Well, she wasn't a founder?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: I don't know her.  Are you sure that she doesn't follow the, the NABJ was founded in nine- December of 1975.
Speaker 2: She might have been a, she might have been a, I don't think, I don't know if she, I don't think she was a founder (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, she was not a founder, I can tell you that she was not a founder.
Speaker 2: But she was one of 'em, she was a member and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But I don't know her.
Speaker 2: --a prominent member, okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know her name either.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She was at Howard, she was the editor of The Hilltop at one time.
Speaker 1: What period?
Speaker 2: In--around '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], something like that.
Speaker 1: Well, it would have to--I left in the spring, well, after I graduated I was gone, I left for, that fall I left for Kenya (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it, it, it's moot if you don't know her anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know her.
Speaker 2: And--
Story_ID: 486704
Speaker 1: Go ahead, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To talk about Kenya, I had been dating my first wife [Dyann Waugh] now since the summer of '67 [1967], she was a student at American University [Washington, D.C.] and she was graduating in June of '68 [1968], we both were graduating in June of '68 [1968], or I had graduated in January of '68 [1968].  So, we had planned to get married, we got married in June.  We submitted our applications to the Peace Corps as an engaged couple, and then after we married in June, they informed us that we were assigned to be harambee teachers in Kenya, East Africa.  Harambee means in Swahili, let's pull together, that means you're assigned to a community school in, in, in Kenya, not a government school, but the school with the poorest resources, yeah.  And that was fine with us.  And then we went to Kenya, well, there's a story about the draft board.  The draft board now, I'm up, in Upstate New York in a place called Monroe, New York, doing total immersion in the Swahili language training and the draft board catches up with me there through my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.].  And, you know, the, you know, words to the effect of: "Where are you?  What are you doing?  The last time we heard from you, you were in Washington [D.C.], you were a student at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]."  And so on and so on.  And they said, "We wanna see you right now."  So I had to leave Monroe, New York, and come down to New York City [New York, New York] and go to a meeting at my draft board, and the chairman of the draft board said, "Well, we don't know if we're gonna let you go into the Peace Corps 'cause you're now twenty-four, and if you go in the Peace Corps that's two years and you'll be twenty-six.  And we can't draft you after twenty-six."  I already knew that 'cause [U.S.] Congress cannot draft y- the draft can draft you up until you're twenty-six if Congress has not declared war.  If Congress declares war, they can draft you up to the age of thirty-five.  I knew all of that, you know.  I was very conscious of what could be done and not done under draft laws.  And they said, "We want you to report back here to us the first day of Jan- the first day of 1968 [sic. 1969]."  Well, the first day of 1968 as it turned out it was a Monday and it was a holiday 'cause it was New Year's, New Year's Day, and they were closed so I couldn't report back.  And we were leaving that day, my group were leaving that day for Kenya on a chartered KLM [KLM Royal Dutch Airlines] flight out of JFK Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport] in New York [New York], and I was on that flight.  And then they sent me a letter, my draft board again, to me in Kenya (laughter).  And I said why don't these people leave me alone (laughter).  And when I opened the letter, it was a two year deferment.  And I figured they just decided let him go, and that's what I figure, you know.  And that was it because the next year Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] set up a selection system by a lottery, and I was not in it because I already had a deferment, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were literally, the, the draft boards were literally drafting people out of Kenya and sending them to bases, sending them for a physical at an [U.S.] Air Force base in Italy, and if they passed the physical sending them for basic training in West Germany.  These, these were people that came over with me particularly those who came from small communities.
Speaker 1: So they could actually draft you out of the Peace Corps and--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  The, the Peace Corps was not an automatic deferment.  It was up to the discretion of your draft board, yeah.
Story_ID: 486705
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I came back after two years of teaching in rural Kenya, I taught among the Nandi, who were pastoralists.  Two years of that and I came back to the states in 1971.
Speaker 2: Let's not skip over it too fast because--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: --I think it's important that we talk about who the Nandi and what you--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the Nandi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what that experience was like.
Speaker 1: --the Nandi are one group of the, one, one group of what is lingually, what is classified by linguists as the Kalenjin, these are people who speak a similar language, among them are the Kipsigis who lived near us.
Speaker 2: The Maasai.
Speaker 1: The Maasai, but they're, they're farther away in the lingual classification.  The Nandi of course, and all of these groups are pastoralists.  And cattle are very important in the central part of their culture.  And, I think my biggest lesson there was cultural relativity, living with the Nandi because my, my wife [Dyann Waugh] would fix dinner, we invite some of our neighbors in to eat and she did it like we were--she grew up in Haddonfield, New Jersey, right outside of Camden, New Jersey, outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And she would be upset because she'd tell people that she was gonna serve dinner at twelve noon or lunch at twelve noon and people would show up as late as four o'clock, five o'clock.  And, she thought it was awfully rude.  But when we, when invitations were reciprocated, and we started going to other people's homes, we realized that the food that we were going to eat at their houses wasn't even killed until we arrived.  If we were going to have chicken, the chickens weren't even collected and exe- and slaughtered until we were there.  Same thing if we were gonna have goat or a small sheep.  If it was a cow or a couple of bulls for a big, let's say baby christening, that was killed well in advan- of arrival of the guests but if you were the main guests, the food wasn't even killed until you were there.  And it was killed in front of you so you knew--that was part of the honor, so you knew that this food was being killed in your honor of visiting my house.  And it was an all-day affair.  Not like in the West where you have, invite people over for dinner and you expect them to stay two, three hours and go home.  No, it was all, all day, yeah.  So, we began to adjust to that because they were not going to change, we had to change; we were the visitors.  And that, that to, to us was a big lesson.
Story_ID: 486706
Speaker 1: Also there was a lot of frustration the first term because I was determined to take, bring all my students along; I was preparing them for the Kenya secondary exam.  And this exam determined whether you went further in your high school education and eventually ended up in college.  If you didn't pass it, that was the end of your high school educations, form one and form two.  And I was determined that I was gonna pull all of my students along, so the majority or all of them would pass the exam.  Well, you know, I was making a nervous wreck out of myself, pushing my students.  And some of them were at different levels of ability to learn and I wouldn't acknowledge that.  And so I was (laughter) someone who was frustrated.  In fact, I pushed my students so hard they threatened to strike (laughter).  We didn't have any, we didn't have many books; we had these long blackboards, they weren't black boards they were cement walls that were painted black.  And I had three sections in my history class.  And so I had to write everything just like Chancellor Williams read to us at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I had to write everything that they needed on the blackboard so I'd write one section of a blackboard, and start on the second section and then start on the third, and they were writing, they were following my writing and then I'd go back to the first section and erase it and begin writing on the first section again and then erase the second and write on the second, you know, maybe for a whole period.
Speaker 2: Now, this is, what history are they being taught at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) World history.
Speaker 2: World history.
Speaker 1: World history.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: And, 'cause I want, 'cause I gave essay exams, I didn't give short answers, 'cause I wanna prepare them for the essays on the Kenya secondary exam.  So the leader who's now a teacher, the leader of the strike, Patrick [ph.], I can't think of his last name, stood up and I could hear him standing up because the chair was scraping on the ground and I thought it was a student going, getting up to go back into the, back into the bush they had latrine for boys and a latrine for girls, so I wasn't paying attention.  And then I didn't see any, out of the corner of my eye, I didn't see anyone go out of the door, and I turned around and Patrick was just standing there, and I said, "Patrick, what is it?"  You know, 'cause he should be sitting down taking notes, what is he doing standing up in the middle of the classroom?  And I had stopped the business about asking me permiss- for permission to go to the bathroom, just go and come back.  He said, "Well, Mwalim," which is short for teacher, the word in Swahili is mwalimu, it's almost like saying teach.  "Mwalim, we find this class very difficult, and we think you're too difficult f- ," words to this effect, "too difficult and, and you're making it too difficult for us to do this and--."  Blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I looked at him and he, and he said, "We're going on strike."  And I said, "Oh."  And there were a lot of strikes all over Kenya; students stroke over many things.  And I said, "Well, those who--," 'cause I was preparing them for the exam that I was giving them. I said, "Well, those who are here for the exam will get the grade that they get, and those who don't show up will get zero."  And I turned back and went back to the board, writing the notes.  And he sat down and the strike collapsed (laughter).  It was funny because I met him in my, I, I had revisited that place several times and whenever I see him, that he's a school teacher, I say, I'm saying, "I'm going to go, come to your school and tell your students the day you threatened to strike."  (Laughter) And he said, "Please don't."  Yeah.
Story_ID: 486707
Speaker 1: Did the experience meet your expectations you had about Africa when--
Speaker 2: I don't know that I had any deep expectations.  I was very excited about going.  I had always wanted to go, this was my first opportunity to go.  The Peace Corps had wanted my wife [Dyann Waugh] and I to teach Starehe Boys' School [Starehe Boys' Centre and School] in Nairobi [Kenya], and they wanted to showco- showcase us 'cause there were very few blacks in the Peace Corps.  And we insisted that we were not staying in Nairobi, we didn't come all the way to Africa to hang out with the urban elite, Starehe Boys' School was for the sons of the ministers; it was an elite school.  We said we, we wanna teach at a harambee school, we were originally assigned to a harambee school and that's where we wanna teach.  So they sent us way, 250 miles northwest of Nairobi, and in those days it took two days to get there over dirt roads.  And it was the best experience of my life.  It was as close as I could get to an authentic African community.  And the two of us really immersed ourselves in that community.  In fact, both of us are still supporting students, the children of friends that we made there in '69 [1969] and '70 [1970], we're still supporting the children and grandchildren in terms of their education of those adult friends.
Speaker 1: Now, now, did you really mean it was the best experience of your life?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Or just a good experience?
Speaker 2: It was the best two years of my life, period.  And it was the period where I had the least or almost no psychological turmoil about being a minority in a country such as the United States where I felt a psychological release that I had never felt before.  And it really--when I said, when you said what is my favorite vacation spot, it's Kilibwoni, Kenya.  Kilibwoni, is K-I-L-I, B as in boy, W-O-N-I.  And that's the trading center and it's the location of the high school that I taught in.
Story_ID: 486708
Speaker 1: In 1968 Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and you were in Kenya then, I guess you'd been there about four months (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was April of '68 [1968].  I left for Kenya--
Speaker 1: Yeah, April of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: --I left for Kenya January 1st of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Oh, you said '68 [1968] before--
Speaker 2: New Year's Day.
Speaker 1: --so that threw me off.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, New Year's Day, '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That threw me off, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the states.  I was working at the--
Speaker 1: Now you were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], so you were, you were in--
Speaker 2: --I covered [for The Washington Post] the assassination.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was sent, in fact, I had been down there the week before with a, a white reporter named Paul Valentine [Paul W. Valentine], and the two of us were sent the week before when the riot broke out in connection to the march about the garbage workers getting a contract with the city, and we covered that.  And we came back, and I literally was in my apartment and the phone rang and as I stood up to answer the phone, a news flash came over the CBS ['CBS Evening News'] and Walter Cronkite announced that Martin Luther King had just been killed.  So bef- had just been shot; it wasn't known that he was dead.  And so even before I got the phone to my ear I knew who it was, and it was the city editor, one of the city editors, Bill Brady, calling me to tell me that Martin Luther King had just been shot, for me to get a suitcase together and get to American--to get to National Airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.], an American Airlines flight was being held for me and Paul to go back to Memphis [Tennessee].  And we both raced--he, he was living in a different part of Washington [D.C.], but we were both racing almost simultaneously to Washington's National Airport and literally walked, they were holding the, the head of the finance department of the newsroom was standing at the door to the airplane holding--Bob [ph.] was his first name, I'm blanking on his last name--holding the tickets for me and Paul to fly to Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel about it?  I mean, what, the, the whole thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very sad.  I thought that this was the, my reaction was that this was--.  I didn't know, I didn't anticipate the break, the outbreak of the riots, but I felt that his assassination, and I didn't know the details of the assassination--I didn't know that, I still didn't know that he was dead when I got on that plane and I didn't have any information even, we had to fly, I forget where we flew to catch a connecting flight; we couldn't fly straight to Memphis.  I don't think I understand that he was dead until I arrived in Memphis and by that time the riot in Washington had broken out.  Right in areas that I had raced through to get to the airport.  But, I felt on the flight going down that, I felt despondent, and I felt that a, a great hope for change in America had been killed.  And I, and I was surprised that he'd been assassinated, I really was 'cause I thought that his stature put him above this, and, of course, I was wrong and very naive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then you were equally surprised about the riot too, you didn't think that was gonna happen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause when, by the time I called back and we had done some on the ground reporting and called back the riot was in full gear, in full operation in Washington.
Speaker 1: Now, they, last summer there was a movie out about Petey Greene, I think--
Speaker 2: 'Talk To Me.'
Speaker 1: --fictionalized kind of version.
Speaker 2: I went to see that, I went to see that.
Speaker 1: Did, did it--
Speaker 2: And it was very accurate, with Don Cheadle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Don Cheadle, yeah, it was very good.  I thought it was very accurate, and I thought he really captured Petey Greene, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you knew Petey and--
Speaker 2: I didn't know him.  I knew him to say hello, I don't think he knew me, and I knew what he looked like, and I had met him at several functions and said hello, shook, shook his hand but I don't think he knew me.  I don't think he knew me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 486709
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971], you finished your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tour with the Peace Corps--
Speaker 2: My wife and I returned to the states after we did a tour through--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's, can--what is his wife's name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sorry what, what is your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Dyann Waugh, D, first name is D-Y-A, double N, last name is W-A-U-G-H.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So is it, is, is she Jewish or German or, or--
Speaker 1: She's black American.
Speaker 2: Black American with Waugh?
Speaker 1: Her father, Bascom Slemp Waugh, he's dead now, grew up in Virginia, rural Virginia, I wanna, I, I, I've forgotten the name of the town, he's a black American and the mother [Alberta Foye Waugh] was a black American from Georgia.
Speaker 2: That's an unusual name in the black--
Speaker 1: But he was a physician in Camden, New Jersey.  And they lived in Haddonfield [New Jersey].  They moved there in the mid-'50s [1950s] and the neighbors, it was, Haddonfield was a sundown town, meaning no blacks after sundown, that was the policy and--
Speaker 2: There's been a new book written about that ['Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism,' James W. Loewen].
Speaker 1: --they pretended to be a butler and a maid when their house was being constructed in Haddonfield when they would come to see to it.  Then they moved in and people threw rocks through the kitchen window and so on.  And then a group of people got together to buy the house from them and they wouldn't, he wouldn't sell.  But that's the house she grew up in, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 1: I met her at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in 1963, and she was dating a good friend of mine, and--who ended up marrying her girlfriend.  And then there was a long gap when I didn't see her, and then we reconnected at a party in Connecticut.  She was a student at American University [Washington, D.C.].  I had seen her once or twice while she was at American University, but something clicked in the summer of '67 [1967] at this party in Connecticut, right outside of Hartfield, Connecticut [sic. Hartford, Connecticut]--Bloomington, Connecticut [sic. Bloomfield, Connecticut].  And we started dating from the summer of '67 [1967] and then married in June of '68 [1968], um-hm.
Story_ID: 486710
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So leaving, we left Kenya in December of 1970, we traveled through East and West Africa, North Africa, Moro- and then into Spain and London [England] and then home.  So we were back in the states by early February.
Speaker 1: Do you have a, kind of a quick synopsis of how, what, what, what you thought about how the Peace Corps works, I guess, in for, you know--
Speaker 2: You know, I really didn't, I don't (unclear), the Peace Corps to me was an avenue to get there and teaching at a, a community built--our school was very poor, we didn't have, there were no window panes in the windows, there was no ceiling, so when it rained on this, on the tin roof, you had to stop teaching because the rain was very heavy and it drowned you out.  I told you there were latrines in the back, there were no dormitories for the students and students came from many miles away.  This is in the highlands of Kenya, never went above 80 [degrees], never went as, lower than maybe 50 or something like that in the, in the coolest weather, this is where all of Kenya's runners come from.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They were all Kalenjin.
Speaker 1: Were, were they excited in the '68 Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico] when Kip Keino [Kipchoge Keino] won the 1500 meters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, and I, I met him when I first moved, when we first arrived at Kilibwoni [Kenya], he had just won the gold medal in Mexico, right.  And, but, I guess I should move from there to '71 [1971]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  So anyway we traveled through East and West Africa, and North Africa, Spain, and England, and then back home.  And I went to work, went back to work at The Washington Post in February of '71 [1971].  I, I was on general assignment.  It was not a very good period for me, my reentry into the states.  Remember, I told you that this period for me was one of the best periods of my life, the two years in Kenya.  And now I was back to a society where I felt I was genuinely less than a man, or treated as such, and it was a very bad adjustment.
Speaker 1: Would that characterize how you were treated at The Post?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the society itself, that's how I saw it.  So my drinking really took off then, and it became daily drinking very quickly on expense account, I had an expense account.  There were a lot of liquid lunches that reporters did, and I did them, but my liquid lunches began to extend themselves to all day drinking.  So, by the period, even with the trips to Angola, '73 [1973] and '74 [1974], my drinking just continued to increase.  So by the time I returned in '74 [1974] from my second of three trips to Angola, I easily was drinking a fifth, or a fifth and a-half of whiskey a day, right.
Speaker 1: Was drinking part of the guerilla lifestyle over--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in Kenya?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean, in Angola?
Speaker 2: They had a, they had a delicious alcoholic drink that they made from honey called honey beer, and that was, that was nice, that was nice, but it wasn't heavy drinking.  And it wasn't that, it, it wasn't available all the time.
Speaker 1: So that kind of kept you away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ovingu-
Speaker 1: --away from it when you were there?
Speaker 2: The, the Ovimbundu name for that honey beer was Ovingundo, O-V-I-N-G-U-N-D-O--
Speaker 1: It's almost like--
Speaker 2: --D as David, O.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's almost like the name of the group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But anyway that's what it was called, Ovingundo.  And, but by the time I was back in the states and had written the series ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash] on the second trip on the colonial side of, of Angola, the series ran the same week that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] ra- Nixon resigned.  In fact, he knocked me off the front page.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which annoyed me, you know, I said you, you should have held out a few more days before you resigned (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 486711
Speaker 1: We should go back and set up the trip.  Now, you were, I think the other night when we were discussing this, you were saying that you were working on some, was it housing statistics or something or, or, be, when you got the, the--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the first invitation to go to Angola, right?
Speaker 2: When the first, the invitation to go to Angola, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At first I was on general assignment.  Oh, I ought to tell you too is to because we filed a racial discrimination, myself and six other black reporters filed a racial discrimination complaint against The Washington Post with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC].
Speaker 1: Now, now, when, when was that?
Speaker 2: And Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] was our lawyer.  Huh?
Speaker 1: When was that filed?
Speaker 2: We filed it in March of '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I returned to the states in February of '71 [1971], we had, I had already been agitating for racial change at The Washington Post, better assignments for black reporters, not, all of us assigned to the city desk ghetto to cover black Washington [D.C.], or black issues.  I had already been mentored a good deal by Bob Maynard [Robert C. Maynard] when he came to The Post in 1967; he was one of my early mentors.  And when I returned to The Post in, in, myself and another black reporter named Jesse Lewis who later became a Middle East correspondent for The Post, had already confronted The Post at a meeting about them not living up to the affirmative action or the equal opportunity clause that was in the Guild [Washington-Baltimore Newspaper Guild] contract.  And, so Jesse and I attended a meeting and forced them to make some changes and so on.  They made some changes just because the two of us were there, right.  This is all before I left for the Peace Corps.  I had confronted Ben Bradlee about why was Arthur Ashe on the inside page for some major, I think a U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships, New York, New York], it wasn't Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England], this is before Wimbledon, but some major tennis event he had won and was the first, he was the first black to win it.  The New York Times had him on the front page, and I wanted to know, myself and Jesse again, wanted to know from Bradlee in a face to face meeting why wasn't Arthur Ashe on the front page of The Washington Post?  And you could never get straight answers about that, it was a competition with this, and a competition with that, you know, it was smoke and mirrors, you know.  So, in a number of meetings, at least one meeting Bradlee insisted that there would be changes.  He had now become--when I first came to The Post, I can't think of the name of the executive editor, he was managing editor and Russell-someone [James Russell Wiggins] was editor and soon after that Russell retired and Bradlee became editor.  So all this, a little bit of agitation had gone on at The Post, betwe- my period there as a reporter from '66 [1966] to '68 [1968], now I was back in '71 [1971] and it was stunning because absolutely nothing had changed in the newsroom.  And that, you know, I had been away for two and a-half years, nothing had changed, it was the same, same old same old.  You had the white, white highlands; that was my characterization of the national desk and the foreign desk.  And all the blacks bunched up on the, on the metropolitan desk or the city desk.  So I literally began working with the other black por- reporters on the desk, on the city desk to tell them that we needed to do something about this.  I was a little surprised by some of the responses I got initially by--they were repeating rhetoric that they had just heard but it was rhetoric that to me I had heard in '65 [1965] and '66 [1966].  And they were talking about, well, we're just entering the industry, we're just gathering the experience and so on and so on.  And I said, yeah, well, that doesn't, that's the same thing I heard before I left in '68 [1968], so we need to work at bringing this to a screeching halt now.  And that took a year of discussion among the black reporters before we, we delivered a list of demands to Bradlee, twenty-two or twenty demands, I forget how many, about needed change at The Washington Post.  And that was in early of, early 1972.  And then we tried to do a negotiation with Ben Bradlee and Howard Simons, the manager editor, and they wouldn't budge, yeah, well, they, they said they were budging, they said they'd do this, and they'd do that and do this and do that and they, and we said that's not enough.  We wanted 35 percent black representation in every job category at The Washington Post, newsroom, and they weren't gone do that.  Bradlee was saying, "Well, that'd cost me a million dollars and Katharine Graham would fire me."  And we said, well, if that, if you have to be fired and sacrificed and be fired (laughter) and he said, well, that--he wasn't gonna fall on the sword for us.  So then we filed a, we held a press conference and announced that we were filing a racial discrimination complaint against The Washington Post and that was in March of 1972, there were seven of us and Clifford Alexander was our lawyer at the press conference, and we did that.  Then there was a long investigation by the EEOC, and they issued a report by the end of the year, I forget exactly when it was published, but The Post ran it, declaring The Post a discriminatory employer.
Story_ID: 486712
Speaker 1: And we tried to negotiate a settlement with, through the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] with Ed Califano [sic. Joseph A. Califano, Jr.] who was representing The Washington Post.  And at the first negotiation meeting, myself, Richard Prince, and I think Michael Hodge [Michael B. Hodge] attended, or Ron Taylor [Ronald A. Taylor], I forget who, I know Richard Prince and myself were there across the table from Califano and he said The Post was not gonna negotiate because there were errors made in the findings from the EEOC.  And I told Califano, I said, you know, he was working with Bennett Williams [Edward Bennett Williams] and Califano, which Edward Bennett at that time owned the Redskins [Washington Redskins], and I said to Califano, "You're just trying to stir this up to the point where you can make enough money to buy your own football team."  And he just laughed and didn't deny it, and he just laughed.  And said, "Well, my clients refuse to negotiate on the basis that there were errors in the report and until the EEOC withdraws the report, we're not going to do anything, we're not going to negotiate."  So then we asked the EEOC to take The Washington Post to court and the commissioners to our disappointment voted that The Washington Post can be taken to court by us, but they were not going to take the, the commission itself was not gonna take The Washington Post to court.  Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] up to this point had been rep- representing us pro bono and he worked with a prestigious law firm, Arnold and Porter [Arnold and Porter LLP, Washington, D.C.] but now Arnold and Porter said now we have to pay legal fees.  Well, legal fees at Arnold and Porter started at some astronomical amount per, per hour and we were not gonna do that.  But we left the report hanging over The Washington Post.  And The Washington Post because of that report began to make changes, began to hire people for the national desk, the foreign desk, and to increase the number of black sport writers, that kind of thing, yeah.  So we had made a small change at The Washington Post, it wasn't, I didn't see it as some significant change but we had made a change because--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --now you had on different, some different perspectives coming in to the news columns of The Washington Post for the first time.  Yeah.  I was quite happy about that.
Story_ID: 486713
Speaker 1: All through this period my drinking was increasing, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, my willingness to confront people also was increasing.  In some respects when I look back on it, it was either suicidal or I didn't care about the long term results.  And I probably didn't.  Because when I returned to the states from Kenya my anger was out of control and it was very self-destructive, yeah.  I didn't, you wouldn't have been able to convince me at that period that it was self-destructive, but it was when I look back on it.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, the anger emerged when you got back and discovered things were the same way or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --what--?
Speaker 1: And I didn't like the readjustment.  I had to come back to the states, but I wasn't adjusting well.  In, in part it might have been culture shock, in part it was probably coming back to a society where I recognized that blacks were less than human and didn't have full citizenship rights.  But it was getting out of control, and I, and I didn't recognize it.  And I was pouring liquor on it to which was not helpful 'cause I couldn't think my way through it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, now what about the book with--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What about his marriage?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Is it, does, does that trouble your marriage (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, my, and my drinking, my drinking, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --my drinking troubled my--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --marriage and it ended up destroying my marriage, the first marriage.  My wife [Dyann Waugh] and I separated in June 1972.
Speaker 2: Okay so that's about a year after you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Almost four years after we married, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A year after you got back?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, I got back in February of '71 [1971], we separated in June of '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So the, was drinking the issue or--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, very much so, very much so, yeah.
Story_ID: 486714
Speaker 1: During this time period you wrote this book with Ben Bagdikian, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we did a project called 'Shame of the Prisons' ['The Shame of the Prisons,' Ben H. Bagdikian and Leon Dash].  This also led to the, the twenty-two demands, or however many demands there were.  Ben Bagdikian, I was covering, in '71 [1971] I was covering the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] prison system and writing stories out of the prison system.  And Ben Bagdikian was getting ready to do a ser- (cough) a series on prisons in the United States.  And he asked for me to be, to work with him.  And a city editor who had been a thorn in my side and had been blocking me in a number of ways, and we were really coming to a point where it was going to be a major confrontation between the two of us, tried to get another reporter assigned to Ben Bagdikian, but I was well aware of it 'cause Ben Bagdikian told me.  So that, all that information was in the, the twenty-two demands about what the particular, we named the editor, I named the editor and what he had done and so on, in an effort to stymie my career, I felt.  So that all became an issue and, and as part of these demands or confrontation with Ben Bradlee.  Hm, but then Ben and I went on to do the project.  The project was the first time that I did extensive long term interviews and it was very significant to me because I, I found the, in the prison system, well, as I began looking at the prison system I already knew that 50 percent of the thirty odd men, thirty odd thousand men and women who cycled through were criminal recidivists, people who were arrested on a fresh crime two years, within two years of being released from a previous sentence.  And my interest was, well, what do we do now to really intervene in their lives so that they can, so this syndrome will stop, this repeated coming back and forth to prison.  So I was really looking at the prison's rehabilitation system, which maybe affected 2 percent of the prison population; I didn't know that at the outset.  And I found a, a grandfather, father, and grandson, in the Central prison [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.], and but they didn't wanna be, the one in the middle, the father didn't wanna be a part of the project.  I also knew that from prison officials that there were entire family units circulating through the prison system.  And then I found a father and a son who, the Lawrence Smiths [Lawrence Smith, Sr. and Lawrence Smith, Jr.], and I interviewed them.  And over the long term, long term interviewing, they eventually--I'm saying long term, over three months of interviewing--they eventually revealed that they didn't have this, the basic skills to be habilitated, they had never been habilitated so you couldn't, they were semi-literate, they had never been given a full academic foundation to make them competitive in the American job market.  Drug dealing was one of their options as far as they saw it.  And that meant that father and son would continue to cycle through the prison system.  And that was this, that was my contribution to these, to the series, that rehabilitation was a false, if not frayed hope given this, this condition.  And so then that was published as a book that year, I think in '72 [1972], or s- yeah, '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], right.
Speaker 2: Literally after we filed our complaint against The Washington Post, you know.  And they began making some changes.
Story_ID: 486715
Speaker 1: But I think that targeted all of us, and I think we, well, I understood that it targeted all of us 'cause I told my wife [Dyann Waugh] when, the beginning of this that was she willing to go on welfare 'cause she was doing at the time a master's [degree] in public health nutrition at University of Maryland, College Park [Maryland] so I said will you be able to do this on welfare 'cause, you know, The Post [The Washington Post] will probably fire me.  She said, "Well, they're not gone fire you, you know."  So but she was supportive in the whole effort.  At any rate, so, so she and I ended up separating June 1972.  I continued working at The Post, by this time I was assigned to, to work in Montgomery County [Maryland], I think I was the second black reporter after LaBarbara Bowman.  And LaBarbara Bowman was part of the suit against the, the complaint against The Washington Post.  We were called, because we started out with nine black reporters, two dropped out, we were called the Metro 9, 8, 7 [Metro 7] (laughter).  Finally we got the complaint before anybody else (laughter) dropped out so we held at seven, LaBarbara was part of the seven.  And covering Montgomery County was exciting and interesting because of the range of things that I covered, you know.  Not only daily breaking stories out of the city council or police story, a story out of the executive with feature articles, reviews, I was doing a range of reporting.  And then, finally I stumbled across this story about unequal tax real estate assessment in the county, and the county was putting the burden of taxes on the individual homeowner to make it more palatable to the business interests because they were trying to keep the business interests in the county.  In this period, Montgomery County had the highest per capita income than any other county in the United States, so it was a very wealthy county.  And I really got bogged down into that because I even went up to New Jersey to talk to a tax expert, and he just made it more confused in the end.  And I got a call, it was early May, May 2nd, I believe, I got a call from a woman named Connie Hilliard [Constance Hilliard] who then was doing a Ph.D. in Arab, African studies at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And she said, "I understand you're the person to call that you would be willing to go and live with the liberation movement in Africa."  And I said, "Yes, when?"  You know, I was ready to go.  Get me out of this real estate investigation, yeah.  And then she sent me a l- she didn't wanna talk about it on the phone, she sent me a long letter outlining the details and the name of the group that I would be going with, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, which with the Por- in the Portuguese language the acronym would be UNITA, right.  And so I went in the next morning and talked to the foreign editor, Phil Foisie [Philip M. Foisie], 9:00 in the morning, and then we went in to see the managing editor by 9:15, and by 9:30 the decision was made that I would go and live with these guerillas.
Story_ID: 486716
Speaker 1: We had already had someone, Jim Hoagland, in on, in Angola on the Portuguese side.  Now we were gonna go in, and I was gonna live with guerillas.  This is one of three guerilla movements operating in Angola at this, at this time. UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] was a- operating mainly in the East in Moxico province [Angola], the area of the country the Portuguese called the lands at the end of the earth, sparsely populated, of no real value to the colonial government.
Speaker 2: It's deep in, it's kind of a dense area, well wouldn't that be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dense and a high, well--
Speaker 2: --near, near Congo, near, near Zaire, I guess?
Speaker 1: Right.  But it was on a high plateau and it had a huge canopy of trees that the guerillas lived under; it went on for miles and miles in any direction.  And more toward the center of the country was the popular movement for the liberation of Angola, headed by os- and the group that I was with was headed by Jonas Savimbi, Agostinho Neto headed the, do you want me to spell that?  Agostinho (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you probably should.
Speaker 1: --A-G, well, let me spell Jonas, Jonas is J-O-N-A-S, Savimbi is S-A-V as in Victor, I-M-B-I.  And Agostinho Neto, who headed the Popular Movement [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] was A-G-O-S-T-I-N-H-O, Neto is N as in Nelly, E-T-O.  And then a man named Holden Roberto head, headed the National Front for the Liberation of Angola [National Liberation Front of Angola], or the FNLA.  Holden is H-O-L-D-E-N, Roberto is R-O-B-E-R-T-O.  It was funny, let me, there's one funny thing because when, when she told me and I, I agreed to go in with UNITA, I then went to the state, the U.S. state department [U.S. Department of State] to do a report, a story on, a reporting on all the liberation movements in all of the three Portuguese territories: Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.  And I reviewed with the state department desk officer for the Portuguese territories all of the movements, FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] in Mozambique, PAIGC [African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde] in Guinea-Bissau, and the three movements in Angola.  And in the course of the interview I had with him, I wouldn't tell him, I didn't tell him, of course, that I was going to Angola.  He told me that UNITA didn't exist, and I said, oh, lord, what are you doing, Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]?  (Laughter) You're running off into the bush with a (unclear) with a group that doesn't exist.  But that was the state of their information, right, right.
Speaker 2: So the state department really didn't--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) know?
Speaker 1: No.  So he was very embarrassed when he had to come to me after my story ran about living with the UNITA guerillas, and he had to come to The Post [The Washington Post] now to interview me if he, to get information from me, right.
Speaker 2: Now, what was, Ms. Hilliard [Constance Hilliard] was a, she was a, a professor at--
Speaker 1: No, she was a graduate student.
Speaker 2: She was a graduate student.
Speaker 1: She was doing a Ph.D. in Arab African studies--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time.  But--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --she was in love with one of the UNITA representatives, a guy with whom I had gone to school in, at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  Jorge Sangumba.  And Jorge is the Portuguese spelling, J-O-R-G-E, Sangumba is S-A-N-G-U-M-B-A.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And so, was--
Speaker 1: --although I didn't know it at the time because when he was at Lincoln he couldn't speak English, but he was learning English.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: But I remembered the face and he remembered mine when we met in Lusaka [Zambia] later.
Speaker 2: So it was at this, at her suggestion that you, that, that someone should, from a major U.S. paper should go and cover UNITA or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she had, yeah, she had gone around to a number of black journalists from major media outlets, newspapers mainly, even Carl Sims who was a Nieman [Nieman Foundation for Journalism] fellow at Harvard at the time, and all, she told me that all six reporters that she approached said that they were not in a position to go, but they knew someone who would and that someone was Leon Dash.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that's what she told me.
Story_ID: 486717
Speaker 1: So I just wanna clarify the, The Washington Post paid for your trip.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was on assignment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, but the idea and invitation was from Connie Hilliard [Constance Hilliard].
Speaker 2: Connie Hilliard, and Hilliard is spelled, H-I-L-L-I-A-R-D, all right.  And again she was a Ph.D. student at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time.  She had become a UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] supporter through a man that she loved, Jorge Sangumba, who was a U- a, a representative of, of UNITA both in London [England], and the United, and in the United States, uh-huh.  At any rate when I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --got the assignment approved and The Washington Post agreed to finance the trip and to send me because the whole time that I was with the UNITA guerillas, I was on salary with The Washington Post so they financed the whole thing.  Sangumba, I actually saw, he was one, one of the guerillas I rendezvoused with at the Lusaka Airport [Lusaka International Airport; Kenneth Kaunda International Airport, Lusaka, Zambia].  And then I recognized him as someone I had known at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], at least I hadn't known him because we, the, there was no conversation but I recognized him.  Lincoln is a very small school.  I recognized his face and he recognized mine.  It was only at that moment that we realized that we both had been at Lincoln University at the same time because we didn't know each other names, you know, we came to know each other's names there at the airport.  And--
Speaker 1: That's ironic, huh?
Speaker 2: Did you wanna go into detail of getting into Angola?
Speaker 1: Yeah, if it's a story, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  This is at the point where Angola is still ruled by the Portuguese, five hundred years of colonial rule.  We went north of Lusaka [Zambia]--
Speaker 1: Wait now, five hundred years, so--
Speaker 2: Fifteen hundreds [1500s].
Speaker 1: I think a lot of people don't understand that the Portuguese have been there since there was a Kingdom of the Kongo [Kingdom of Kongo]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --back in the 1400s, right?
Speaker 2: And they, they destroyed the Kingdom of the Kongo with the slave trade, yeah.
Speaker 1: Like King Afonso [Afonso I] of the Kongo who's--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --on the Budweiser calendar--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.  So again the, we went north of Lusaka and they put me in the home of a local school teacher in, in, in a town, I can't think of the, I don't remember the name of the town, north of Lusaka, I wanna say Kabwe [Zambia].  And the woman's name was Chinosole [Patricia Thornton], she's African American.  She now teaches in the California school, college system [California State University].
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Chinosole is C-H-I-N-O-S-O-L-E.  And then they picked me up there after several days and we drove to the bank of the Zambezi River due west from Kabwe.  And went across the river on a pirogue, a log, a canoe that's hollowed out from a log.  And then walked into Angola, right across the border.  And after several, maybe a couple of weeks of walking we got to Jonas Savimbi's camp and did some traveling around Angola.  We went up to the Benguela railroad, I was photographed on the Benguela road- railroad.  I photographed them.  I--
Speaker 1: Now this was a dangerous assignment in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because the armored car, we were waiting for a train to come through and the train was always proceeded by an armored car on rails so I photographed both the armored car and the train.
Speaker 1: So that's the Portuguese Army in the armored car--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And right after the train passed the guerillas got on the rail line and I photographed them.  Then I got on the rail line and I was, there also, there was a, a British journalist traveling with us, Bernard Rivers-Moore, Rivers-Moore is R-I-V-E-R-S, hyphen, M-O-O-R-E.  And he, he and I were antagonistic to each other 'cause we both thought that we had an exclusive until we met up in the interior, so that was not, we were not happy campers.  But at any rate he's photographed standing right next to me on the rail, rail line, railroad.
Story_ID: 486718
Speaker 1: Then after about three months walked back out and got to Lusaka [Zambia], I had to get my passport renewed because my visa for Zambia, the, the country that I was traveling through on the way to Angola and coming back through, had expired, the visa expired and I got a new passport from the U.S. embassy in Lusaka.  And I flew to Nairobi [Kenya] to write the series ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash].  I went up to the village where I had been a Peace Corps volunteer, back to Nairobi, and home.  To be frank with you they didn't like the way I had done the series and it was poor, poorly done.  I had never done a series before.  And--
Speaker 2: Would you consider it poorly done now?
Speaker 1: Well, looking back at it, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What, what were the faults of the--?
Speaker 1: It was too shallow, there wasn't enough detail, I did too much repetition from part to part, they weren't long enough to be a series, I had all the artwork, but I didn't, the writing was not long enough and it was poorly structured.  So, they put me together with my Maryland editor, Kevin Klose who is now head of National Public Radio [NPR], and he really showed me how to do a series.  And so the series that ran in, during the Christmas holidays of 1973, was the series that really he helped me put together--my material, but him telling me how to structure it and so on.  And after that I often did a, I averaged a series a year.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --just, I wanted to go back to something you were talking about at dinner the other night.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And how you had kind of surreptitiously, make the assignment yours by not going directly to the city desk editor, you had to go, go over his head--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --to get the--
Speaker 1: I didn't think that the metropolitan editor, Harry Rosenfeld, would let me go to Angola.  And I knew Harry got in about 10:15, between 10:15 and 10:30 in the morning.  I already knew that, I had already read the series done by Jim Hoagland on his travel to the Portuguese side of Angola.  So I was gonna go directly to the foreign desk, Phil, foreign editor, Phil Foisie [Philip M. Foisie], to see if I could get his concurrence for me to go; that was step one.  Then he suggested after we talked for fifteen minutes and he read Connie Hilliard's [Constance Hilliard] letter to me then he said let's go talk to Howard [Howard Simons], and I knew that Howard got in at 9 and Phil got in at 9.  And we were leaving Phil's office to go to Howard's office at 9:15.  I didn't know how long they would take to make the decision or whether they would confer with Harry Rosenfeld first, the metropolitan editor.  But I felt that Harry, Howard, Harry Rosenfeld would block the assignment.  So I didn't want him involved in the early stages of it, and I, but by 9:30 when we had reviewed it all with Howard Simons, he made the decision that I was to go.  And that was a half hour to forty-five minutes before Harry Rosenfeld got in.  So I went over to the Maryland editor Kevin Klose and I told him about the assignment, and he wasn't particularly excited about it because that meant he had fewer reporters to cover Maryland and his concern was well, "How long are you--?" (Laughter) "How long are you gonna be gone?"  And so on and so on.  'Cause he was covering one of the most important counties for The Washington Post in terms of subscriptions and advertisement and so on.  And his concern was his manpower to cover Montgomery County [Maryland], and Maryland if need be.  And I, at that time I think I might have known two or three months.  And he was still not a happy camper.  So it might have been he that informed Harry Rosenfeld or it might have been Howard Simons, the managing editor, I don't know who informed him but then later on that day Kevin came to me and told me that Harry was very upset with me by going to Phil Foisie first, the foreign editor, I should have come to him.  And I said, "Oh, really?"  And that was just faking it and Kevin knew it and waved his hand at me like, you know, you know better.  But I didn't feel that I would have his support, so that is why I went to the foreign editor first, yeah.
Story_ID: 486719
Speaker 1: When you got back and you're, collected your material, what did you learn in, in, in, in Angola about UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] and Jonas Savimbi?
Speaker 2: Well, they were heavily on negritude, which had sort of been discredited by that time in terms of black people having some particular outlook on the world, particular world view because of them being born black.  And they were heavy on Pan-Africanism, they sang a fight song that was based on the African National Congress anthem out of South Africa, (speaking Umbundu) in Ovimbundu [sic. Umbundu], which means we shall fight.  It was a very pretty song, they sung it often.  Almost like--
Speaker 1: Like based on the tune in crisis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Based on the, the same--
Speaker 1: --(singing)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, exact, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(makes sounds).
Speaker 2: Exactly, right.  That's the song, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it was very difficult to get a, a long interview with Jonas Savimbi because most reporters would spend ten, fifteen minutes with him.  Now, remember I talked about interviewing people for three months in the first project in '71 [1971] ['The Shame of the Prisons,' Ben H. Bagdikian and Leon Dash] that I did at length.  So he was not accustomed to being interviewed at, at length and he was very impatient with it.  And so, we had some conflicts, myself and Bernard Rivers-Moore, the British journalist, he was a freelance journalist, in getting Savimbi to sit down and agree to an interview.  So, we got a sporadic interviews here and there and we attended one of their congresses and there was an awful lot of censorship in terms of not allowing us to know certain things or attend open meetings, although we didn't speak Ovimbundu or Portuguese they were, as a guerilla group, they were very paranoid about maybe we were hiding our ability to understand these languages, or they weren't gonna take any chances that we would learn something that they didn't wanna see in print.  So the congress was heavily censored in terms of them not allowing us to attend sessions.  I got sick during the congress with malaria, so for several days I was delirious 'cause it was hot, and, but still I needed a fire in the, in the grass hut that I was living in to help me keep warm 'cause I went through chills and, and, and eventually I sweated it out.  And they talked about, one of the things I was interested in they talked about that--peasants were the foundation of their movement and Savimbi felt strongly that peasants were the most important people in their movement because once you had convinced a peasant of the righteousness of your cause, then they were with you forever through thick and thin.  And the first, I also learned that the first cadre of UNITA guerillas were trained in China.  And they had adopted a Chinese philosophy of living among the peasant population.  They talked repeatedly about Savimbi was not outside the country, he was inside the country, whereas the leaders of the other two movements, Agostinho Neto for the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola], and Holden Roberto for the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola], lived in exile in other countries, you know, that kind of thing where they were there swimming among the masses.  So they had their rhetoric down and that's just what it was, it was rhetoric.  My disappointment on that, that first trip was that I didn't have enough time to interview peasant soldiers to find out--.  'Cause I already knew that I was hearing a lot of rhetoric and I wanted to get to the core reasons why, how they could convince a peasant man or a peasant woman, 'cause there were men and women in the, in the rank and file soldiers, and the women carried arms and were quite effective with them, I mean, they were, they were, they were well trained.  I wanted to get at the core reasons that they fought and what they understood about why they were fighting.  That I wasn't able to get to until I made another trip with Angola, with the UNITA guerillas much later on.  But I came back, and with Kevin Klose's help I did the series that ran ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash].  And then I didn't go back to the Maryland desk, and Kevin had moved from the Maryland desk also, he was now city editor, so I moved to the city desk with him.  And, and I was on general assignment and looking for something else to produce a series.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is like early '74 [1974] now or--
Speaker 2: This is early '74 [1974], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, there's another daughter [Destiny Dash] that that comes out of, I guess, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was born in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a different, that's in the next--
Speaker 2: September 27th, '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: That's, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: All right, all right. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to make sure I didn't miss her.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, okay.  So seven- so '74 [1974], the series comes out and you're really not satisfied with it?
Speaker 2: Am I satisfied with the series?
Speaker 1: No, so you're, you're, you said you really weren't satisfied with it.
Speaker 2: I was satisfied with the series.
Speaker 1: Were you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not satisfied with what I was able to, the level of reporting I was--and interviewing I was able to do when I lived with the guerillas in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: But I was satisfied with the series.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  It came out all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  I mean--
Speaker 1: With the help of--
Speaker 2: --I don't think UNITA--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't think UNITA had been written about to that extent up to that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or anything about Angola in The Washington Post had been written to that extent in that post, in, in that period, up to that point, even the Jim Hoagland series of traveling on the colonial side was not as extensive and I did a four-part series, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was quite satisfied with the series.  I was not satisfied with what I had been able to achieve, yeah.
Story_ID: 486720
Speaker 1: In '75 [1975], I don't wanna jump too far ahead but in '75 [1975] you formed, you're part of the founding group for the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].
Speaker 2: Oh, right, right.  That was in December '75 [1975].  Now that's important because we had been trying to organize the organization of black journalists at least since '67 [1967] and I had participated in these efforts before I left to go into the Peace Corps.  In fact, just before I left to go to the Peace Corps I had met with a group of journalists in New York City [New York, New York], including Tom Johnson [Thomas A. Johnson] of The New York Times, and Nancy Hick- then, Nancy Hicks [Nancy Hicks Maynard] then worked at The New York Times too.  And I remember meeting with them and a guy named David Hardy in late, in the winter of 1968, and remember I left for Peace Corps, New Year's Day 1969.  And we were meeting once again to try to organize a national association of black journalists.  So, when I returned in '71 [1971] there were several other meetings, but it never could, it never could come to--we could never reach a point where we could put the organization together because the differences of, of philosophy about what the organization should be, and the conflict between people who, blacks who were working in public relations and blacks who were working in journalism (cough).  And at all of those meetings, both, there were both groups there, public relations people, journalists.  The journalists didn't want the public relations people in the organization.  The public relations people always financed the meetings (laughter).  This is a ridiculous situation.  And, you know, not only were there differences among the journalists, but that was the main interest, that was the main conflict I, as I saw it, you know.  So finally, in December of 1975--I think it was the second annual meeting, conference, of the national association of elected black officials [National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials]--black journalists from all over the country were coming to cover this, it was in Washington, D.C. and I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's before the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] was formed or, or is this a, a different organization from the Black Caucus?
Speaker 2: It had, had nothing to do with the Black Caucus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  These were elected officials from--
Speaker 2: National association of elected--
Speaker 1: Oh, elected from all over--
Speaker 2: It might have been the national association of elected local black officials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I remember it as--
Speaker 1: So this would be mayors and other--
Speaker 2: --but it had no connection to the Black Caucus.
Speaker 1: --representatives and officials--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from different--
Speaker 2: County officials throughout the South in particular.  And the numbers had jumped exponentially from the voting right, Voting Rights Act in 1965 [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  So you had all these black journalists together covering this conference in one hotel.  For the most part, their meetings were boring and there was no big news coming out of it.  And so, [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock took the opportunity to rent a big conference room at the hotel, I'm, I'm blanking on the name of the hotel but it's right off Connecticut, Connecticut Avenue in Northwest Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Paul Brock we've interviewed before and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --he was a producer with 'Tony Brown's Journal' and he did a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but Paul Brock, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think at that time he was with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Doing something for the NAACP.  But at any rate, so we all began meeting to really put this organization together and it was all journalists this time.  The public relations people didn't have to finance it, so there were no public relations people there.  And, you know, there were differences of opinion, there were exceptions, there were wrangling but it was all done relatively low key, there were no strident arguments, everybody was in agreement that before this conference ended this organization would be organized, the National Association of Black Journalists.  We were all in agreement that we were not gonna leave this undone this time.
Story_ID: 486721
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there are about forty--
Speaker 1: Forty-four--
Speaker 2: Forty-four.
Speaker 1: --to be exact, forty-four of us.  And it's amazing because when you, when I look th- when I look back at that room and think about that meeting, everybody had whiskey glasses with ice in it.  You could hear the clinking of the ice in the whiskey glasses and people weren't drinking wine (laughter).  And everybody was smoking, I was smoking, everybody was chain smoking.  I wasn't drinking; I had stopped drinking by then.  But, you can hear at the meeting, and this is several days, you could always hear the clinking of the glasses, the ice in the glasses and the room was full of smoke, a cloud of smoke, right.  So, but at the end we, we formed it.  One of the things that was very clear that the people from the Midwest there at the meeting said, "You people from the Northeast are not gonna dominate this meeting, and we're gonna break this organization up into regions and the Midwest is going to have meetings and the first meeting is going to be in Texas."  (Laughter) So I just laughed, I said, "Good for you," you know.  'Cause the, the, most of the journalists in the room were from the Northeast, and it was about time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--yeah, like [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone and others were there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was at the Philadelphia Daily News at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think he had left the Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.] Afro-American [Afro-American Company; Afro-American Newspapers].
Speaker 2: You had [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: From Chicago, he was in that group, right.
Speaker 2: Even Sandra Gilliam-Beale from my hometown of Dayton [Ohio] was there--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --as part of that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that was one of the clear themes that you people from the Northeast are not gonna dominate this organization like you've dominated other organizations and so on.
Speaker 2: So this organization is formed, the associate- the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] is organized just like the black police officers [National Black Police Association] organize themselves--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --black teachers [National Alliance of Black School Educators] had to organize themselves.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Every major, Association of Black Psychologists--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --black sociologists [Association of Black Sociologists] organized themselves, they're all organized around the same period of time--
Speaker 1: Medical [National Medical Association], doctors.
Speaker 2: --from '68 [1968] to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Psychiatrists [Black Psychiatrists of America], lawyers [National Bar Association], right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: The whole, right.
Speaker 2: And for similar reasons--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I would think.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: And so that's it, in terms of the formation of the NABJ.  The NABJ then begins to really organize itself and from forty-four it's up to several hundred, not several hundred, it's up to several thousand today, somewhere between three and four thousand today.
Speaker 2: When you look back--
Speaker 1: And I'll be coming to Chicago to the UNITY conference of which the NABJ will be participating this July, July 23rd to July 27th, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I know Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock] is coming up for that too.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Oh, and he told me, Paul called me here and told there was going to be a founders meeting, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First founders meeting I've attended since '75 {1975] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He pointed that out to me too.
Story_ID: 486722
Speaker 1: When you look back at the organization, has it been effective in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it has been in terms of both challenging media outlets in terms of lack of their diversity, challenging the American association of newspaper editors [American Society of News Editors] about commitment to diversity, not only for blacks, non-whites.  And out of that other groups have organized themselves to mirror the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], National Association of Hispanic Journalists came after us, national organization of Asian American journalists [Asian American Journalists Association], and national organization of Native American journalists [Native American Journalists Association]; all of those are a result of the NABJ organizing itself.  And these unity, UNITY conferences, all four groups come together as they will later, later this month to hold a national conference and it's called a UNITY conference.  A lot of job, jobs are, are, are people are, people come to recruit.  I don't know what's happening now because there's a lot of turmoil both particularly in the newsprint industry and the competition over technological changes and a lot of newspapers are downsizing.  But there are a myriad opportunities not only newspapers but other organizations come there to recruit, recruit employees.  So I'm expecting it to be the same this year.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 486723
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], you go back to Angola.  Now, what, what happened this time?
Speaker 2: The, the, the first time I go back to Angola is 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: I'm traveling and I'm giving lectures about Angola in the University of California system, I think seven or eight campuses including Stanford University [Stanford, California].  And in April, 1974 while I'm in California lecturing, there's a coup d'etat in Lisbon [Portugal] by disgruntled middle level offices in the Portuguese Army about fighting anticolonial wars in Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique.  Because they had, the Portugal, the Portuguese political dictatorship had been recruiting from the Portuguese middle class into the Army to fight these wars and these middle class soldiers didn't wanna fight these wars.  They didn't wanna fight and maintain the colonial structure.  They saw it as exploitive and they were endangering their lives and shortening their careers to fight a war that they had no commitment to.  Eventually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's also--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --the public image of Portugal was going down fast.  I remember the ads in Jet from the Boycott Gulf Coalition [sic. Gulf Boycott Coalition] of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Portuguese soldiers standing with the heads of Angolan citizens at their, you know, in their hands and that sort of thing, full page ads.
Speaker 2: That they had, that they had beheaded.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So while I'm in Los Angeles [California] at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] giving lectures on Angola, I get a message, I already know about the coup, the coup was carried out by an organization calling itself the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council.  They send, now remember my series on Angola ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash] ran in, during the Christmas holidays, four months earlier.  This is April, they send the telex message to The Washington Post saying that they, they had read my series when I had sneaked into Angola illegally.  I don't know how else you cover a guerilla outfit except to go illegally (laughter).  And they now invited me to come back--and, and they saw, and they saw it, actually, actually the message came from Newsweek correspondent Andrew Jaffe.  And he said the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council found your series to be fair comment and they invite you to come back to Angola legally this time but you have to fly through Lisbon and get a visa.
Speaker 1: So this is a new Portuguese government inviting you to--
Speaker 2: The Armed Forces Revolutionary Council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I said, hey, that's great.  So I fly, after I finished the lectures I fly back to Washington [D.C.], I confer again with Phil Foisie [Philip M. Foisie], and they, and he and Howard Simons get together and say, "All right go."  So back to Angola I go, now this time through Lisbon.  So I went to Lisbon to collect my visa and I went to their foreign ministry and I was assigned to speak to a guy who was perfectly bilingual.  So I'm very cautious, you know, because I know there are factions in the Portuguese government that still see their mission, they, they treated these colonies as under a fiction that these were overseas provinces and they were a part of Portugal.  It was fiction.  So I don't know who I'm dealing with necessarily, but I go to the foreign ministry to get the visa to go down to Angola 'cause I have to fly on a Portuguese airline down there, TAP is the acronym, T-A-P [TAP Portugal].  And I'm meeting with them and I just came for him to put the visa in my passport, but he wants to sit and talk.  So, he's talking to me and I'm being very cautious in my replies.  I don't know what he knows.  Finally, he looks at me, he leans across to me and says, "You know, I read the series, you don't have to stop, you can stop dancing all over the place."  (Laughter) I said, "Oh, okay."  And he didn't indicate that he disagreed with the series or agreed with the series but then we, then I just opened up and we had a straight forward conversation and at the end of which he stamped my passport and I got on the airline down to Luanda [Angola], the capital, the next day.  They all knew I was coming.  They had a, a secret service agency called PIDE [International and State Defense Police], I forget what the acronym starts, stands for, something in, and PIDE had, was very brutal, killed a lot of Africans, had been formed shortly after the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] had started making a tax in Luanda in 1959.  And a lot of Angolans were living in exile because they supported one part of whatever group and had to leave in exile to live, yeah.
Story_ID: 486724
Speaker 1: The second trip to Angola (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Angola.  I described how we got, I got a message while I was in--.  The message actually came from The Washington Post that I was invited back to Angola, legally.  All right.  So--
Speaker 1: So we got you there, just--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, back in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: --I, I arrive in Luanda [Angola], and a naval, a Portuguese naval officer meets me, coming off the plane, and I said, oh, that's what I mean about PIDE [International and State Defense Police], I said--
Speaker 1: Yeah, PIDE.
Speaker 2: --these, these people they're on top of it, boy, this, this structure is still in place.  But importantly to me now the coup took place in April, I'm arriving in Angola in May, I'm very anxious to see the colonial structure still intact.  'Cause when I arrived in Kenya, Kenya had reached independence in '63 [1963], and though some of the remnants of the colonial structure were still intact, most of it had been dismantled, right.  Now there's been a coup in Lisbon [Portugal] but nothing has changed in Angola, right.  And I think it's great 'cause I wanna be able to write about it and see it in place.  And, the naval officer sits me down after I get registered in my hotel, and again I'm on The Washington Post, I mean, the Portuguese and the Portuguese government is paying for nothing, everything was on The Washington Post.  And he said, he, first he wants to go over what I want to see, he's read the series ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash] too; he's perfectly li- bilingual, English is perfect.  What I wanna see, I said I wanna see everything.  I wanna go to the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola] areas, I wanna see the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] areas, and I wanna go back to see UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] areas.  He said, "Well, you've already seen those," he's teasing me, you know.  And I said, "Yeah, but I wanna see 'em now on the Portuguese side."  I haven't been to any towns, I spent all the time in the bush and on the, Bie Plateau is what the Central Angolan plateau is called and that's spelled B as in boy, U [sic.], E, with an accent over the E.  I spent all my time in Moxico [Angola] and the Bie Plateau and this time I wanna go into the towns.  So he said, "Fine.  You know, we had been ordered by the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council in Lisbon that you are to be given anything that you want, and so we will fly you anywhere we want, you want to go and we will take you anywhere you want to go."  For- tell a reporter that, you know, that is so great, you know, I said, "Oh, great."  So, then I spent time interviewing in, in Luanda--because I knew that the MPLA was strongest in Luanda, I spent a lot of time interviewing MPLA supporters and members in Luanda, in the caciques.  Caciques is literally in Portuguese, I'm gonna spell it for you, sandy places, but it's a description of slum areas, shanty towns.  And caciques, you spell it, C-A-S-S-I-Q-U-E-S [sic.], caciques.  So I interviewed a lot of the MPLA supporters and then I go all the way to east to a town called Luso [Luena, Angola], L-U-S, L-U-S-O, which is right on the Benguela railroad.  And then I come west to Nova Lisboa [Huambo, Angola] and Nova Portu [ph.], these are towns, the, the names of which have been since changed.  But these are areas where, these are major towns in the central area and they're along the Benguela railroad.
Story_ID: 486725
Speaker 1: Also while I'm in Nova Lisboa [Huambo, Angola], New Lisbon, I had gathered my, I have a great uncle who was born in Angola, and he was born of, the son of a Plymouth Brethren missionary.  Plymouth Brethren is a church that came out of England and his father was a Guyanese missionary from Guyana and had gotten a graduate degree from Oxford University [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] and had joined this very narrow religious sect called the Plymouth Brethren in England and went to central Angola f- to be a missionary for this Plymouth Brethren (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How many people, how many people have a relative who (laughter) was born in Angola?  I mean that's just really--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this is really remarkable.
Speaker 1: Well actually he's my relative's--he married my grandmother's sister.  Remember I told you my [paternal] grandmother was Ivy Bishop [Ivy Bishop Dash], she died during the Spanish flu pandemic?  Well this is her youngest sister, Amy Bishop [ph.].  Amy Bishop's mother, my grand- my father's Granny Bishop [Jane Warren Bishop], had joined the Plymouth Brethren in New York [New York], all right.  So, I don't, I, I can't remember my Uncle Robert's fir- his father's first name but anyway he ends up in a village in central Bie Plateau, in Ovimbundu area.  And his daughter, Blanche [Blanche Phillips Delaine] who is a principal of an elementary school [Hybla Valley Elementary School] in Fairfax County in northern Virginia [Alexandria, Virginia], had given me a Xeroxed copy of his birth certificate because his birth was registered at the British embassy in Luanda [Angola], in 1913.  So I have that with me when I get to Nova Lisboa, and I'm asking a number of people if they know where this village is, and I find a soccer player who knows where the village is.  So the Portuguese military take me out to the village.  And the people are stunned, you know, that I'm coming back there.  And I ask to see the church records for the mission station.  And the mission had been, ended, but they still had the records.  And I looked through the records and I find my uncle's father.  And he had married an Ovimbundu woman and they had one son, my Uncle Robert.  And he was homeschooled by this uncle.  And he arrived in Washington [D.C.] at the age of the seventeen and he didn't wanna do any undergraduate work at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], he wanted to go straight to Howard's medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  And they said you can't, "Well, you know, you, you can't walk in, you've been homeschooled, we don't, we don't know what you know."  He said, "Test me."  They tested him, and he entered medical school as a teenager, right.  And he became the only black doctor in Bowling Green, Virginia, right.  So--
Speaker 2: What, what, what's his name again?
Speaker 1: Robert Phillips.
Speaker 2: Is he still--
Speaker 1: No, he died in--
Speaker 2: No, he's pro- he's died, okay.
Speaker 1: --by the time I make this trip in '74 [1974] he was dead.  He died while I was in the Peace Corps, 1970.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Before I returned, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's quite a story in and of itself, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I actually found his birth place, right.  So then I go on with the rest of the story.  And I wrote about him in the first series ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash].  In fact, one of the, the second or third part of the series that appeared in December '73 [1973], starts with him.
Story_ID: 486726
Speaker 1: But at any rate, now I've found his [Dash's paternal great uncle, Robert Phillips] village in '74 [1974] and I travel, I travel throughout Angola, I go to north, through the north, to Carmona [Uige, Angola] where the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola] is the strongest among the Bakongo.  And most, all three of these guerilla groups are dominated by different ethnic groups and they all were concerned, when they were fighting the Portuguese, with being dominated by the, one of the other groups.  The FNLA is mainly Bakongo in the northern part of Angola.  In the central part of Angola, stretching out behind Luanda [Angola], the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] is dominated by the Mbundu.  And then in south of there on the Bie Plateau, UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] is dominated by the Ovimbundu, right.  And whenever they get a group, someone else from another ethnic group, they put him up in a high category to showcase the person, just like they do in the states when they have token blacks, same thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, to show that they're--
Speaker 1: To show that they're, they're multiethnic (laughter) and it's all a farce (laughter).  You get down to the rank and file and they're all of one ethnic group, right.  So this was fascinating for me.  I think one of the most dramatic moments for me was going up in the northern Angola and going out with a Portuguese Army patrol and they wanted to give me a, a rifle and so I said, no, I'm, I'm not shooting anybody, and they're busy taking photographs and taking notes and interviewing.  And one of the officers on the record and that showed to me how things had changed, he referred to the Portuguese inside Angola as degradados, which meant they were criminals, and he said that on the record.  He was a lieutenant in the Portuguese Army and I was able to write that and why and he described to me that he was a, a medical doctor and he had been drafted away from his practice in Lisbon [Portugal] to come and fight for these degradados (laughter) in Angola, you know.  And so this is part of the anger that led to the coup, right.  So I was able to lay it out.  The only disappointment I had is that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned the same week the series ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash] ran.  So I only got parts one and two of the series on the front page and Nixon bumped me into the inside for part three and four, right.  But I was quite satisfied with that.
Story_ID: 486727
Speaker 1: Now, to be candid, my alcoholism is not abating; it's getting worse.  And my body is beginning to break down and I can feel it in my central nervous system, just the intake of the alcohol.  Again, fifth, by this time I'm up to a fifth, fifth and a-half of whiskey a day (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so sometime between '74 [1974] and '75 [1975] you, you, you're treated for this or what--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --what happens, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Finally, at the end of September of '75 [1975], The Post [The Washington Post] gives me a choice because it's clear to everybody, it's clear to my family, it's clear to all my friends, it's clear to all the people I work with, that I'm an alcoholic.  And The Post at the end of September of '75 [1975], and I'm struggling now, I've admitted it to myself by this time and I'm struggling now to stop but it's a struggle, it's not something that I just, I'm able, I'm not able to turn it off.  And The Post gives me a choice of going and dying somewhere else of alcoholism, or going into an institution for alcoholic rehabilitation, so I took that choice.  A place called Melwood Farm [Melwood Farm Treatment Center] in Montgomery County, Maryland [Olney, Maryland].  I stay in there twenty-eight days, when I come out and I join an A- a twelve-step program, and that was it.  Stopped drinking entirely, yeah.  From the point that I entered the institution, I haven't had a drink since then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that was October 1st of '75 [1975], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, were you able to reconnect with your first wife [Dyann Waugh], I mean, I guess (unclear)--
Speaker 1: We've, we've always maintained our friendship.  In fact, we began dating again in the '80s [1980s], for a couple of years we dated.  That didn't go beyond dating, but we, we still are friends to this day, yeah.
Story_ID: 486728
Speaker 1: So '76 [1976] is another trip to Angola, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Okay.  So now I'm out, I come out of Melwood Farm [Melwood Farm Treatment Center, Olney, Maryland] the end of October, the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] is formed in December, and I'm doing series after series now and now I've become a workaholic and now my career really takes off.  Now, before then you, I, I would have been complaining that the white man was keeping me from fulfilling my career (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were taking a drink (laughter).
Speaker 2: And, and, and ignoring the alcohol's impact on me, you know.  And say alcohol has no impact on me at all.  But after I stopped drinking, my career really sky rockets, you know, and I had become a workaholic.  You asked me to put in eighteen hours, I'd put in eighteen hours.  Or you don't have to ask me because I'm determined now to be at the top of my game, and with the alcohol behind me, I reach it.  And I did a series--.  Oh, also people at The Post [The Washington Post] had written me off and that, that annoys me because they say well, you know, he's an alcoholic and he's, now he's a reformed alcoholic, a recovering alcoholic, a recovered alcoholic, whatever you chose, you know, his career is at an end.  And that's not, that's not my attitude at all.  So--
Speaker 1: You're still a young man too at this point?
Speaker 2: Thirty-one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I really take off.  And I begin working, my whole life becomes work, rest, and that's about it.  I'm not doing, I mean for a year I got involved, I had no social life and that was intentional and it was a conscious choice on my part.  And I did a series in February on drug traffic into Washington [D.C.] from the Sierra Madre in Mexico was one part.  The second part was Golden Triangle in Southeast Asia coming through Amsterdam [the Netherlands] into Dulles Airport [Dulles International Airport; Washington Dulles International Airport, Dulles, Virginia], second part.  The third part was the traditional Marseille [France] to New York City [New York, New York] down to Washington route.
Speaker 1: 'French Connection' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Out--like out of 'The French Connection,' yeah.  But I'm naming names and running photographs of the--Tennessee Dawson [Thomas "Tennessee" Dawson] was the courier from New York for the mafia from New York to Washington.  And I lo- and I even detailed it to the place, the haberdashery on Georgia Avenue where he delivered the drugs and how it was distributed from there.  And that was '76 [1976].  And then when I was doing the project on Rosa Lee ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash], I met Tennessee Dawson's daughter whose husband was doing crack cocaine selling.  And she said, "I know your name, I, for some reason I know--."  (Laughter) And then after a couple of days she said (claps hands) I got it, and she went to her, we're in her house, and she went to her drawer and pulled it out and there's the article, "You wrote about my father in 1976."  I said, "What?"  Tennessee Dawson.  I said, "Oh, the former, the former safecracker who became a heroin courier?"  She said, "Yeah, that's him.  He's retired now, he lives in Memphis [Tennessee]."  "Oh," I said, "I'd love to see him."  I never got around to seeing him, but he was retired, retired from drug trafficking and cracking safes and living in Memphis.  And now I was trying to bring her into a study of the underclass, right.  So I do that series and then I do a second series--now you can't stop me from writing series, now that I've done two, I'm just going from series to series.
Story_ID: 486729
Speaker 1: I do a second series on what happens with the distribution of cocaine and the patterns of overdoses and drug addicted babies, babies that are addicted in the womb, born addicted to heroin, what they have to go through.  And it's fairly horrific, and I go into great detail about what happens to a child born addicted to heroin, yeah.  And how the physicians have to bring the child down and so on; it's very hairy.  All these are through the stories of real life people.  While I'm doing this, while I'm writing the series literally, I've done the reporting, the foreign editor comes over to me, this time it's Ronald Koven and he said, "You know, you kn- there's a civil war in Angola."  I said, "Yeah, I've been following it."  And he said, "The, your, your buddies--," 'cause once you cover a group your people assign you as their supporter, "Your buddies have retreated from the cities and are back in the forests and they're asking that you come back, they've captured some Cuban soldiers and they'll hold on to them so you can interview them."  I said, "Well, send the message back--," 'cause this is coming through The Washington Post foreign correspondent who was based in Addis Ababa [Ethiopia] at the time.  "Tell them to hold on, I gotta get this series published."  (Laughter) "And I'll be ready to go as soon as this series is published."  And that's it.  When the series was published in September, I left for Angola in October.
Speaker 2: This is '76 [1976], right?
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].  I meet, rendezvous with guerillas in Mussuco [Angola], we go to the Zambezi River; go across the Zambezi in a pirogue; and into Angola on foot.  Also by this time UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] has become a pariah because Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] has colluded with the South African Army, right.  I am the only correspondent who's coming into UNITA territory through Zambia, the rest of them are coming through southwest Africa with the collusion of the South African government.  But Savimbi is trying to hide that route from me, but I'm well aware of it 'cause I had already done pre- pre-reporting.  And in the series ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash] I talk about that, right.  So at any rate this time I lived with the guerillas for seven and a-half months, covered 2100 miles on foot, and was able to do the repeated interviews methodology, and really get passed the rhetoric about the real reasons that they were fighting.
Speaker 2: Tell us something about the logistics.  You were telling us the other night about how you had to protect your film and your feet and--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --a lot of things like that.
Speaker 1: Of course, on this trip now, I've, I've already done one short trip with them, I don't know how long this trip is going to last, but I bring a ton of film, a ton of batteries to operate the camera and so on, and a ton of notes, piles of pens, BIC pens I thought were the best.
Speaker 2: This is just you though from The Washington Post?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and a, a huge green sack, canvas green sack and inside I covered it with plastic, it was a blue plastic, I can see the color now, I forget where I got the blue plastic from.  All of this I did before I left 'cause now I know I'm entering, before I entered Angola in April, May, end of May, June.  Now I'm going in, in October, this is the beginning of the rainy season.  So I'm very concerned about holding on to my notes and the film.  I can get soaked to the skin, doesn't matter.  The film has to be kept dry and my notes have to be kept dry.  And so that, that sack stays with me during the whole seven months; it never leaves my sight, I use it as a pillow, and I, everywhere I go I carry it with me.
Story_ID: 486730
Speaker 1: You know, you have to adjust fairly quickly to arduous circumstances.  And again the mind has a great capacity to adjust.  You'd be surprised what you can accomplish if you have no other choice.  Well, I was willing going into this situation, but you, you're dealing with traveling with guerillas in the rainy season, when, when it's in the rainy season, there's no dry place to lie down, you know.  And so you take your backpack and you lean it against a tree, you sit on it, and you lean against the tree and you go to sleep, and it's pouring rain and you can do that.  And wake up at dawn and get up and keep moving.  And we were trying to get to Savimbi's [Jonas Savimbi] camp, it took us about a month and a-half, five to six weeks, I forget exactly how long.  When we get to Savimbi's camp, I learn that there's been a major MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] push, the government now has been handed over to the popular movement and they're fighting a civil war with UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola].  They've really decimated by this time the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola], the FNLA is not in the equation, but UNITA is still out in the forests.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, the president now is Agostinho Neto.
Speaker 1: Agostinho Neto.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so they have major conventional army force movement against UNITA guerillas.  But the UNITA guerillas operate like guerillas.  They're not gonna confront the army; if the army comes after them, they disperse into the forest, so you have no real target.  And, but at one of these attacks against them they executed the Cuban prisoners, I think they had seven or nine, I forget the number.  So Savimbi said we don't have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Cuba's over there--that's an important point I guess for somebody watching this that doesn't know.
Speaker 1: Cuba came in support of the popular movement--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --forces, particularly after it became publicly known that the South Africans were backing UNITA.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so you have the MPLA which is characterized in the western press as Soviet [Soviet Union] backed MPLA, and UNITA is characterized as western back- backed, right.  And the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] had delivered a lot of weapons to UNITA.  That was interesting because they delivered a lot of World War II [WWII] weapons that were totally ineffective against AK-47s.
Speaker 2: Now, I've, I've heard that the CIA or the United States often delivers outmoded weapons to--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --groups to gain their trust and, and but the stuff wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All it did was antagonize the guerillas, UNITA guerillas, they were very disappointed.  And World War II rifles and World War II ammunition for those rifles.  They were carbine, some kind of carbine.  There's a particular--
Speaker 2: That stuff is thirty years, over thirty years old?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  So, UNITA used that as a motivational aspect of their recruiting young guerillas, 'cause the young guerillas would complain that these things were really ineffective in a firefight.  They're going with, maybe, I don't know, maybe six or seven shot ability against a guy who has a banana clip with sixteen, eighteen, twenty bullets you know, and high velocity, stronger, you know.  And so the guer- the UNITA guerillas, the leadership said to the young recruits that they distributed these carbines to, they said when you kill a Cuban soldier with an AK-47, the AK- AK-47 is yours.
Speaker 2: Personally?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  And these guys, because of their youth, you know, all young people think they're immortal and invulnerable, were very aggressive in trying to collect their personal weapons.  And those who had succeeded were very proud of the fact that they had AK-47s.  Most of the carbines they threw in the river, yeah.  They just found them useless; they threw 'em in the river.  I, you know, all of that written into the, into the series ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash].
Speaker 2: So these are like M-16s from World War II?
Speaker 1: They're not M-16s.
Speaker 2: Not either?
Speaker 1: The M-16 was Vietnam [Vietnam War] era.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: This is before the M-16 and it's called a carbine something, something, something and I'm no weapons expert but I knew the name of it when I wrote the series, but at any rate.  So this is all fascinating to me, and they have brought in a lot of urbanized Angolans into the UNITA guerilla movement and they're in the forests with them.  And men and women, they're living in the forest, there are marriages being conducted, there are children being born.  There was one attack on one camp by the MPLA when the male guerillas were away, and the women guerillas were there with their children.  Now, normally they would have in that circumstance run away, but they couldn't run away with their children, so the women refused to move.  And they fought the attacking force until the attacking force withdrew, yeah.  'Cause they, they were not leaving their children behind, they would prefer to die.  They couldn't pick up their children and run because the fighting was just that intense and that close, so they just didn't move.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The women were at the back, the enemy was in front of 'em, and they stayed right there, you know.  So I mean they were quite effective in terms of guerilla warfare.  They, I mean, they were, the men respected them and they talked about don't put your hands on me for the guys that didn't have (laughter) a lot of respect for women, don't put your hands on me (laughter), and they would talk about it, I reported it too, 'cause you will not live through the night.  And guys backed up, those who had the tendency to be bullying or aggressive, yeah.
Story_ID: 486731
Speaker 1: So what's your, your perspective on Jonas Savimbi?  I think you finally got a fix on who he was and what he was about during this last trip (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I found, I found to be brilliant, without a scruple, Machiavellian, a liar, 'cause he lied to me about the, it was funny because the office, his officers were telling me about their collusion with the South African--and Savimbi was lying to me, you know.  So I set up that dichotomy in the series ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash] with the officer, one officer, one that he later killed, Mateus Katalayo, he killed he, he killed him, his wife [Aurora Katalayo], and their two children, a girl and a boy [Michel Katalyao], had them thrown alive, the daughter and the, the wife, the daughter, and the son were thrown alive onto a bonfire after Savimbi accused them of witchcraft.  And that story I wrote in The Washington Post in the Outlook section in 1990 about how Savimbi dealt with the dissidents within his group.  And I saw that Katalayo, Katalayo was, Mateus is M-A-T-E-U-S, last name was K-A-T-A-L-A-Y-O.  And I saw that Katalayo, my interaction with him 'cause I spent a lot of time with him and I traveled with he, the son hadn't been born then, at that time, but his daughter, Mbimbi [Mbimbi Katalayo], was a young girl of about eight or nine, would possibly be killed by Savimbi because he was so, he was brilliant.  And Savimbi killed all the people who he thought could possibly challenge his authority, within his own organization I'm talking about, yeah.
Speaker 1: That sounds a lot like echoes of Pol Pot in--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --Cambodia.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Like shoot everybody with glasses on--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, that was just shoot everybody who was educated.  But this is more about personal authority and power.  Anybody who can replace me is a danger to me, yeah.  It's very, it's a very different thing, I think.  At any rate, I saw that in Katalayo and he was very cynical.  But he was one of the officers, he was a major in UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] who was very honest with me about the collaboration with the South Africans.  Because I had written about them censoring me and keeping me from attending congress sessions, this time they made a point of letting me come to the sessions, and Katalayo was my interpreter.  (Laughter) And the officers would get upset because Kat- Katalayo would tell me about what was actually going on in English and the officers would see me taking notes and they say, "You speak Ovimbundu [sic. Umbundu]?"  I say, "No, no, no."  And Katalayo would tell them, "I'm interpreting for him."  And they would say, "Well, what are you doing?"  And he said, "Savimbi has ordered it."  Because, you know, he said we are censors (laughter).
Story_ID: 486732
Speaker 1: Let's say this is the fall of '76 [1976].  By now I've reached Savimbi's [Jonas Savimbi] camp.  This is like mid-November, still the rainy season in Angola.  And Savimbi tells me that the Cuban prisoners were executed so, I said, well, I'd like to go and he says this is where, he shows me on a map where UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] guerillas are operating and it's a much broader area than they were operating in when I was there in '73 [1973].  So I looked at him and I said, "Show me."  And he said, "You want go to all these places?"  I said, "I want to go to the furthest part north of the Benguela railroad, Dondo [Angola], you said--."  And that's where Savimbi was born.  And I said, "You have guerillas operating in Dondo and around Dondo, let's go there."  He said, "That's gonna take a long time."  I said, "I got all the time in the world."  And that's where he gave me a bodyguard of fifty guerillas, and we headed for Dondo, took some while stopping at major camps along the way.  Along one way, along, at one location on the trip walking north, I was right outside of a town, I knew the, the, a major who was attacking a town that was full of MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] soldiers, and, well, I was right outside the town when the attacks started before dawn.  And then when they had overrun the town, I was going into the town with them and the major was escorting me and then some guerillas came running out because MPLA reinforcements came back into the town and we had to go back across two rivers across a single log bridge, crossing both rivers.  And all the MPLA soldiers had to do was come out of that town and they would have caught us and been able to clean us up right there.  But the major didn't think they would come out of the town; once they had chased the guerillas out of the town he didn't think that they were--and they didn't, you know.  But we were very vulnerable at that point.  And I said, Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], you have pushed the envelope too far this time, (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were close--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --very close to--
Speaker 1: I made it back in one piece.  And anyway I continued to travel with the guerillas and we traveled up to Dondo where Savimbi was born, crossed the Benguela railroad, spent some days over there, and then headed back and they were holding their congress, one of their congresses.  And at that congress they left it, they didn't censor it for me.
Speaker 2: That's when you got the interpretation by--
Speaker 1: Right, it was from Katalayo [Mateus Katalayo].
Speaker 2: Katalayo.
Speaker 1: Major Katalayo.  And was able to gather a lot of information and interact with a lot of people because they had their delegates come from all over the country, those who were surreptitiously and still in urban areas that there was, their supporters, and those who were living in guerilla locations in different parts of the central plateau [Bie Plateau].  So I interacted with a lot of them and though a lot of them already knew of me from the '73 [1973] series ['The War in Angola,' Leon Dash].  And I got a better understanding that--.  I remember interviewing a Captain Jamba, J-A-M-B-A, I've forgotten his first name.  And he was very candid with me, he was an intellectual and he said, "Look, if Savimbi dies UNITA falls apart; there is no one to replace Savimbi."  He didn't go into the fact that Savimbi wouldn't allow anybody to rise to the level that they could replace him or threaten his control over UNITA; that was clear to me.  But because there were some people that I asked about and I kept getting this expression, killed in combat.  And then there were some other people who were letting me in on the fact that these people weren't killed in combat that they were seen as competitors by Savimbi, Savimbi was very paranoid, and they were eliminated.
Speaker 2: Now you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the rationale was given that they were always killed in combat.
Story_ID: 486733
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell us during the break (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yeah, about Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi].
Speaker 1: --about how you knew about the people thrown into the fire--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Katalayo's [Mateus Katalayo] family.
Speaker 2: One of my, one of the closest associates that I had in UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] who was my bodyguard in the '76 [1976], '77 [1977] trip, was a man, is a man named George Chikoti [George Pinto Chikoti].  The last name is C-H-I-T-O-K-I [sic.].  And George is spelled the way it is spelled in English, G-E-O-R-G-E.  In fact, he was raised in Zambia.  His father was a UNITA operative in Angola and the Portuguese mil- Portuguese secret police [International and State Defense Police] had tried to kill him, so he fled to Zambia when Georges was a young child.  And George grew up speaking and going to school in English in Zambia, so he was bilingual, perfectly bilingual, and spoke Ovimbundu [sic. Umbundu] as well.  But, in 1990, I interviewed George and a couple of other people with Savimbi, or with UNITA that I knew from UNITA, and they described how Savimbi would get rid of people who he identified as dissidents within UNITA.  Now, Mateus Katalayo had been killed, and his wife, Aurora [Aurora Katalayo], I was trying to remember, Aurora, A-O-R-O-R-A [sic.], had been told that her husband had been killed on a military mission in combat, and she didn't believe it.  She felt that Simbi- Savimbi had assigned him to be killed because Savimbi saw him as a threat.  I saw him as a threat years before 'cause I saw his charisma and his, his mind was such that he would be a younger replacement of Savimbi at some point.  But Aurora had been outspoken about her disbelief that her husband had been killed in combat.  And there was another woman named Eunice, E-U-N-I-C-E, don't remember her last name, who also her husband had been killed.  And her husband had been led, had been the leader of a particular army unit within UNITA called the Black Panthers, who literally were named after the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] in the United States.  And he was a very tough guy.  I had met him in '73 [1973] but when I went back in '76 [1976] he had been killed, and Eunice felt that Savimbi had had him killed.  And they had been too open with their belief that Savimbi had had their husbands killed.  And there were a number of people in UNITA, men and women like that, so at a mass meeting, Savimbi had two ha- two huge bonfires built and then said, "Today we're going to kill witches."  Now, there's still a very strong belief in witchcraft in Africa.  And traditionally in Angola, witches are killed by fire.  So everybody then knew the purposes of the bonfire.  And then he began calling out the names of the witches that he had identified.  And the guerillas would run up to them and pull them out of the standing crowd, and throw them and their children onto the bonfire.  One woman who he identified as a witch had an infant child in her arms and when she was identified she ran out of the crowd and asked, ran to all of her friends asking them to take her baby, she knew she was dead, and she was begging them, "Please take my baby, please take my baby."  And Savimbi said, "All the children of witches are also witches," which meant that she and her daughter were going to be killed.  And then the guerilla soldiers just grabbed her and her infant and threw them on the bonfire.  So everyone was burned alive, killed alive.  And he made everyone stand there until all the witches had been called out.  And these were, all of them were dissidents within UNITA.  The headline on the story I wrote was 'Blood and Fire' ['Blood and Fire: Savimbi's War Against His UNITA Rivals,' Leon Dash], how Savimbi deals with dissidents within UNITA, yeah.  And it was published the day before he arrived here seeking money from the administration, White House, so it didn't go over too well for his supporters.  The, his supporters--they set up a thing, they're so, his right wing supporters in the United States set up a letter writing campaign to the editor of The Washington Post denouncing me with these canned phrases, they all had the same phrases; they all used the same language (laughter).  And, in fact, Bradlee [Ben Bradlee] gave me a couple of 'em, you know.  It was, it was a canned effort, you know, so--with no credibility (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so there was a certain point now, now this is during the--
Speaker 2: That was, but that article ran in September 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 486734
Speaker 1: So I think at some point even '60 Minutes' started to denounce Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --pretty--
Speaker 2: --makes sense.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was a pretty brutal person, right.  He was the darling of the West, but he was as autocratic as any African or any other dictator.
Speaker 1: How was he able to become the darling of the West?  I know they (unclear)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause he spoke the, the, the proper rhetoric that he--
Speaker 1: And he--
Speaker 2: --was seeking democracy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that the West should help him against these Soviet [Soviet Union] puppets.  He was a brilliant man; he was not in any way, in any way, shape, or form dumb, you know.  He was Machiavellian, I described him in the '77 [1977] piece ['A Long March in Angola,' Leon Dash] as Machiavellian, a liar and brilliant, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I've often wondered how it might feel to live in a medieval regime or in imperial Rome, or, or even in the American South during 1919 where you have, where these kind of atrocities can take place in the open and people are afraid to say anything or do anything about it.  How, how did you feel being in Angola in, during, in that kind of regime?
Speaker 2: What, traveling with the UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] guerillas?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't fear, I wasn't fearful at all.  And I asked very direct questions.  Their interest in me was for me to get out and write their story.  Savimbi told my bodyguards, "Don't let anything happen to him; don't come back if anything happens to them."  So they knew what that meant, they would face execution.
Speaker 1: Did Savimbi ever, ever write you after the stories came out or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in fact, Savimbi distrusted me a great deal because when I was, I left this out, I'm sorry.  When I was in Angola and I traveled, I had mentioned the town Luso [Luena, Angola], I had a, an interpreter, a lieutenant in the Portuguese Army named Jose Guerre, and just as it's spelled, J-O-S-E, and the last name is G-U-E-R-R-E.  Joseph War was his name in Portuguese, and if you translate it.  He wore fifty beads around his neck.  I said, "How you get away with that in the Portuguese Army?"  He said, "They're afraid of me," you know.  And he was one of these middle class dissidents in the Portuguese Army that didn't really wanna be fighting in Angola.  And he was an open supporter of the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola], and my interpreter.  And he had read my series also.  In fact, he had it and he had translated it for the local commander in Luso.  While we were in Luso, he says I know of, of a priest who's in contact with Joseph, with Jonas Savimbi in the bush.  I said, "Oh, really?"  I said, "Take me to meet him.  Do you think I can do an interview with Savimbi while I'm here?"  He said, "Savimbi doesn't believe the Armed Forces Revolutionary [Armed Forces Revolutionary Council] coup took place; he thinks this is all a charade to get him out of the bush and execute him."  (Laughter) And, and he said, "But the priest goes into the forest to see him."  So we went to the pr- he called the priest and we went to his house and we sat down and I had a long talk with him, and he said that he was going in a couple of days to meet Savimbi again in the forest, and he'd tell him about my request to interview him.  And we waited as long as we could, maybe a week or more, and then I had to move on west to Nova Lisboa [Huambo, Angola], the next town.  And then word, the priest came back to Luso and sent word to me in Nova Lisboa that Savimbi said now is not a time where he could meet me, right.  Savimbi s- felt that I was really CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], and he had mixed feelings about me when I arrived at his camp in '76 [1976].  But when I said I wanted to go to Dondo [Angola] and make the trek to Dongo--Dondo, then he saw me, I don't know, I don't know how he ever saw me because he expected me to be in the European tradition of journalism.  And European journalists are very open about their allegiance, whether it's left, moderate, or to the right.  And they work for publications that are either left, center, or right.  And so they come and they can wear that point of view on their sleeve without a problem; they're still considered credible and they write from that point of view.  Whereas my position has always been that you must be neutral, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and Savimbi didn't understand that.  I don't think he ever understood that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He saw me as a turncoat.  W- , "How did you get into Angola in '74 [1974]?"  And I explained it all to him in '76 [1976].  I don't think he ever believed me, all right.  And he was through with me because when I did the piece about him burning people alive ['Blood and Fire: Savimbi's War Against His UNITA Rivals,' Leon Dash], that appeared in The Washington Post on Sunday, and then I went to the state department [U.S. Department of State] the next day to listen to his talk and sat in the front row so he would clearly see me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he see you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He didn't speak.  I thought he'd come over and hug me or something but he didn't do that.  I'm being facetious.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 486735
Speaker 1: So Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] met his demise in the '90s [1990s], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was killed by the [Angolan] government in February of 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that ended the civil war.  That's from '75 [1975] to 2002, twenty-seven years.
Speaker 1: And the president--
Speaker 2: Do you know how he was killed?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He made a call on his cell phone and my understanding is that Israeli intelligent, intelligence taught the Angolans how to triangle--
Speaker 1: How to triangulate the--
Speaker 2: --yeah, and locate--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and triangulate it and locate him.  And they located him and he was, my understanding is from Sunni Khalid, the reporter in Baltimore [Maryland], with WYKR [sic. WYPR Radio, Baltimore, Maryland] an NP- NPR [National Public Radio] affiliate, this is what he has told me, that they triangulated him and he was calling to Paris [France] to check on his cash deposits in Paris, either from a foreign government or I don't know what he was doing.  And I, and I asked Sunni, "Now, is that some, are you making that up?  All right, he made a cellphone call."  (Laughter) Are you sure that's the rationale or are you feeding me some propaganda, I don't know."  He, he swore it's not propaganda.  But he said the Israelis taught the, or did it for the Angolans, triangulated him, they surrounded him and then when they attacked his camp, he came out of his tent and apparently was determined not to be taken alive and fired back and they killed him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The current president is, is DeCosta or--?
Speaker 2: No, dos Santos [Jose Eduardo dos Santos].
Speaker 1: --dos Santos, dos Santos.
Speaker 2: Don't be calling my middle name.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. I got the Ds messed, mixed up.
Speaker 2: It's dos Santos, not DeCosta (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not DeCosta, but dos Santos.  That's right, dos Santos--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --Eduardo dos Santos.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486736
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978] you come, come back [from Angola] he- well you're back in '77 [1977] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I come back to the states in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do another series that runs in August of '77 [1977].  And I took seven months off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Traveled in the Caribbean, that's when I first made the trip to Barbados to meet my family in Barbados, the first time, the fall of '77 [1977].  And then I come back, I traveled through the Caribbean, the first time in, it was my first trip to the Caribbean.  I go see the relative who works at the University of Virgin Islands [University of the Virgin Islands, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] who is the bookstore manager, my father's younger brother, half-brother, Alfred Dash [ph.] in St. John, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  Go to Trinidad, hang out in Trinidad with some journalist friends of mine that I had met in Washington [D.C].  And then I come back, I'm relaxing, traveling, and then I go back to work in February of '78 [1978] and I'm assigned to cover the mayoral campaign for that year and I'm assigned to the underdog, Marion Shepilov Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry].
Speaker 1: Shepilov (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I say Shepilov because I always tease him about that because when he went to Le Moyne College [Syracuse, New York], he noticed that all these middle class black students had middle names and middle initials and he didn't have one.  And he was a chemistry major; that was his strong suit.  So he picks the name, as his middle name, the middle name of some Nobel Prize-winning Russian chemist, Shepilov, S-H-E-L-E-P-O-V [sic.].  And I got that from his sister when I had gone to Memphis [Tennessee] to interview his family during the campaign.  So I included that in the profile I wrote about him.  He was, he's, he said, "You know, you know, you know too much."  (Laughter) And he complained, "You ask too many questions."  (Laughter) So I said, "Where did you get this Shepilov?  Who is Shepilov?"  He said, "I'm not gonna get into that."  Right, but his sister already gave me the, the skinny on it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What a figure young Marion Barry is, in--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: --American politics.  You know, he's quite a figure in American--
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: --politics.
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: Marion Barry is beloved by a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but is baffling to many, many others.  Some people don't, you know, detest him, so.
Speaker 2: Well, the people that he spoke up for, the poor and, in Washington [D.C.], the black poor, are never going to, I don't believe, ever change their loyalty to him because he did things for them and on their behalf that no other Washington politician has done, had done before or since.  And he, they're very clear on that, as he is, yeah.  The poor and the--
Speaker 1: Now, I, I, I don't think people--
Speaker 2: --the poor and the elderly.
Speaker 1: I don't think people in other regions of the country understand that.  And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I've often, I've had discussions with Washingtonians about him before they, they, they're very defensive about Marion Barry.
Speaker 2: And then these Washingtonians are middle class, black Washingtonians?
Speaker 1: No, rank and- you know, maybe lower middle class or people with jobs and various--
Speaker 2: Well, people were stunned in '94 [1994] when the black middle class voted for him.  But again, they see him as having done more for them and the city than any politician before and since.  Now, Adrian Fenty, the current mayor, I don't know what his bas is or what he's doing really 'cause I, I don't stay up with it.  But, I know Marion still probably has a very deep core of supporters, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people miss him.  And he's still, he's still on city council [Council of the District of Columbia] as we speak, right?
Speaker 2: I believe so and he ran for city council after he came out of prison for the crack possession charge and beat one of his biggest supporters in Ward 8, [HistoryMaker] Wilhelmina Rolark.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Took her seat from her.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She's someone that had a lot of credibility in the community--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Wilhelmina Rolark.  We interviewed her, her, her interview's here in the collection.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  What about her husband Calvin Rolark?
Speaker 1: We missed Calvin Rolark.
Speaker 2: Oh, he had died?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: He had passed away.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She talked about him.  Also another gentleman that ran against Marion Barry, we interviewed too, the, you know, who I'm talking about Walt- there was Walter Washington and then there was another--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sterling Tucker.
Speaker 1: Sterling Tucker, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We, we have his interview here too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 486737
Speaker 1: Tell us about [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry.  What, what was that campaign like and--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an underdog campaign and he was, he out-organized and outworked both Walter Washington, who was the incumbent, and [HistoryMaker] Sterling Tucker who was the city council [Council of the District of Columbia] chairman in that race.  And he won a plur- plurality, he didn't a majority, he won a plurality of the Democratic primary.  And that meant he won the general election when that was held, and that's how he won.  And he and Ivanhoe Donaldson, Donaldson his campaign manager, really figured that out.  They really figured that out.  And they figured out the numbers, they figured out how he would win and he won just the way they did.  They, they were very smart, and he was very smart.  People discounted their, their ability to organize, but these guys had been organizing in the South.  They understood, they did the counting, I mean, Marion Barry was the first chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] elected in 1960.  Ivanhoe Donaldson was the brain of many of their campaigns, particularly in Mississippi.  They understood numbers; they understood voting blocs; they understood what appeals that had to be made.  And Marion was out beating the hustings every, every day.  And that was not what Walter Washington and Sterling Tucker were doing.  They were relying on TV and radio and that didn't get it.  And then The Washington Post endorsed Marion Barry as the better of the three candidates.
Speaker 1: That's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: And that was very interesting, yeah.  That was not something I expected.
Speaker 1: What do you think persuaded The Washington Post to endorse Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: Well they saw Walter Washington as tired and they saw Sterling Tucker as the, as an old, as a younger Walter Washington.  And they came to the conclusion that the city [Washington, D.C.] needed a, a breath of fresh air and so they endorsed Barry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you covered that campaign in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then seventy- he had won, he won the primary in September so I wasn't gonna cover the general election, that was a slam dunk, everyone knew it.
Story_ID: 486738
Speaker 1: And I began, and I was offered to the bureau in sou- in Africa, West Africa, to open a West Africa bureau [for The Washington Post].
Speaker 2: Now, now, now did, did you teach at UC San Diego [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California] for, for a minute there?
Speaker 1: In '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: In seventy- in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In March of '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  I did for two weeks.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: You, you, you were, yeah, I didn't teach, two weeks, it was a two week seminar on Angola and in political science, or international--excuse me--international relations.  And one of the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] supporters, Professor Gerald Bender, B-E-N-D-E-R, who was teaching at UC San Diego at the time had me come out.  And he was the one who had organized the tour of the University of California system in '74 [1974].  And had strong personal ties to Agostinho Neto and as well as Eduardo dos Santos [Jose Eduardo dos Santos], although he, he's fallen out, more, in more recent years with Ed- he teaches now at U- University of Southern California in Los Angeles [California].  He has since fallen out with Eduardo dos Santos because he's wrote about Eduardo dos Santos, corruption.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And how much money is not getting to the people of Angola.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: From the oil money that they're, they're collecting.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there's lots of oil there as--
Speaker 1: Well, the last I, I haven't looked in recent years but I remember years ago, at, maybe five or six, maybe even ten years ago, Angola was taking in at least $600 million a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gulf [Gulf Oil] was big there--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 486739
Speaker 1: West African bureau job [with The Washington Post], now what, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I had gotten the bureau when Bradlee, Ben Bradlee took me to lunch in July.  Everybody was keeping it a secret.  I had a good friend who the city editor at the time, Herbert Denton [Herbert H. Denton, Jr.], he has since died, died in '89 [1989].  But, he came up to me and he was, you know, he was a person I res- I answered to, he was the city editor, (unclear) this is the city election, and I'm busy, you know, covering an election is, you don't have a lot, a lot of time, there's no downtime really, you know, you're going to every event the candidate is going too.  You're constantly, you know, I was a bachelor at the time but, you know, I had put all my shirts in the laundry.  And sometimes I didn't have time, I have to run downtown and buy a shirt, run into the office, go into the bathroom, put on a fresh shirt and stick the dirty shirt in a bag, you know.  It's, it's (laughter) that's the nature of a campaign; you're going from early in the morning to late at night.  And he came up to me and he said, "What have you got going on today?"  This is some day in July and I said, "I haven't--," you know, I don't remember what I had but I said, I had, I had many things to do.  "Well, cancel it all."  I said, "You cancel all this--what are you talking about? (Makes sounds) You know, you got, you know, this is, I'm doing this, I got this story to write."  He said, "Well, cancel it, and make yourself available for lunch.  It's a very important lunch."  So I did what he told me.  And then Bradlee's secretary called me and said, "Can you go to lunch with Ben today?"  I said, "Oh, so this is what this is all about."  So after lunch he told me that I had the next bureau, I had the next spot on the foreign desk and that I'd be opening a bureau in Africa.  He didn't say West Africa, just Africa.  So I was stunned.  I didn't know that that was going to happen.  I was very surprised.  So right after the Democratic primary was in, held in September, I moved to the foreign desk in October.  And then in March I moved to Abidjan, Ivory Coast.  First I went over in November to look for a bureau.  I looked at Monrovia [Liberia], Abidjan, and Lagos [Nigeria], and I decided on Abidjan.
Speaker 1: Why Abidjan?
Speaker 2: Telecommunications were the best in West Africa, and airplanes, anywhere, going anywhere in Africa in terms of flights.  I already knew that a lot of my coverage would be emergency coverage: coup d'etats, attempted coup d'etats, invasions and so on, that's the nature of the beat.  So that's what I needed.  And Lagos and Monrovia didn't have it at the level that Abidjan did.
Story_ID: 486740
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979], Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: And I also got remarried, my second wife, when it was clear that I was headed, I was dating Alice Bond [ph.] and we married in October of '78 [1978].  And so we went to Abidjan together.  By this time also by December of '78 [1978], my oldest daughter came to live with me.  Her name is Darla, D-A-R-L-A [Darla Dash Washington].
Speaker 1: Now, now, how did you meet your second wife?
Speaker 2: She worked at The Washington Post.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had known her for years.  We hadn't dated for years, we had dated off and on, '78 [1978], I think we had started dating off and on, '76 [1976], I believe.  And then I went off to Angola and came back seven and a-half months later, that didn't settle too well.  And then we started dating again.  And then it was clear that I was going off to Africa for a number of years.  So we married in October of '78 [1978] and then my oldest daughter came to live with me in December in Washington [D.C.] and the three of us left for Abidjan in March of '79 [1979], right.  And my oldest daughter went, right after we got there I went through the process of telling her that she had to repeat the tenth and eleventh grade with this homeschooling program with the University of Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we got that story--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in the first part.  So--
Speaker 2: All right.  So--
Speaker 1: --we don't have to go over that again.  But that's--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --my wife at the time was doing work for the city desk.  There were people, delegations from the city and involved in Washington politics were coming out for trips and I know they made one extensive trip through West Africa to East Africa to Nairobi [Kenya] and she went on that trip with them and reported for the city desk on that trip.  And that was the first time she saw Nairobi and when she came back from Nairobi she said, "Why are we here?"  You know, Nairobi's, Nairobi is much more temperate, it's a highland area; she saw it as much more attractive and in some respects it is.
Speaker 1: Ab- Abidjan isn't it in the Ivory Coast like a, a resort for the French, I mean, some sort of that, a lot of them come over there to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well people describe it as the, Abidjan, the city, as the African Paris.  I didn't find that to be the case, but it, it, at the time in '79 [1979] it was one of the most developed cities in West Africa in terms of communications, airline flights, the ability to work and use it as a regional base, and that's what I was using it as.  But I ended up covering not just West Africa, West, Central [Central Africa], and East Africa, covered all three areas.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a lot of territory.
Speaker 2: It is.  And so 80 percent of the time I was on the road.  So where, where are we gonna go now?  So I'm on the road and I'm doing a lot of coverage.  In fact, shortly after I get into Abidjan, there's a coup in Ghana, or coup attempt, Jerry Rawlings.  And the, the attempt fails, and he's put on trial and the mid-level again, just almost like Portugal, the mid-level officers, after they listened to his defense, when he makes his defense on the stand in the court, they decide to overthrow the government and put him in power, and that's what happens.
Speaker 1: Now, he was a flight lieutenant in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jerry--
Speaker 2: --in the [Ghana] Air Force.
Speaker 1: --Jerry Rawlings.
Speaker 2: Jerry Rawlings.  And Rawlings is R-A-W-L-I-N-G-S.
Story_ID: 486741
Speaker 1: So eventually when they--.  You know, usually, when there's a coup they don't allow any air traffic in, you know, any airplanes in and out but I get in to Accra [Ghana] on one of the first airplanes that goes in, one of the first commercial flights.  And what happened next?  Oh, so, I get, I get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what assessment of that situation do you have from that?
Speaker 1: Well, I did an interview with Rawlings [Jerry Rawlings] at Burma Camp [Accra, Ghana], which is the major army [Ghana Armed Forces] camp in Accra and he never forgave me for what I wrote out of that interview.  But I go into the headquarters and Rawlings is sitting at a desk, he's already been designated head of state.  I'd already done a background session at the U.S. embassy, and I knew Rawlings was not really in charge, that the person who had led the coup attempt that put him in office was really still in charge and that was a man named Captain Waka Jahn [ph.].  I don't have the spelling of his name, I think his last name is J-A-H-N.  And, so I go into this meeting with Rawlings and I'm interviewing him and taking hand notes.  And there's a guy sitting next to me, a Ghanaian, sitting next to me on my right, and every time I ask Rawlings a question, he answers.  And after the second or third time I say, "You know, I'm not here to interview you, I don't even know your name.  What is your name?"  And he said, "I'm not gone give you my name."  I said, "Well, you know, I think, you know, I'd like to get an answer from Jerry Rawlings."  And so he lightens up.  And eventually I s- I ask Rawlings, I say, "Well, there's been international complaints, Amnesty International in particular, has claimed about these people tribunals where people are being executed, shortly afterwards and they say they lack due, due process and it's a kangaroo court.  I'd like to attend one of these tribunals and be able to describe it."  So Rawlings looks at me and he says, "Okay, you can attend."  And this guy who had been sitting on Rawlings' right with an army cap on and an AK-47 on his lap, said, "No, he can't."  Just like that.  And I, and I said to myself this must be Waka Jahn.  And I looked back at Rawlings and Rawlings looked at the ceiling.  And I looked back at who, the man who--'cause he identified himself, I said, "But why do you say I can't attend the tribunal and can I get your name?"  He said, "My name is Captain Waka Jahn.  And we're not letting even Ghanaian journalists attend the tribunals, so we're not going, certainly not gonna let the foreign press attend a tribunal."  Finished.  Subject ended.  So I continued my interview in other ways.  Well the story I wrote, I described that whole scene.  There was, and it was very clear that Rawlings was the figurehead, he was not in charge.
Story_ID: 486742
Speaker 1: And years, a year or so later, I came back after they held an election, and a Ghanaian journalist--.  Oh, I saw a Ni- Ghanaian journalist, Cameron Duodu, D-O-U-D-U [sic.], Cameron, C-A-M-E-R-O-N, very well-known Ghanaian journalist.  I saw him at a coup attempt in Gambia, this is how we get together, you know (laughter).  So we're in Gambia and we had to do a lot of walking to try to interview the people who had stopped the coup, long distances 'cause nothing was allowed on the roads or anything.  And while we're walking to this camp, Cameron says to me, said to me, "You know, Jerry Rawlings is very upset with you."  I knew why he was upset, and I said, "About what?"  He said, he didn't descri- he didn't tell me what he was upset about, but he's very upset with me.  I said, "Well, the next time I'm in Ghana I'll go to see him."  But in the meantime, there was an election, a civilian election and Jerry Rawlings stepped aside and a civilian government was in place.  And I went back to Ghana, I interviewed some of the newer politicians in the new government.  And then I went to Jerry Rawlings' house to see him.  Knocked on the door, he opened the door, and the marijuana just almost knocked me out and behind him was a Johnnie Walker Red Label.  Well, this is very extravagant for a country that's in dire financial straits, but that was Rawlings' power still.  And he looked at me, he was amazed.  He said, "You have the ner-."  He cursed me out right there, right at the door to his apartment.  "You have the nerve to come knocking on my door?"  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and he went on and on.  And I listened to him.  And I said, "Well Cameron Duodu told me that you're upset about what I wrote, but he wasn't able to tell me what you are upset about, so I came to ask you."  And he looked at me again and he said, "All right."  He said, "Well, the next time you're in Ghana, bring the article you wrote and we will go over it."  And I said I will.  And he didn't invite me in.  He closed the door and, and I left.  So when he did another coup now, now he did his own coup and put himself into power, Waka Jahn [ph.] had to flee t- and went into exile in London [England].  And I went back to Ghana--this must be now '80 [1980] or '81 [1981], I forget the sequence, I would have to look at when he was in power and when he stepped aside and so on.  And I went to the castle [Osu Castle, Accra, Ghana] and I had the article with me and I went to their public information officer and the public information I asked him, I, I wanted to put in a request for an interview, this is the drill for an interview with Head of State Rawlings and this is my name, these, you know, this is who I represent.  So he said fine and he went upstairs and then he came back downstairs about a half hour later, he looks like, like he had seen a ghost.  He said, "Look, Rawlings is not gonna interview you, give you an interview and I suggest you get out of the country."  Yeah.  So I left.  And I had a taxi waiting outside in case that was the response with my luggage in it, and I had him drive me across the border into Lome, Togo, yeah.  I wasn't gonna go at the airport and wait (laughter)--
Speaker 2: To see the--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) 'til Rawlings changed his mind and sent some of his thugs out there to get me.
Story_ID: 486743
Speaker 1: What about the, the coup in Liberia?
Speaker 2: Oh Liberia, that was, that was plain; that was building.  Number one, the Liberian, the Americo-Liberians who used to claim they didn't exist, and it was clear that they did exist, they were running an oligarchy and had since the establishment of, well, first they arrived in 1822 and then they established the Liberian republic [Republic of Liberia] in 1847 and named Monrovia [Liberia] after President Monroe [President James Monroe].
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are son, a lot of them sons and daughters of slave owners sent over--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And the--
Speaker 2: A lot of them came out of Maryland, right, freed coloreds and freed slaves.  And I had been there in February of 1980 when there was a riot against William Tolbert [William R. Tolbert, Jr.] and the increase in the price of rice.  But there they were so much--the tension was palpable everywhere you went in the capital, the executive mansion, downtown, and I went to interview the leaders of the demonstration against the increasing rice prices.  One of the leaders was a guy named Baccus Matthews [Gabriel Baccus Matthews].  Did extensive interviews with them and wrote about this tinderbox that Liberia had reached.  And that the indigenous people were just fed up with the domination of the Americo-Liberian elite.  And I didn't see the coup coming; I thought that the, the issue might come from the people outside the army.  'Cause the army was pampered, right, to keep it loyal to the power in the executive mansion, William Tolbert.  And the army had, was all, the top echelon was dominated by the Americo-Liberians and the rank and file were indigenous, you know.  And that was so plain, so obvious.  So I did a, a series of articles, it wasn't a series, I did about four articles that ran in The Washington Post in February.  And then the coup jumped off in April, not in connection with my articles but because of indigenous circumstances.  And the coup, of course, grew out of the guy who had the, the indigenous person who had the highest rank in the army, Sergeant Doe, Samuel Doe.
Speaker 1: He was the highest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything above sergeant was Americo-Liberian, everything from sergeant below was indigenous in the Liberian army, it was very clear.  And they killed Tolbert, they gutted him at the executive mansion while he was begging for his life.  They tracked down Tolbert's son [A. Benedict Tolbert] who had, who had abused a lot of indigenous people.  I, I can see his face, I can't remember his name.  They tracked him down in the interior and killed him.  And there was a lot of bloodletting.
Story_ID: 486744
Speaker 1: Well this was so shocking to a lot of African Americans that had any relationship to, to Africa because we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) American, you know, a lot of African Ameri-
Speaker 1: --we saw it as an extension of--
Speaker 2: I, I guess, I shouldn't say this but I, you know, I find that a lot of Ameri- African Americans take Africa and Africans out of the realm of humanity and romanticize them.  And Africans are no different from the rest of humanity, from my point of view.  And they're no different from the Homo sapiens.  And you've got good people, bad people, evil people, altruistic people; the range of humanity that you find anywhere on the globe, is the same range you find in Africa.  And if you look at Africa through rose-colored glasses then you're going to have a distorted understanding of Africa from my point of view, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I think that a lot of people saw Liberia and Sierra Leone as kind of the tamest places in Africa and a lot of--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Sierra Leone had one of the vicious insurgencies that you would ever wanna witness, particularly with amputating people's limbs.
Speaker 1: But prior to--
Speaker 2: I mean, just, just--
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighty [1980], I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, the whole view of those two places were like those are--even other Africans, Nigerians would le- would flee Nigeria and hang out in Sierra Leone and Liberia to recollect themselves and go back, you know, and just--
Speaker 2: That's fine because they're foreign nationals, they're not involved in the indigenous issues but there are indigenous issues in every country.  And those are, you know, the, you know there's a, there's a strongman syndrome in many places in Africa and when the person gets in power or his group gets in power, they really shut out everyone else.  There's no spread of the spoils; it's winner take all.  And people who are marginalized are really shut out, really.  And if they get angry and organized then you're in trouble.  It had come, you know, the Americo-Liberians had really in, had really conquered the indigenous population of that region of Liberia and only let very few of them in by adopting children into their families.  And then the children they would provide for, and even provide them with advanced educations by sending them to the United States to college but that was very few compared to the numbers, you know.
Story_ID: 486745
Speaker 1: Let's move on to Idi Amin Dada [Idi Amin], that's a, that's another big story, I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't cover his overthrow--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by the Tanzanian army [Tanzania People's Defence Force], another Washington Post [The Washington Post] reporter did, correspondent, David Ottaway covered that.  So I had no firsthand knowledge of his downfall and, in fact, I didn't get to Uganda until '83 [1983] when Obote, Milton Obote, was in power.
Speaker 1: And the refugees were, the remnants of the--
Speaker 2: Of the war?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well there was still the, there was still a war in the North and there was still a lot of fighting.  The Lord's Resistance Army was still fighting in the North; they've been negotiating with him just recently, it's still ongoing.  And there was a lot of killing.  And the army [National Resistance Army; Uganda People's Defence Force] really couldn't, couldn't control the Lord's Resistance Army because they used, they fought guerilla tactics and they used Sudan as a refuge, they would go out of Uganda.  And the Ugandan army was afraid to pursue them because then they were afraid that the Sudanese would give that army, the Lord's Resistance Army more support or might invade Uganda.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, the Lord's Resistance Army, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And he was kidnapping young boys to indoctrinate into his guerilla force, young girls and forcing them to sleep with his soldiers and himself, all of that.
Story_ID: 486746
Speaker 1: So you were in, in Africa from 1979 to '84 [1984] as West Africa bureau chief [for The Washington Post] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually December of '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  To '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else we need to really--
Speaker 2: Well, my youngest daughter--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you asked me about my youngest daughter.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She was born, I literally was covering--her mother was a month away from leaving, she was pregnant, and seven months pregnant, and I was covering the French toppling of Jean-Bedel Bokassa--
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: --in the Central African Republic, Bangui, B-A-N-G-U-I.  And I had gotten--
Speaker 1: And Bokassa was a man who executed somebody by setting them inside of a drum I think or I, I heard (unclear) stories.
Speaker 2: I didn't find that that was ever--
Speaker 1: Confirmed?
Speaker 2: --I, I, I read those stories, but I didn't write that because I didn't confirm it for myself.  You know, I found a lot of stories were--
Speaker 1: Sensationali- ?
Speaker 2: --fabricated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or sensationalized, particularly by the European reporters.  So you had, I had, I felt that you had to be very cautious and my editors would send me, "Well so and so says this."  And I said, "I don't care what he said; don't put it in my story."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Don't put it under my byline."
Speaker 1: Now, what about the, didn't he build a crystal cathedral or something, Catholic cathedral, or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he, he, he made himself emperor of the Central African Republic and, and it was ridiculous, a very poor country.  He was supported a great deal by Giscard d'Estaing [Valery Giscard d'Estaing], the president of France at the time, initially because he allowed Giscard d'Estaing to use the Central African Republic as a hunting ground, to hunt elephants and the like (cough).  And he was a brutal person.  He did a lot of killing, indiscriminate.  You could not speak u- you could not speak your mind or write anything, all right.  And a majority of the population is illiterate, didn't provide any education for them.  He, his claim to fame and how he set himself up to be where he was, was that he was a sergeant in the French Foreign Legion, and very loyal to the French so they really set it up for him, as Idi Amin was.  Idi Amin was very loyal to the British during Mau Mau.  And apparent- he was particularly brutal in going into the forest of central Kenya to hunt out the Mau Mau guerilla fighters and kill them.  You know, he had a reputation of not coming back with any prisoners for the British to interrogate.  And so he was rewarded with that by being promoted in the Ugandan army [National Resistance Army; Uganda People's Defence Force], so when independence came he was the head of the army because of his loyalty to the British and his brutality against other Africans.  The same process with Jean-Bedel Bokassa: loyal to the French, so the French promoted him to the position that he began, he was able to seize power and independence (unclear).  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about, I think Obasanjo's regime, I think--
Speaker 2: Obasanjo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Obasanjo, yeah, in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Olusegun Obasanjo.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He came to power during the civil war against Biafra.  And rose in rank and then there was a lot of sorting out in the [Nigerian] Army and he eventually became the head of the Army and handed over to the first civilian government in '79 [1979], right.  But while I was in, covering Bokassa's overthrow by the French, my daughter went, my, my wife at the time went into premature labor and had, gave birth to my youngest daughter, Destiny Dash, right.  And because she was premature she has cerebral palsy, she was two months premature.  She was due in November, she was born September 27th, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it difficult to, to--
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't know at first that she had cerebral palsy; that didn't manifest itself until after we had separated.  We separated when she was seven months old, my wife and I, she mo- returned to the states and then subsequent to her return it was discovered that she had cerebral palsy, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So do, do you have a good relationship with her now or do you have a--
Speaker 2: That's not a relationship I'd care to discuss.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not gonna characterize it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not gonna discuss it either.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 486747
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What did he learn with his, what did he learn about himself and what did he learn about the country?  That's, he had been there, this would have been his fifth time, fifth trip?  He was in the Peace--
Speaker 2: Fifth.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --Corps, three trips, then (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two, two (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, and then four years in--
Speaker 1: And they're all different countries but I don't--
Speaker 2: --three trips to Angola, and two years in Kenya, and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right.
Speaker 2: --four years as an African correspondent [for The Washington Post].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Really that, as I, as I, as I've already described, that really Africa and Africans are a part of humanity.  I don't find that there's any difference in the rest of humanity.  There are cultural and lingual differences but you begin to realize that human beings are all over the world the same, um-hm.  I think that's the universal perspective I came away with, yeah.  And I think I dealt with that when, when African Americans tend to look at Africa in a roman- with a romantic view, which I did young, at a young age.  Thinking about going to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] because Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] went there and Azikiwe [Nnamdi Azikiwe] went there and listening to Chancellor Williams about the great African kingdoms and all of that.  So I had a romantic view until really the Peace Corps began, the experience in living in rural Kenya began to break that down.
Speaker 1: Well, I know you said earlier too that Chancellor gave you a critique of African leadership.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was a realistic kind of--
Speaker 2: That was realistic, yeah.  And I think that was my introduction to--.  He, he had a very insightful understanding of the flaws of African leadership.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And was very clear about it.
Speaker 1: There's all--
Speaker 2: Clearer than, clearer than the romantics or the Pan-Africanists, yeah.
Speaker 1: And there's, there's also, and I think there are more people that have the, a negative view of Africa than have a romantic view.  African Americans who don't wanna be associated with Africa--
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought that--
Speaker 1: --or despise Africa.
Speaker 2: Well, I thought that was--
Speaker 1: And was, did, did your trip do anything to dispel any of the notions?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I remember coming back from the Peace Corps if this helps you, I remember coming back from the Peace Corps and very enthusiastic about Africa and the reality of Africa and what I had experienced in those two years and trying to share that with a number of friends and relatives because I was full of Africa.  And after one or two sentences, they were not interested.  I had one cousin ask me, this was the extent of her interest, "Do they have television over there?"  And I said, "Yes."  And that was it, she was finished, yeah, they had television, that's fine, yeah.  So I didn't find a great deal of--among intellectuals, but I'm talking about friends and relatives now--I didn't find a lot of interest in knowing about Africa one way or the other, not necessarily, they didn't have necessarily a negative viewpoint but they had no viewpoint and no interest.  I had thought that the negative image of Africa has dissipated, but you're staying that it's still very strong (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't think it's dissipated--
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: --at all, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think people are very negative about Africa, particularly African Americans.  It's the last ethnic group that they--
Speaker 2: I haven't encountered that.  I, I, I used to encounter that when I was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --much younger, I haven't encountered that recently.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm thinking, well, I haven't had a lot of discussions about Africa recently, yeah.  But I remember encountering that as a young person, both in my teenage years as in, in my twenties, yeah.
Story_ID: 486748
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994], Washington Post [The Washington Post] you're, you're an, an investigative journalist now doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually I come back in 1984, I'm assigned as assistant foreign editor on the foreign desk--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: --editing foreign correspondence.  Copy is boring, you know, particularly if you have energy and you're active.  So I began to maneuver to get another assignment.  Now, you know, I'm accustomed to maneuvering to get assignments.  And I'm talking to a good friend of mine, Vernita Fort, V-E-R-N-I, T as in Tom, A, F-O-R-T.  The same person I stayed with in '92 [1992], going back and forth to Barbados in '92 [1992], '95 [1995].  I am talking to her in January of '84 [1984], and she told me that 53 percent of all black children born in America in 1983 were the children of single mothers.  And over a third of those single mothers were adolescent girls growing up in poverty.  Well, I had not, this is the first time I'm exposed to these figures and percentages and I'm saying, no, you're wrong.  That can't be right.  Fifty-three percent and over a third are adolescent girls?  No.  So we bet a dinner at Rive Gauche, a very expensive French restaurant in Georgetown, Washington, D.C., corner of Wisconsin [Avenue] and M Street, it's been replaced by the Banana Republic.  It was so expensive it--.  Yeah, that's why it's no longer in business (laughter).  And I lost.  And I go out to the, and National Institutes of Health to their demographics and se- section, that's headed by a name, a woman named Wendy Baldwin, a demographer named Wendy Baldwin.  And she tells me that my, my friend's figures are correct and, in fact, at that point in '84 [1984] the figures were skyrocketing, increasing every year particularly among black adolescent girls.  So on my own, now I'm still working on the foreign desk, I began asking people what they thought this represented, or how did this phenomenon come about, and what is happening?  And I get a lot of glib responses as you usually do from people who were extrapolating from their own experience.  It's, doesn't mean that this is the experience that these girls are going through.  And admittedly I'm asking a lot of middle class people, black and white, and a lot of journalists, black and white, as well as relatives of mine.  Remember the woman who I mentioned, my cousin, Blanche Phillips, who is Blanche Phillips Delaine, last name is D-E-L-A-I-N-E, that's her married name.  She's the daughter of my great uncle who was born in Angola, Robert Phillips, right.  She's the principal of an elementary school [Hybla Valley Elementary School] in Fairfax County [Alexandria, Virginia] at this time.  And she told me that she felt the girls were having babies to qualify for welfare payments, black girls.  And I said, "No, that's, that's--.  You're wrong."  And she said, "You know, you think I'm wrong, but I know what I'm talking about."  And I said, "Well, you know, I, in the '70s [1970s] I covered families in poverty, and usually there's no food in the house for any welfare dependent family by the third or fourth week of any month."  She said, "Well, I didn't know that," but she didn't change her point of view.  And it's a very powerful myth here in America that that's a motivation to have babies.  So and then I asked other people and a friend of mine said, "Well, I think the girls are growing up in dire circumstances and they're emotionally needy because of the poverty that they're living in and confronted with.  And as a result they (unclear) (background noise), as a result they're easily manipulated by the macho teenage boys that they grow up with."  And I said, "Well, that sounds kind of sexist."  He said, "What, what do you mean sexist?"  I said, "Well, you know, I grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], I grew up in a middle class, relatively middle class family, but I was surrounded by poverty and a lot of my friends were poor, and where were all these emotionally needy girls when I was a teenage boy? I surely didn't come across them.  And the girls that I knew were very tough, I mean, growing up in poverty, and you didn't manipulate them into anything, you know.  That wasn't happening."
Story_ID: 486749
Speaker 1: Eventually I made, I went back to Howard Simons, the managing editor [of The Washington Post], and said, you know, I really would like to do a study of adolescent childbearing, I called it teenage pregnancy then because I thought, my presumption was that it was out of ignorance.  And because my s- presumption was based on what I knew about sexuality when I was a teenager because there was nothing available in the school system.  I had a half hour, forty-five minute discussion during a hygiene course at Olinville Junior High [Olinville Junior High School; M.S. 113, Richard R. Green School, Bronx, New York] and that was it, A to Z on human sexuality, nothing about birth control.  So he said, "Well, that's, that's," he said, "that's great if you wanna do a project like that, but you can't do it on the foreign desk."  So he said, "Why don't you talk to Woodward," who is heading up the investigative unit.  And I wasn't sure Woodward, Bob Woodward, of Watergate fame, would be interested in this subject but he said, "Great."  He was very enthusiastic.  He said, "'Cause everybody's talking about it and nobody knows what they're talking about."  (Laughter) Nobody's talking to the teenagers.  And so, by May of '84 [1984], May 1st, I had moved over to the investigative desk, from the foreign desk.  And first I had to do, I was a little annoyed because I couldn't start on it right away because I had to do a project on the criminal justice system in St. Louis [Missouri] and myself, a fellow named Ted Gup, and a woman named Athelia Knight, Athelia is A-T-H-E-L-I-A, N, I mean, K-N-I-G-H-T.  We did this project on the criminal justice system in St. Louis ['A Question of Justice: Cellmates' Word Sent Woman to Jail'] that was published in June of '84 [1984].  And then I could start full-time on the adolescent childbearing series ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash].  So I selected census track data for every census track in Washington, D.C.  And I chose the census track that had the highest percentage of people living in poverty because it was very clear when you looked at the census track data, that the higher rates of adolescent childbearing were in the, in the communities that had the highest numbers or percentages of people in poverty.  The poorest community in Washington, D.C. was a community cal- named Washington Highlands.  Twenty-six percent of its nineteen thousand residents were living below federal levels of poverty and it had the highest levels of adolescent childbearing than any other census track in Washington, D.C.  So that was the community I decided to move into and live.
Story_ID: 486750
Speaker 1: First I thought about moving into a public housing project, because that community [Washington Highlands, Washington, D.C.] is dominated by public housing, but I said that's not right because there's a long list of people waiting to get into public housing, and here I am doing a project ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash].  At that point I thought the project would take about six months, it took seventeen, but I said I can't move into public housing.  And I did finally, after looking, found, in a private house, private apartment building, a basement apartment, one bedroom basement apartment and I moved into that apartment.  I knew it was the apartment to rent because when I went to the superintendent to get the key, he was located in another building, he gave me the key to go look at the apartment, and I walked into the apartment and there were roaches all over the apartment and they didn't run when they saw me.  And I already knew that from my childhood in, in Harlem [New York, New York] that these roaches were accustomed to humans live, living alongside humans and were not afraid of them.  And that to me was a sign that this, this--the, the previous tenant was at a level of despair that these generations of, of roaches were used to living alongside humans.
Speaker 2: They wouldn't even try to smash--
Speaker 1: No, I mean, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) roaches, they were--
Speaker 1: --you know, well, who was I?  You know, it was just another human.  So I looked through the apartment and I said, oh, this will work.  And I went to leave the apartment and pulled the knob on the front door, and it came off in my hand.  And I said (laughter) I'm definitely in the right place.  That also meant I couldn't get out.  So I tried yelling, there's no one else in the building, it's during the daytime, everybody who works is either out or at school or at work.  I didn't have a cellphone to call the superintendent, but then I opened the--it was a basement apartment so the windows were right at ground level and they had a burglar screen on the living room window and I pushed it, I opened the window and I pushed it and it fell out (laughter).  So I climbed, I climbed out (laughter) of the, on the living roo- floor level (unclear) said I hope I don't get shot; people will think I'm a burglar.  I climbed out onto the ground outside and put the burglar screen back in its place, you know, and went up to the superintendent and explained to him, I gave him the doorknob from inside, I said, "I want the apartment, but could you fix the door?"  (Laughter) "And put--and could you put, could you make the burglar screens secure?"  And I rented the apartment.  I moved into that apartment in July, 1984, and I lived there for a year, the entire project as I mentioned took seventeen months 'cause I continued interviewing right up until the series ran in January, '86 [1986].
Story_ID: 486751
Speaker 1: I approached twenty-two families about doing an adolescent childbearing project ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash] with interviews about how children, boys and girls, in these families, these twenty-two families, became adolescent parents.  I had started de- I started identifying these families by contacting the minister of the nearby Paramount Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] who introduced me to the chairman of the youth committee, who directed me to a, a young girl, sixteen year old girl, who lived in Washington Highlands [Washington, D.C.] and attended this church and through her I began meeting people in the community, adolescents and family units and introducing myself to them.  So in the process I, I, I approached twenty-two families, thirteen agreed to come into the project.  After a couple of months, I dropped seven of the families.  In two of the thirteen families, there were eleven children each, and my intention was in, to interview everyone in the family repeatedly, everyone, children, the adults in the family.  And of course, I would have to approach the adults first after I make contact with the adolescents to see if they agreed for their children to be in the project.  So I, the six families I selected I kept one of the families with eleven children.  And the six families I selected were selected on the basis of the access they allowed me to have with every member in the family.  It's clear for me, it's important for me to say at the outset that every adolescent lied to me about how he or she became a parent.  They told me that it was a matter of ignorance about sex- human sexuality, ignorant about their reproductive capabilities, ignorant about birth control; those were the general rationales offered.  None of that was the truth.  And I learned fairly early on in the project that it wasn't the truth because remember the mothers were in the project and the mothers would tell me what the genuine daughter, motivation of their daughters were in having a child.  And it's not something that I ever shared with their daughters even when the daughters told me something different.  I just waited and kept interviewing and interviewing until the daughters were willing to tell me.  And they all did, within four to six months of me interviewing them and bringing them into the project, they all told me it's something different from what they had originally told me.  In one case, the case of Sherita Dreher, her oldest sister told me what Sherita's genuine motivation was in having a child.  The sister told me in December, Sherita told me in February, 1985.  I had met Sherita and begun interviewing her in October of '84 [1984].
Story_ID: 486752
Speaker 1: Then I did the, the series ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash], that was published in January [1986].  I was interviewing right up until a week before the series ran.  Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the reason?  Now what's the reason (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Generally the motivation was to have an achievement in a world in which their achievements were going to be very limited and having a baby is an achievement; it's an affirmation and it fulfills a, a human need to achieve something.  These were kids who were growing up in the poorest section of the city [Washington Highlands, Washington, D.C.], and it was also, they had the poorest school system in the city, the poorest part of the school system.  Most of the incompetent and inept teachers were sent to this area of the city to work because they couldn't be fired because of civil service regulations; it was too difficult to fire them, so just shunt them off into a dangerous, down ridden part of the city.  And these kids were not being given a quality education, and they knew it, they knew it.  They were not, and none of them were learning disabled or dumb but they were cynical about where they lived and where they grew up about their chances in life and their futures.  Most of the ones that I interviewed were not competitive in the American job market.  Some of them, some of them, and they were not learning disabled, were semi-illiterate, they had not been taught to read.  So, having a baby was an achievement.  And none of these young women, none of these young women were manipulated by their boyfriends.  And often they were the initiator of the discussion about having a child and stopped their boyfriend from using condoms.  And informed, like Sheila Matthews told her boyfriend, Mario Jones that, first she said, "I wanna have a baby."  He laughed at her and said, "We're too young and we're not having any babies."  And she looked at him and said, "I've decided to have a baby, and you're gonna be the father."  And he laughed at her again, you know.  Tauscha Vaughn got her boyfriend, Reggie Wiley, to stop using condoms and said we'll practice withdrawal, and then wouldn't let him withdraw.  You know, very clear desire to have children.  Some of these desires were individual.  Sherita [Sherita Dreher] wanted to hold on, Sherita had dark skin and had had low self-esteem because of her dark-skinned complexion and wanted to hold on to her light-skinned boyfriend, William Wheeler, whe- at a point where they were breaking up, it was clear they were breaking up.  And that didn't, that didn't hold on to him.  He didn't, he didn't stay with her because she was pregnant with their child.  Tauscha wanted, besides the achievement, she wanted a baby as a sign from God that he loved her.  And, and I said to her, "Well, what in the Baptist religion says that having a child out of wedlock is a sign that God loves you?  Where did you learn that?  I mean, where did you come up with that?"  Well, she ca- she was manipulating religion 'cause there's nothing in Baptist, she, she was a, this was the girl that I met through Paramount Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], there's nothings in Baptist dogma that says having a child out of wedlock is a sign that God loves you; it's just the opposite, right.  So with Sheila Matthews she was competing with her two best friends who had become sexually active before she did, so Sheila became sexually active.  Who became mothers and dropped out of school, so Sheila became a mother, she didn't drop out of school, her parents agreed to look after the, Petey, her son, until she finished school.  But all that was about keeping up with girls.  And she, she was a very bright girl.  And, and a number of her teachers thought that she had the ability to go on to college and fulfill a dream that she had of being a pediatrician.  But she got no status in that community for being academically bright.  Having a child raised your status from the teenagers' point of view, from that of adolescent to adult and it was seen as a rite of passage.  And that's essentially, with individual stories what the series said.
Speaker 2: You think that it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of reaction to the series.  Some praise, a lot of criticism, particularly from the black middle class, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would imagine those reasons still hold true today, I don't see why they would change.
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I don't think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the motivation for girls to have babies has changed.  I've had students who at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] who have done adolescent childbearing studies with one girl, rather than a whole family, in Champaign-Urbana [Illinois], and they have found the same thing.  I don't tell them, well, they, they have read the book ['Rosa Lee: A Mother and Her Family in Urban America,' Leon Dash], but they do enough interviews with the young girl to uncover the same thing.
Story_ID: 486753
Speaker 1: This series of articles ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash], you know, was recognized by the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] and several other organizations.  Now, your, your next one was the, I believe, it was the Rosa Lee ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It wasn't?
Speaker 2: The next one was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --drug addicted officers at the D.C. Jail ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash].
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  What happened, the sequence was, while I was doing the adolescent childbearing study, it was clear to me that I was interviewing people who were mired in intergenerational poverty.  And the poverty, people weren't getting out.  You know, the poverty, the circumstances, the being trapped in poverty, people were not breaking free.  And I became very interested in a lot of writing about the American underclass.  And the Urban Institute [Washington, D.C.], a think tank on urban studies issued a study in December of 1986 (cough) on the definition of the underclass.  And that was what I wanted to do.  Bob Woodward didn't want me to do it.  He says enough has been written about it, and you're not gonna come up with anything new.  And I ignored him.  But I had to have the deputy head of the investigative unit collude with me to go ahead and do the underclass study without Bob Woodward knowing.  And that was a guy named Steve Luxenberg, Luxenberg is L-U-X-E-N, N as in Nelly, not M, E-N-B-E-R-G.  Bob wanted me to look at the D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.], for whatever--.  I wanted to look at the D.C. Jail because the Urban Institute had come up with a definition of what, a five part definition of what constitutes an underclass family.  And the five parts were: one, that's it female headed; two, marginally educated, almost no high school graduates in the family; three, chronically unemployed, the adults between the ages of eighteen and sixty-five; and four was, oh, welfare dependent; and five, that petty criminal enterprise was a significant contribution to the welfare stipend.  Well, petty criminal enterprise describes criminal recidivists because they don't get long sentences.  People who commit violent crime get long sentences, arm- armed attack, murder, homicide, manslaughter, attack with a deadly weapon, assault with a deadly weapon, rape; they get long sentences but petty criminals get short sentences, out on the street, and back into jail within two years of being released.  I already knew from the study that Ben Bagdikian and I did ['The Shame of the Prisons,' Ben H. Bagdikian and Leon Dash] in '71 [1971] that 50 percent of the D.C. prison population was made up of criminal recidivists so I went to the D.C. Jail.  And my intention was to interview, well, I ended up interviewing twenty men and twenty women who came out of families who met the Urban Institute definition.  Again, whole family units were traveling through the D.C. Jail.  You had a lot of brothers and sisters with different surnames coming through the D.C. Jail.  And the D.C.--it was not in any computer system that you could find that they were interrelated, the staff of the D.C. Jail was identifying for them because they knew them all, right.  And the guy that was helping me was what is called a parole and classification officer who had worked at the jail for many years, his name was Francis Henderson, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Henderson is conventional, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.  And they had me on very strict regulations.  I couldn't move around the jail freely, they said it was for my own safety.  But they really were afraid that I was looking at how the jail was run and would embarrass them with some sort of story and that was not my focus; I really was interested in doing the underclass study.
Story_ID: 486754
Speaker 1: Steve Luxenberg and I were, you know, in sync and Woodward [Bob Woodward] was busy doing some investigation; he was distracted (laughter) so he didn't know what I was doing.  So after a couple of months--this begins in August, '87 [1987]--after a couple of months Francis Henderson said, "Well, how much longer are you gonna be here?"  I said, "Well, you have me on so many restrictions that you have, when I identify an inmate, you have to bring the inmate to me up at classification and parole.  I interview him, him or her for a few minutes and I find out this is not the person I want, they don't meet the definition.  So they go back and I wait for an hour before somebody comes out, and so on."  And during this period I was reading Woodward's latest book called 'Veil' ['Veil: The Secret Wars of the CIA 1981-1987,' Bob Woodward], right.  So 'cause there were so many breaks, so long, long periods between the inmates being brought to me up in classification parole.  So Francis said, "Well, you know, you're really slowing up my work, I've got a huge caseload."  So I said, "Well, why don't you talk to the head of the jail about releasing the restrictions and let me just go to the cellblocks?"  And he did that and they released all restrictions on me.  That gave me permission to go into all the cellblocks of the D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.]: female, male, psychiatric cellblocks, juvenile cellblocks.  And I learned all the jargon that the officers used.  And a lot of the officers thought I was a [D.C.] Department of Corrections employee 'cause I'd come up to the gate and I'd signal to the officer in the glass bubble who had control of the switches to open the gate, and I'd say, "Pop one."  (Laughter) And he'd open the gate, open, and I'd go into the sally port and I'd say, "Pop two."  He'd close one and open two, and I was into the cellblock.  It's a, you know, no one challenged the authority, although I was given the authority no one asked me for the letters that I had they gave me, they just said all right, come on in.  So in that process then the work began to go faster and I interviewed twenty men and twenty women in that fall.  Well, something else was happening.  Remember I start- I started coming into the D.C. Jail in August of '87 [1987], and I was using the service entrance that all the officers used?  Well, I began noticing officers coming in with long sleeved shirts with skin popping, fresh skin popping scabs on the backs of their hands that told me that they were active heroin addicts or intravenous drug abusers.  And then a lot of them had long sleeved shirts on, you don't wear long sleeved shirts in Washington [D.C.] in the win- in the summer, not in August; it's like a bowl of hot soup.  But even the shirts, you know, either they shrunk 'cause they were cotton shirts, but the track marks were still clear at the end of the wrist.  And they were fresh; these weren't old scars.  And then the alcoholic officers--number one, at one of the roll calls when I, on all three roll calls the day I started coming into the jail, the officers were warned that I would be moving around the jail and asking a lot of questions, and their jobs were, were in jeopardy if they were too candid with me.  So all the officers said yes, sir, and no, sir, and very uptight.  But the longer the time I stayed there that began to break down.  So the alcoholic officers who looked down on the drug abusing officers began identifying the drug abuser- the drug abusing officers to me.  And I began approaching them for an interview.  Well, I didn't at first because I didn't wanna do that story, but it was driving me crazy because it was happening right in front of me.  And then there were three officers who overdosed on their post using drugs in the jail.  I knew enough about drug use that they hadn't used drugs at home and come to work and passed out.  They had shot up at work and passed out on their post (laughter) and had to be rushed out of the jail to, to D.C. General Hospital [District of Columbia General Hospital, Washington, D.C.] next door.  And I just said, you know, you can't ignore this.  So I went to Steve and, and Bob Woodward and I said, "You know, we need to assign another reporter to go into the jail and do this story."  And they said (laughter), "No, we're not assigning another reporter; you need to do it."  And so I went ahead and did it ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash].  So but that ended up into a two-year diversion because they wanted me to get officers on the record with their photographs and their names, their real names, talking about drug use, their drug use, their drug habits, using drugs in the jail, selling drugs in the jail, selling drugs to inmates in the jail, and selling sex, female officers selling sex in the jail to fellow officers to pay for their drug habit.  And I did it.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: It took two years, yeah.
Story_ID: 486755
Speaker 1: One of the things about the underclass study, well, after I finished the, I interviewed maybe about fifty correctional officers and staff and the series ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash] ran in June of 1990.  Now, I had already met Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham]; Francis Henderson who I mentioned earlier, he was her case officer.  And Rosa Lee had been arrested at the intersection of 14th [Street] and W Street Northwest in Washington [D.C.].  It's funny to say that now 'cause that whole area has been gentrified; it's very different than, than it was in '87 [1987].  She was selling heroin to feed three of her grandchildren and to feed her habit.  And she was arrested in October of '87 [1987].  She, and when you're, when you're an active drug addict and you come into the D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.], they don't provide you any Valium or anything to let you down gently, you cold turkey.  And she thought, now she's in her early fifties, she thought this time I'm gonna die and that's how she physically felt, that she was dying.  She had been an active heroin addict since the age of thirty-six and now she was fifty-one, I believe.  So, she recovered obviously and in January of '88 [1988] began going to her classification and parole officer because they really set it up for you to make parole and tell you what you have to do to get there and get out and so on, and the time that you, how mu- the amount of time you're gonna have to do for your sentence.  And they, they figure all that out.  And she told Francis that she wanted to tell Francis her life story.  And Francis said, "You know how many people I have to deal with every day?  I don't have time to listen to your life story, but I'm gonna introduce you to a reporter here, Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], and that's what he's doing, and he'd be interested in your life story."  And so he introduced us in January of '88 [1988] and I began interviewing her.
Story_ID: 486756
Speaker 1: Because all of the--this is part of--I began working on two series simultaneously because I was still looking for the inmates for the underclass study, and I was still interviewing officers and introducing myself, approaching officers in the jail who I knew were active drug addicts and asking for interviews.  And, but I couldn't interview the officers in the jail because I didn't want the [D.C.] Department of Corrections administration to know about this is what I, what I was doing.  So whatever, whenever I came into the jail I had to continue with the underclass study, with the inmates.  All of the officer, all of the interviews with the officers took place outside the jail, in their homes, and restaurants, different parts of Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: And they were willing to talk about it?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And some of them came up and said, "I understand you're looking for me?"  'Cause I had the name but I didn't, I didn't know what the person looked like.
Speaker 2: I guess, it's hard for me to believe they'd be willing to talk about it, especially (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They talked about it on the record.
Speaker 2: --and they, on the record, they didn't give their names did they or did--?
Speaker 1: Well, I had a, I also had a Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] lawyer, a Teamsters union representative, a man named David Tinsley, T-I-N-S-L-E-Y, who was on the leave for The Post [The Washington Post], from the, the D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.] because he was the union representative for the officers and he himself had worked--he was a sergeant, he himself had worked at the D.C. Jail for many years, he was sick of defending the drug addicted officers in disciplinary hearings and he felt that there was a, there had to be a need for a change of the civil service regulations to require random drug tests.  And those didn't, those didn't exist in the D.C. Jail civil service system, nor could you be fired as a drug user 'cause it wasn't in the civil service regulations.  Well, after the series ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash] appeared they, they (laughter) changed the regulations and they started doing random drug testing.  And the U.S. attorney did an investigation, undercover investigation and a year later arrested like twenty-two officers, right, so.
Story_ID: 486757
Speaker 1: But any rate, Francis [Francis Henderson] introduced me to Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham], and I started interviewing her about a week or so after I met her.  And I interviewed her over nine days.  The, with the methodology I told you I had already developed: her school history, her family history, her church history, which was extensive, and her life growing up outside her family.  And it took nine days in one of the female cellblocks.  And at the end, even at the beginning, I knew this is a person that I wanted to be in the underclass study because she had--her youngest sister was in an adjoining field, in adjoining cellblock, and her youngest daughter, the mother of the three children for which she was trying to get money for food, had just left the jail on a cocaine crack charge.  And she told me that six of her eight children were active drug addicts and two were not, her third born, Alvin [Alvin Cunningham], and her fourth born, Eric [Eric Wright], so definitely.  And I had four families that I wanted to follow.  It was important to me because out of this Urban Institute [Washington, D.C.] study, they said that the underclass was dominated by black Americans because of the history of oppression.  And they broke down the 3 million people that they estimated to be in the American underclass as 50 percent--57 percent black, 20 percent white, 20 percent Hispanic, and the remaining 3 percent Asian American and Native American, right.  So the series on the drug addicted officers ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash] ran in June of 1990, I had already established a relationship with Rosa Lee and the other families I wanted to follow.  And so I moved to, I took some time off and then moved to do the underclass study with the four families.  Well, that became impossible, number one, one woman that I wanted to really study, Veronica Sassy Dent [ph.], three of her four children were born at the jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.] and shortly after she was put on parole, she cut up this man who abused her and then went on escape status, she was on parole, didn't report to her parole officer so they had, she had police and [D.C.] Department of Corrections people looking for her.  And I was talking to her on the phone, I knew where she was hiding, (laughter) and Woodward [Bob Woodward] found out and got all upset and said, "Look, you got all these people looking for this woman trying to arrest her, and you're talking to her every day, what are you, what--?"  (Laughter) You know, he was afraid that there would be some journalistic violation, ethical violation.  I said, "Look, I'm doing--," by this time he knew I was doing the underclass study, you know, I said, "I'm doing a study on the underclass, criminality is part of their lifestyle, you know, that's what I'm doing.  So it's no, I don't have a problem with talking to somebody on escape status."  He said, "Well I do."  So he made me drop her from the study.  Then the other two would never tell me the truth.  One of them was the daughter of her- I actually met her through her husband, I met her husband in jail, he was a criminal recidivist, he was in his fifties, had been going back to, forth to jail since he was sixteen.  And, I interviewed his wife and that she, she was the one who recognized my name as having written about her father years before as a heroin courier, Tennessee Dawson [Thomas "Tennessee" Dawson].  But she was telling me what her husband was really doing, and he was lying to me, but she told me what her husband was really, swearing me to secrecy.  I said, you know, this is ridiculous (laughter) I'm not gone write this story.  He's always lying, she's telling me he's lying (laughter) but don't tell him that I told you he's lying, you know.  I, I said, I said this is not gonna work.  And then there was a young man that I wanted, really wanted to follow, but he had moved--.  I met him in the jail and he was arrested on selling love boat, phencyclidine, or PCP.  And when he got out of jail he moved into the crack trade.  And whenever I went around to see him, the other crack dealers thought I was an undercover policeman so, his name was Philip Howk [ph.].  And he said, "Look, either they're gonna kill me, or they're gonna kill you, or they're gonna kill both of us."  So I dropped him, and that left Rosa Lee.
Story_ID: 486758
Speaker 1: By this time, her daughter [Patty Cunningham] was back in prison, so she had the care of the three, her three grandchildren, and so she was anchored and she had stopped using heroin and was using methadone and that changed a lot of her lifestyle.  And so the interviewing began in September of 1990, the really extensive interview, what I call the focus interviews that follow those four sections.  And I followed her for the next four years, Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham].  I interviewed all eight of her children repeatedly, I interviewed five of her thirty-odd grandchildren repeatedly, and six of her brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the series ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash] ran in September of 1994.
Speaker 2: Now, you tape record these interviews, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, all of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And they're all now in the archives at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], both the adolescent childbearing ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash], the drug addicted officers ['Drugs in the Ranks: Getting High in D.C. Jail,' Leon Dash], Rosa Lee, and the subsequent interview on young male killers ['Young Male Killers: America's Urban Street Wars,' Leon Dash].
Speaker 2: Well, what did you learn about Rosa Lee's family?
Speaker 1: One, they had been at the bottom of the social class barrier, they were at the bottom of the social class hierarchy among blacks in Northampton County, North Carolina.  Among the sharecropping community, they were considered swamp blacks and referred to as swamp blacks because they lived on the north bank of the Roanoke River and it would overflow--they lived on, they're sharecroppers on the Bishop and Powell Plantation [North Carolina] and it would overflow every spring and flood that area.  Rosa Lee's grandfather used that swampy area to become a very effective bootlegger and provided for his family with bootlegging.  He didn't make any money sharecropping; sharecropping was a hard life and you were always cheated out of your settle by the landowner.  And you had no recourse, you couldn't take him to court.  And they were treated virtually as slaves.  And in Northam- hampton County there were people who lived very close to the river and the bayous and swamp areas who were referred to by other blacks as swamp blacks.  Then there were what were called piney wood blacks who lived on the higher ground and thought of themselves as better than the swamp blacks.  And then there were free coloreds who had been free during slavery, their descendants.  The piney wood blacks went to one Baptist church, the swamp blacks went to another Baptist church, and the free coloreds went to an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church; (laughter) very clear.  So, once you understood that you understood the people who were really marginalized even by their own people.  And eventually during the Depression [Great Depression], Joe Purvis, P-U-R-V-I-S, lost the Bishop and Powell Plantation because of the decline in peanut and cotton prices and the money he owed the local bank.  So he told Rosa Lee's grandfather--Rosa Lee hadn't been born yet, he told Rosa Lee's grandfather and grandmother and her parents, Rosetta [Rosetta Lawrence Wright] and Isaac Wright [sic. Earl Wright] that he couldn't feed them through the winter.  So they migrated up to Leonardtown, Maryland, to work tobacco sharecropping outside of Leonardtown, Maryland.  And they subsisted off of trapped muskrat and wild watercress that they gathered from fresh water streams.  That's how they survived from '32 [1932] to '35 [1935].  In '35 [1935], they migrated to Washington [D.C.], and the men took general labor jobs and the women worked as domestics in white people's homes.
Story_ID: 486759
Speaker 1: Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham] was born the following year, in October 1936.  She went to Giddings Elementary School [Joshua R. Giddings Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and never was taught to read.  One day, in the fourth grade--.  I took her ba- well, as an adult woman I took her back t- back to Giddings and we just walked through the school.  One day in the fourth grade she was, became interested in a boy named Herbert [ph.], she couldn't remember his last name and she went, she followed him into his classroom and he was being taught by a woman named Ms. Whitehead who was still living, and--when I was doing the study.  And this would have been, Rosa Lee was about nine at the time so this would be about 1945.  And Washington [D.C.] had a segregated, rigidly segregated school system, right, with black schools, black superintendents, black teachers.  And she went up to the third floor of Giddings Elementary and went into the back of the classroom to talk to this boy, and she said he didn't pay her any mind, so she lost interest very quickly, and then the teacher Ms. Whitehead came in and told all the students to take out their papers, they had work to do.  And Rosa Lee was startled because all these kids had notebooks and pencils and pens and took them out and began doing the assignment; she had never seen that before.  And she said these kids are learning here because she was in Ms. Jeter's [ph.] class on the first floor and Miss Jeter spent her time out in the hallway talking to the other teachers, male teachers, and would step back into her classroom if the, her classroom got too noisy, but there was no teaching going on and Rosa Lee had never been in a class where there was any teaching going on and she didn't understand why.  Well, the kids in Ms. Whitehead's class were the kids, the sons and daughters of ci- of Washington civil servants, either in the federal government or the city government, maybe at low levels, but these were, these were jobs that implied steady employment.  And they were in relative terms, the black middle class.  She came out of a poor family with an alcoholic father [Earl Wright] and a mother [Rosetta Lawrence Wright] who did domestic work and her grandparents did the same.  And her grandparents and her parents couldn't read and were easily cheated by local merchants, and never asked Rosa Lee for an example of her work, so they weren't monitoring whether she was getting an education or not.  So she had two things against her, from my point of view, and this is my point of view.  The school people that I've talked to about this get upset with me when I say that but they haven't provided anything that for me overturns that, and that Rosa Lee had two strikes against her: she was black skinned and she was poor, and she was not being educated for those reasons.  She didn't have any parents that had the ability to stand up to a school teacher or a school principal.  Her parents weren't gonna come to school and ask why she wasn't being educated, they didn't have the wherewithal to, to know that or to find that out.  And they certainly weren't gonna come and confront a, a teacher.  So she went on like that, she stayed in Ms. Whitehead's class for a couple of days until she raised her hand and Mrs. Whitehead noticed her and said, "Wait a minute, wait a minute, you don't belong in here."  She says, "What class are you in?"  And Ms. Rosa Lee said, "Ms. Jeter's class."  And she said, "Well, you just can't move from class to class on your own.  You have to go back to Ms. Jeter's class on the first floor."  Rosa Lee said, "I wanna stay here; we're not learning anything in Ms. Jeter's class."  And Ms. Whitehead said, "Well, that's not your decision to make."  So she returned to Ms. Jeter's class and Ms. Jeter's class, Ms., Ms. Jeter was furious because she hadn't missed Rosa Lee for the several days that she was absent and now Rosa Lee comes in and tells her she's been in Ms. Whitehead's class (laughter) for the last several days.  She said, "Where have you been?"  She said, "In Ms. Whitehead's class."  And, and Ms. Jeter had never marked her absent, right.  So that tells you really what's happening.
Story_ID: 486760
Speaker 1: At the end of the sixth grade, a teacher came by to talk to her mother [Rosetta Lawrence Wright] at the home and said, "Well, Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham] is gonna be passed on to the seventh grade at Randolph Junior High School [sic. Randall Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] but not because she can do junior high school level work, but because she's too old to stay at Giddings Elementary School [Joshua R. Giddings Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]."  And that summer Rosa Lee got pregnant by a light-skinned guy who she wanted to attract to her to make her girlfriends jealous.  And he was a sailor and she was a thirteen or twelve year old girl, thirteen.  And they had sex twice and she never saw him again and she was pregnant.  And as she began to show the pregnancy in the seventh grade at Randolph Elementar- at Randolph Junior High School, she, she was put out of school; pregnant girls in the '40s [1940s] were not allowed to stay in school, she was put out of school and she went on the welfare.  At thirteen she also began to shoplift while she was at Randolph because her mother only bought clothes at the Salvation Army or Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.] and Rosa Lee was tired of wearing those clothes; they weren't fashionable.  And so she began shoplifting and--quite successfully.  She was eventually caught the following year after her first child was born and she was pregnant with her second child, Ronnie [Ronald Wright], and she was put in a juvenile facility at fourteen for nineteen days.  She went right back to shoplifting the day after she was released and never stopped until she was about fifty-three, a couple of years after I met her.  And I asked her why had she stopped, she had I got, she had gotten too slow.  And she was getting caught too often, so she decided it wasn't worth it.  She was tired of going back and forth to the jail.  She went on to have eight children with five different men.  She had three children with a man named David Wright.  And by the time she was twenty, she was working off the books at a notorious club or infamous club in Washington, D.C. that I had visited when I was a student at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] called the Coco Club on 8th Street Northeast.  (Laughter) This was a wild club.  Something that, you know, when you're eighteen you're willing to go into and you're forty, you know better (laughter).  And so I was eighteen and a guy named, a guy from Jersey City [New Jersey] and I, Arnold Reynolds [ph.] went into that club while we were staying at his sister's house in D.C.  We had a good time, but I'm glad we got out in one piece (laughter).  And Rosa Lee may have been in there working at the time we figured out 'cause she was working during the period.  But anyway she started working in the Coco Club for cash, waiting on tables.  And then a heroin sal- a heroin dealer approached her about selling heroin for her and at that time she was twenty so this would have been about 1956, heroin was sold in clear capsules for twenty-five cents apiece.  And Rosa Lee would carry them in her bra and sell 'em to her customers at her tables, so her tables were always full.  And the owner of the Coco Club didn't understand why the other waitresses, they didn't have full tables.  It was a big floor that surrounded a dance floor.  But Rosa Lee always had customers at her table because she was also dealing heroin as well as selling beer and mixed drinks.  And she got twenty-five cents on a dollar, which went far for her.  She also pro- began prostituting after her eighth daughter, eighth child or youngest daughter was born and taking customers home from the Coco Club and even customers that came to her house to buy heroin would buy sex from her.  And all of this when you, when you refuted Rosa Lee, she offered the rationale of this is what I had to do to survive and this is what I had to do to keep my eight children with me, and I don't apologize for it.
Story_ID: 486761
Speaker 1: You interacted with the f- with every member of the family from what I was reading?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Interviewed everybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only person I didn't interview was Rosa Lee's mother because Rosa Lee's mother had died in '79 [1979], yeah.  But I would love to have interviewed her, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the--
Speaker 2: Rosetta Wright [Rosetta Lawrence Wright], yeah.
Speaker 1: --subsequent book ['Rosa Lee: A Mother and Her Family in Urban America,' Leon Dash] or--
Speaker 2: Well, the series ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash] ran in September--
Speaker 1: Series ran, okay.
Speaker 2: --of s- September of 1994, eight-part series.  The book came out in, I belie- September of '96 [1996], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then they, there was a piece made for WNET you said in--
Speaker 2: WETA [WETA-TV].
Speaker 1: --ETA, I'm sorry, -ETA in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: After the series, that was based on the series.
Speaker 1: And then 'Frontline' did a--
Speaker 2: And so the series came out in '94 [1994], the WETA piece came out in '95 [1995], early '95 [1995].  Then [HistoryMaker] June Cross from 'Frontline,' a documentary filmmaker from 'Frontline' called me from WGBH [WGBH-TV] in Boston [Massachusetts] and that was funny because she came down--.  My photograph ran with the series as well as Rosa Lee's [Rosa Lee Cunningham] photograph and she had the entire series.  So she said, "I'd like to do a piece on, an hour long piece on you and Rosa Lee and where should I meet you?"  I said, "Well, why don't we meet over at McDonald's at New York Avenue Northeast 'cause Rosa Lee goes around the corner to get her methadone 'cause she can't keep her food on her stomach until she has her methadone.  She goes there when they open at 7:30 and we'll meet at McDonald's, she'll be at McDonald's by 8."  And so Rosa Lee and I are sitting at a table and up walks this woman, June Cross, she said, "You must be Rosa Lee and Leon [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash]."  And we told her to sit down.  And the series, of course, had been published the previous fall.  I should tell you that Rosa Lee had a complaint about the series.  I had explained to her everything that would appear in the series.  And then after the ser- and it had been read to her by her, one of her granddaughters and the girlfriend of her son Eric [Eric Wright]; they read different parts of it to her.  And, when I saw her after the series had finished, we met at McDonald's after she got her methadone and she said, "I have a criticism of you and the series."  I said, "Oh, okay, you know, go ahead.  What's your issue?"  Well, she, she said, "You made my son, Eric, look too good."  I said, "That's your only criticism?"  She said, "Yes."  And I just broke out laughing.  She said, "What's so funny?"  I said, I said, "You, you, you know, there are a lot of criticisms that's coming in, you know.  I've been criticized all week and--"
Speaker 1: Now, what were the, the criticisms from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) "--nobody complained about how I portrayed Eric."  Yeah.  But go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what did people say, how did the black community react to it?
Speaker 2: Well, there were 4600, there were 4600 phone calls that were recorded by The Post [The Washington Post].  A third of those were highly critical of even doing the series, writing about a family like this.  And 90 percent of the critics were middle class blacks.  It's something I anticipated.  I got the same volume of calls and criticism with the adolescent childbearing study ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash], so I understood what was coming.  And the adolescent childbearing story, study was mild compared to the Rosa Lee study, Rosa Lee series.
Speaker 1: So were these people wanted to argue that you should have done a success story or something rather than a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this kind of a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And including black journalists--
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: --they, at The Post.  They, they criticized me harshly for even doing this, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did those criticisms, those criticisms make you feel?
Speaker 2: I anticipate them and I expect them.  It's, it's a difficult subject.  A lot of middle class black people are very defensive about the black poor or very insecure about their own status and their own futures and the futures of their children and so on.  And here I am dragging something out and shining a light on it that they prefer to remain hidden and not be associated with 'cause they feel that the larger white society will ascribe this behavior to all blacks, and not blacks growing up in--mired in intergenerational poverty.  And I said, that may be the case, but if I see a situation that needs to be brought out into light, I feel obligated to bring it out into the light, however racists may use it or conservatives may use it, that to me is irrelevant.  We all need to know about these circumstances and the circumstances that produce this behavior.  So I don't apologize for it, and I'm not defensive about it.  And I had to, I attended a lot of forums.  One of the biggest forums I attended at the Wash- was at The Washington Post, where a lot of the black reporters came to argue with me about doing this kind of reporting.  And I told them that I was not going to stop and I was not defensive about a societal created condition.
Story_ID: 486762
Speaker 1: We were talking about some of the reactions to the piece ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And one reaction was that you actually received the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Reporting].  How did, how did you react to that?  I mean or, or how did you find out about it, yeah, how did you find out about it.
Speaker 2: Well, I was very happy.  Well, how did I find out about it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was very happy to win the Pulitzer.  I had been nominated for a Pulitzer about six or seven times, and even made it to the final cut with the adolescent childbearing series ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash] but didn't win.  So if you don't win, you know, what do you say you've been nominated six times or what is that (laughter) what does that mean?  I had won a lot of prizes but the Pulitzer, you know, was the top prize.  And the person who told me I had won was the publisher of The Post [The Washington Post], Donald Graham [Donald E. Graham].  And this is before it was announced publicly.  And he said, "Now, I'm gonna ask you to keep it to yourself, and if you tell anybody don't tell anybody but your family and try to keep them--."  This is several days before it's publicly announced.  So I did tell my parents [Ruth Kydd Dash and Leon DeCosta Dash, Sr.] and I told my oldest daughter [Darla Dash Washington] who was then a, a student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--no, no, she had graduated in '88 [1988], no, she was out and married, yeah, and when I called her and told her.  And, and then several, two or three days later it was publicly announced so I already knew before it was publicly announced that I had won.  And well, well, there was pain on the day that it was publicly announced.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Rosa Lee's [Rosa Lee Cunningham] grandson who I had met as an eight year old boy in '88 [1988], was being buried on the day that I won the Pulitzer because he got into, he got into the drug trade, he dropped out of school, he was fifteen years old.  He and another guy went after a drug dealer in their community, in their Southeast Washington [D.C.] neighborhood.  They went after this drug dealer, fellow drug dealer or competitor with a .38 caliber six shot revolver.  He had a .45 with two extended clips with twenty bullets each.  After they, they, they, they missed him, I mean, they shot at him and the guy--.  Rico Leon Cunningham, Rosa Lee's grandson was the driver, it was his car, his buddy tried to kill the other drug dealer, missed him entirely with the six shots.  And he just chased them until Rico crashed his car and he killed them both.  Jumped out of his car, he was driving a Lincoln Town Car and killed them both.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the era where gunshot, gun murders in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] were astronom- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Skyrocketing.
Speaker 1: --skyrocketing.
Speaker 2: That's why the next project I did was young male killers, really.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry appeared on the National Press Club and said that you shouldn't be afraid to come to Washington 'cause these are just killings, they're not really murders or something like that he said, it was something that didn't make any sense but it was--
Speaker 2: I don't remember what he said--
Speaker 1: --it was a--
Speaker 2: --but the killings were confined to, to really was limited to people who knew each other.  So, Rosa Lee--.  The, the, it was very odd.  Rosa Lee went into the hospital the morning that the Pulitzer was announced.  Rico was being buried that day, so she would not be at the funeral, I was going to the funeral.  And I went to the funeral, it was very painful, it still is, yeah.
Story_ID: 486763
Speaker 1: Give us some backstory on Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham].  What subsequently happened to her and, and how did you, I mean, how do you draw the line between, you know, being a professional and actually being a human being in, in a situation where--
Speaker 2: Well, you draw a line to be not human while you're doing a project like this.  And when, I set up boundaries when I first met Rosa Lee in the D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.], this is before she made parole in May of 1988.  And I told her what I would do and not do while I was following her and contacting her and so on 'cause she agreed to come into the project, you know.  And I said well, these are my rules; I will never give you any, any amount of money, doesn't matter how small it is, not even a penny.  I will always buy you food, I will pay for it; I will not give you any money to pay for it.  She didn't smoke so that was not an issue.  And I'm gonna start approaching your, her oldest son was in prison, the D.C. prison system at Central, Bobby, Robert Cunningham, and I'm gonna start approaching your children and I'm gonna approach your youngest sister who is in the adjoining female cellblock, Lawan "Chubby" Wright, and my rule would be the same for all of them.  And, of course, her six drug addicted children during the course of the project, all of them tried to get me to violate that rule.  And Rosa Lee was sure that that I wouldn't.  They manufactured emergencies and all kinds of things but I didn't, I would buy Ducky [Donald "Ducky" Wright] cigarettes, he was the only one that smoked cigarettes.  And I would feed them all at different points, but I would always--they would, they would never get any money from me.  And they finally after a year or two they finally accepted that and they stopped coming up with the games and all of that, you know.  Well, I still empathized with them, I still thought that they were caught in syndromes that were not of their making, that extended all the way back to the history of the denial of education of blacks in North Carolina, and now extended into Washington, D.C., the nation's capital.  And they were still living out that legacy.  That's how I saw it.  And that's how I see it today.
Story_ID: 486764
Speaker 1: You also, I think, you said, earlier off camera that, that Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham] was truthful to you for the most part but there was one--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one serious lie she told that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  When I, shortly after Rosa Lee was paroled, Patty [Patty Cunningham], her oldest daughter, was arrested for running an illegal establishment, a crack [crack cocaine] den.  She had a federally subsidized apartment 'cause she was on welfare and she had turned it over to New York crack dealers from which they d- dealt crack and they gave her money and crack for having her apartment.  So when the police busted the operation they found out that she was--.  She was living in another apartment, she wasn't living there, and they issued an arrest warrant for her and she was eventually caught and sent to D.C. Jail [D.C. Central Detention Facility, Washington, D.C.] for six months for running a, convicted of running an illegal establishment.  So I went into the D.C. Jail 'cause I had already met her, Rosa Lee took me to see her in May, shortly after she was paroled, and we went into a place, a, a warren of apartments, in a place called Clifton Terrace [Washington, D.C.].  And we went to Pussycat's apartment and Rosa Lee knocked on the door and a guy named Bernard opened the door and he looked at Rose and said, "Hi, Mama Rose."  And he looked at me and he knew I didn't belong in that, (laughter) this was an oil, what is called an oil joint where heroin addicts go to oil, it wasn't a crack den, it was an oil joint.  And they, they, they shoot up their drugs intravenously and that's the process is called oiling, so it was an oil joint.  Bernard looked at me, and I was casually dressed, probably much like I look now: a pair of khakis, open shirt, short sleeved shirt, remember it was a very hot day.  He looked at me, (laughter) began closing the door and Rosa Lee, now, I had never seen her strength up until this moment, she put her left hand to the door and he couldn't close it.  And he said, "What are you doing?"  He said, she said, "He's with me."  And he said, "Oh."  And in I went, you know.  I had my entree.  And, and Patty was in there lying on a mattress that was, no sheet on the mattress it was the, the plain mattress with black stripes down the center.  And Rosa Lee tried to, she had just shot up with heroin and Rosa Lee tried to awake her and she kept waking for seconds and she was trying to introduce us and her eyes would roll back in her head and Rosa Lee said, "Well, you're not gone meet Patty today," and so we left.  She and Pussycats were in heroin stupors.  So now that was in May, in June she was arrested so I started going into the jail and began interviewing her in July.  And it was, she was thirty at the time and it was the first time that she had been without drugs in fourteen years.  The first interview went well, she had never gone beyond the fourth grade, right, of elementary school.
Speaker 1: So that's worse than her mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the second interview, I'm interviewing her now about growing up in the family, she starts the interview with being raped by, at eight years old by an adult relative.  And she goes into the details, and the rapes are repeated.  And then another relative gets involved in raping her.  She doesn't tell Rosa Lee directly but she's trying to tell Rosa Lee indirectly and Rosa Lee is not paying any attention 'cause this goes on for a couple of years.  The detail was pretty specific and I was getting a splitting headache; it's not the type of epiphany or revelation I expect so early on in the interview process, and I wasn't prepared for it.  I really didn't wanna hear it.  And I literally groaned listening to her, dropped my head and held my hand and groaned, it's all on the tape.  And Patty was just like her mother, Rosa Lee, when she was saying something that was difficult she always focused, she didn't look at you, she always looked at the fingernails of her left hand, just like Rosa Lee, Rosa Lee always did that.  It's one of another reasons I could tell when she was lying, she was making up stuff on the fly.  Tape recorder is going, and Patty heard me gro- groan, and she turned around and she looked at me, she said, "Can you handle this?"  I said, (laughter) I said, "Yeah, I can handle it, I handle it, keep going," you know.  But it was, it was painful to listen to and I left, I, I didn't do any more work the rest of the day after that interview.  I just went home and took a Tylenol and went to bed.  So that's '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 486765
Speaker 1: So now I begin full-time with Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham] in September of 1990, and by 1991 I began asking Rosa Lee about this, and then she went from the rapes to being prostituted by her mother.  So I went into the, I asked Rosa Lee about this and she said, "Oh, Patty's [Patty Cunningham] lying; I didn't do that."  And the way she told me told me that Rosa Lee was lying.  And she immediately tried to put me on the defensive, "Mr. Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash], you, as well as you know me, how can you believe that about me?"  (Laughter) And I said, "Okay.  Let's let it go."  That told me it was true, yeah.  So another year goes by, Patty's always high, or busy getting money to get high.  She doesn't have time to sit down and talk to me and Rosa Lee, but one day, a year later, like this is now '92 [1992], she had been without drugs for a couple of weeks and she was hanging out with Rosa Lee and I because she was trying to get back on welfare and she had been cut from welfare because she never would come in and meet with her welfare caseworker.  And so we did that in the morning, went to the welfare office, and then we went down to McDonald's.  They never wanted to, I took Rosa Lee to a couple of expensive restaurants early in the project, and she said, "Look, you don't need to take me to those places.  I don't like the food, I like some grease and fat on my food."  (Laughter) "And you, you're used to all these white people's food."  That's what, (unclear) that was her attitude.  And I said, "All right, all right, don't, don't, please don't take me through all of that," you know.  By this time we had a relationship, you know.  So we go to McDonald's for lunch, Rosa Lee gets up to go to the ladies' room.  I take out the tape recorder and put it on the table and I tell Patty, "Today we're going to deal with the issue of Rosa Lee prostituting you, and I'm gonna bring it up."  Patty said, "Good 'cause we need to get it on the record."  'Cause Patty wanted me to write about this as the motivation for her drug use, that she was anesthetizing herself.  So Rosa Lee came back to the table and sat down and I said, "Well, Rosa Lee, we're gonna have a come to Jesus meeting today."  And Rosa Lee said, "Oh lord, what is he--?"  You know, 'cause when I use that expression, it's not my original expression, I got it from a friend of mine, it meant we're gonna try to have a truth session.  And so I began asking her about it directly.  And she looked at Patty as if she was signaling to Patty now you go along with me but Patty wouldn't; Patty wanted it on the record.  And she began naming the men that Rosa Lee prostituted her with.  And Rosa Lee, with a lot of pain in her face and eyes looked at me and she said, "She's right, I did it."  And then afterwards we went into the detail.  In fact, we went looking for, a couple of weeks later we went looking for the first adult male that Rosa Lee prostituted Patty with 'cause she knew where he lived but he had, he, this is years now later, and he no longer lived there, we couldn't find him.  But I was, my intention was to go and interview him.
Speaker 2: What is, what, what do you think about that?  I mean, I mean, what, is there any--
Speaker 1: There's no justification; it's horrible.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was doing it because she was prostituting and her trick, Mr. Cooper [ph.] was his name, asked her, he would pay double if he could have sex with Patty.
Speaker 2: But in the world of, of addiction, I guess, and poverty is there, do you think there are any limits to what people will do?
Speaker 1: No.  And I don't think Rosa Lee is unique in that respect.
Story_ID: 486766
Speaker 1: How do you feel about, I know some of the criticism of people don't, don't wanna, don't, don't like to hear stories about the underclass on TV (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I understand that.
Speaker 1: They don't like to hear stories about violence, they don't like to hear stories about these kids that are shooting each other.
Speaker 2: I know that.
Speaker 1: And, and there, there's even, there have even been, what I would consider left or liberal critics that say that the TV news, radio news, is full of violence and, and it just encourages more and that sort of thing.  Well, how do you, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I don't think the, these kids are watching television.  The issues, when I did 'Young Male Killers' ['Young Male Killers: America's Urban Street Wars,' Leon Dash] which appe- was published in '98 [1998], there were issues between the young men who were killing each other and they had the guns because they were selling drugs, crack cocaine, and they were buying these drugs on the black mar- buying these guns on the black market, and they were very expensive, five hundred, six hundred, thousand dollar.  And the issues that they were killing each over, each other over rarely had any connection to the drug trade.  It was issues of young males who had issues with each other not over different aspects.  One guy Russell Wallace, he's at Browne Junior High School [Hugh M. Browne Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], and he sees a kid who's nickname is Tony [Anthony Davis], I forget his last name, beating up his girlfriend, it's Tony's girlfriend, but this girl is also a friend of Russell so Russell intervenes.  And then in subsequent and, and punches up Tony and Tony has to back down 'cause Russell is stronger, bigger.  And then Tony, the next time Russell sees Tony, Tony is shooting at him, trying to kill him.  And that goes on for several days around Browne Junior High School.  And then one night, Russell is, Russell and Tyrone [Tyrone Wallace], his older brother, are taking their mother's laundry, wet laundry to the laundromat to dry it in the big tumbling driers, and he sees Anthony whose nickname was Ant, and he goes around, they go into the laundromat, but Tyrone says if you're gonna go after him now we need to go into the laundromat so we can establish an alibi that we were in the laundromat.  They go into the laundromat, make a lot of noise putting these clothes into several, there was a big pile of wet clothes, putting these clothes into several driers.  Then they go out and Anthony cuts through--not Anthony, Russell cuts through a courtyard in this public housing development and gets out into the street where he saw Anthony talking to a girl.  And Anthony now is just breaking off the conversation walking down the street and Russell calls out his name and Anthony turns around and begins to run and Russell shoots him and brings him down with one bullet and then runs up to him and empties the clip into him and runs back to meet his brother, Tyrone, and they get in the car and drive away.
Speaker 1: Now, why does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was over a fistfight over a girl.
Speaker 1: But what's the difference now between, between, so you get in a fistfight at a party when you're seventeen and a kid doing that now, what, what, what's the difference?
Speaker 2: The most any boy would be carrying in that party would be a knife when I was a teenager.  We, you know, when I described to you having a dollar and twenty-three cents to buy two bottles of Thunderbird wine, where am I going to get $500 or $50 or $25 to buy a gun on the black market?
Speaker 1: The drug trade is providing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the means to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The income.
Speaker 1: --get the fire power to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486767
Speaker 1: You were rewarded, but it, it does take a toll doesn't it?  I mean, this kind of reporting?
Speaker 2: It hasn't taken a toll on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wasn't put off by it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I had planned to keep doing this in, in different areas that I was interested in looking at.  But there was a change in leadership at The Post [The Washington Post] and my editor who I had worked with because Bob Woodward eventually left the investigative unit and just worked as an individual entity.  And Steve Luxenberg became the head of the unit.  So while I was away writing the book, 'Rosa-' 'Rosa Lee' ['Rosa Lee: A Mother and Her Family in Urban America,' Leon Dash], he got assigned to take over the Outlook section, was the Sunday opinion section of The Post, which was a position he wanted.  And so when I returned to work in '96 [1996] he had already moved over but they hadn't replaced him with a new editor yet, but they had selected the editor.  And the new editor came in and said--.  I had already started the project on young male killers ['Young Male Killers: America's Urban Street Wars,' Leon Dash], July of eight--'96 [1996], and he came in October.  And he said, "Well, I'm a let you finish this project but after this I want you to do more conventional investigative reporting, paper trails."  I wasn't interested in that.  I was interested in human behavior and I told him so.  And he said, "Well, that's what I want you to do, you can finish 'Young Male Killers,' but after you're done, I want you to do more conventional reporting and you get two or three months to do it and turn around and turn it into a story."  I wasn't interested.  So I knew that there was not going to be the opportunity for me to do this kind of journalism.  And when we were having this discussion I was fifty-two and I said, well, the, the series that I'm doing won't be ready for two years, we're having this discussion in the fall of '96 [1996], so I figured it would be ready in the summer of '58 [1958], I mean, what am I talking about, '98 [1998].  We're having this discussion in '96 [1996], I figured it would be ready in '98 [1998].  So I had already begun discussing possibly moving to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] and working for DoubleTake magazine.  DoubleTake is a magazine that does these sort of long involved ethnographic studies and they had read a number of pieces that I had done and they were interested in me coming to work for them.  It was headquartered at the time in Duke, it has since moved, but at that time in Duke.  So really in March of '97 [1997] I began having discussions with the African studies, African American studies head at Duke University and DoubleTake magazine, sort of a joint appointment what they call in academia, a joint appointment with the magazine and teaching in African American studies, teaching the emerging journali- journalism methodology.
Story_ID: 486768
Speaker 1: How did this come out now?  So, then a, a former colleague of mine, Walter Harrington invited me out to give a series of lectures at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  I didn't even know where Urbana-Champaign [Illinois] was.  I had never heard of it.  I thought I could fly out to Chi- I thought it was in Chicago [Illinois], I thought I'd fly out to Chicago and fly back in a day.  And he said, "No, that's not happening.  Fly to Chicago and take a connecting flight down to Urbana-Champaign."  So I came out in April of '97 [1997] and gave a series of lectures over several days.  The second day of me lecturing, the dean of the then College of Communications [College of Media] offered me a full professorship with tenure.  And I said, "Whoa, whoa, I didn't come out here looking for work."  And he said, "Well, this is what we're offering you, think about it."  Then as part of the young male killers study ['Young Male Killers: America's Urban Street Wars,' Leon Dash], I was out in Los Angeles [California] the same month in April, '97 [1997] and remember the man I told you about, Gerald Bender who was a big MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola] person?  I went by (cough) his house, he's Jewish, and he invited me to stay for a Passover Seder.  You know what that is?  Where they study Passover, where the angel of death passed over the children of Israel when they killed all the Egyptians, yeah.  So we were doing that.  And he was asking me what's happening at The Post [The Washington Post].  And I said, "Well, I'm in the process, I'm trying to finish up this project, but I'm in the process of leaving and I've begun discussions with Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] and the University of Illinois."  So he disappeared during the middle of the Seder, well, before the Seder started, and he came back, "My dean wants to talk to you at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], Geoffrey Cowan, he'll meet with you at the, on the West Los Angeles [Los Angeles, California], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] campus near--in, West Los Angeles at a restaurant tomorrow at noon, are you free?"  I said, "Yeah."  So then I talked to him.  And then I got a call, I don't remember who gave me the call, that the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] was interested in me coming there because it's a small, you know, people began, became aware that I was making moves to leave The Post and those who were interested were contacting me.  So at the end I had offers from four universities.
Story_ID: 486769
Speaker 1: There any newspapers who were offering you positions?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Just--
Speaker 2: I had been--after--The New York Times had come after me after the adolescent childbearing series ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash].  Craig Whitney [Craig R. Whitney] who was the assistant managing editor at the time and he, we met in New York [New York].  And he told me, we met for breakfast, I was there getting money from the Rockefeller Foundation for the adolescent childbearing study, and because they had given me money, they wanted me to come up and talk so I, you know, you can't tell 'em, no, I'm too busy (laughter).  So we met for breakfast at the Grand Hyatt hotel [Grand Hyatt New York] on 42nd Street [New York, New York].  And Craig starts off the breakfast with, well, the Washington--, "The New York Times is not mature enough--."  The adolescent childbearing study project was seventeen months and he said, "The New York Times is not mature enough," words to this effect, I'm paraphrasing, "to give you that much time to do a project."  And I said, "Well, I'm not interested in coming then."  I said, "Let's enjoy the breakfast."  And, and we did, and talk about things in journalism 'cause there's no sense in you, I'm not intere- I mean, I've got this at The Washington Post now, I'm not letting it go until I run it out, as long as I can.  So that was, that was the only paper that ever came after me.  So then I go back and forth and I'm visiting USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]; you ever been to Lawrence, Kansas?
Speaker 1: No, but I know about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then down to Durham [North Carolina] at Duke [Duke University].  And one thing that struck me, my youngest daughter [Destiny Dash] who was born in Africa and has cerebral palsy, she was getting ready to, she was graduating from high school, June of '98 [1998].  I was planning to make this transition that summer.  And the University of Illinois clearly had, and they showed it to me and introduced me to it, the best support services for students with disabilities.  So very early on in, early in '97 [1997], like early fall of '97 [1997], I decided I was going to the University of Illinois.  And by December I had made the decision, sent the letters to the other three saying thank you, but I had already made a decision and sent a letter accepting the offer at University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we went out in June of '98 [1998] so she could see.  And, and then we both moved out there in August of '98 [1998].  And she actually graduated in May of 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you've been, you've been out in Champaign [Illinois] for about ten years now, right?
Speaker 2: August of '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My last day at The Post [The Washington Post] was August 5th, '98 [1998] and I began teaching on August 21st, '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: How, how has it been different in terms of the pace, you know, you're used to the East Coast, raised in New York [New York] and--
Speaker 2: High stress--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --thing and all of that, no, it's been great.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you haven't missed the stress?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't at all.  And now, I, I just got an e-mail last week from a guy at The Washington Post, a guy I was friendly with, Michael Fletcher, who's a star at The Washington Post but because of all of the reduction in staff and they're going through another one now, there's a great deal of uncertainty in terms of your job at The Washington Post.  As it is at, at this point because of all the changes in technology and people are moving advertising lines onto the Internet, papers are losing revenue, there's a lot of uncertainty and I don't envy his, his position.
Story_ID: 486770
Speaker 1: I wanna go back and recap 1991's--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trip to South Africa.  We, we forgot to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then we'll come back to the U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Around October of 1991 I got a call from a book editor at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], when Simon and Schuster had a unit that dealt with heavy subjects, intellectual subjects.  And she said to me--a, a mutual friend of ours, a woman named Paula Giddings--
Speaker 1: Right.  She's the author of 'When and Where I Enter' ['When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America'].
Speaker 2: 'Where and When I Enter'--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the most recent book she did was about Ida Wells [Ida B. Wells], called 'Ida: A Sword Among Lions' ['Ida, A Sword Among Lions: Ida B. Wells and the Campaign Against Lynching'].  She said Paula Giddings had, she was looking for a journalist to go to South Africa and interview over a week or more Allan Boesak and--about the anti-apartheid movement, and would I be willing to do that?  I said, "Oh, yeah, yeah, I'm interested," you know.  I could use a break from Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham] (laughter).  I didn't tell her that, but I, I was thinking that.  And so she said, "Well, Allan will be here with--" some manager he had from California in October, "can you come up and have lunch or dinner with us?"  So I did in October.  And we agreed that I would go during, right after Thanksgiving or just before, I forget, it was sometime in November, and interview him because he had tried to do a political memoir and she had gotten the manuscript but she was un- dissatisfied with it.  And she, what she wanted me to do was to interview him and pull the story out of him, all right.  So I went to South Africa in '91 [1991] and we, you know, they worked out a deal, they would, I would do the interviewing and I'd come back with the tape, I was using microcassettes and I would pay to have them, both Simon and Schuster would pay to have them transcribed, I'd put the manuscript together, and I would deliver the manuscript, and they would work from that manuscript to try to produce the political memoir is what they wanted.  So it was strange about how, it was funny the way it happened, initially it wasn't funny to me, but it was funny when I look back on it.  So I go to South Africa and I'm staying in Cape Town [South Africa].  And I had a friend named Mdu Lembede.  Mdu is M-D-U, Lembede is, L-E-M, Lembe- L-E-M-B-E-D-E.  And he worked in Durban [South Africa] at a newspaper and I had met him and given him a party at my house in Washington [D.C.].  So I planning to go and see him in Durban as well, and I did.
Story_ID: 486771
Speaker 1: Allan [Allan Boesak] and I meet in Cape Town [South Africa] and then he sets me up at a very nice hotel that he's paying for.  And I, I, I'm working on leave without pay from The Post [The Washington Post] for several weeks during this process.  And then I went on to interview him in great detail, eight to ten hours a day about the anti-apartheid movement.  I think the whole thing took about ten, ten days, in this hotel room.  And with, sitting in on the interview is this woman named Sam [ph.] Venter, V-E-N-T-E-R, she was an Associated Press reporter who covered the anti-apartheid movement and a lot of things that Allan did, so she's contributing and jogging his memory about detail, who was there, and she still has her notes from all this coverage over years.  So we're really putting it together and things that he doesn't remember she remembers and so, and I'm recording it all.  And then at the end I go off to Durban [South Africa] to visit with Mdu [Mdu Lembede] and his family.  And it was a, a good visit, a couple of days.  Then I fly back to Cape Town and I fly to Johannesburg [South Africa] and then back to the states.  This is over maybe two weeks 'cause I went, stopped in London [England] for a few days before I went to South Africa, and then I'm in South Africa at least thirteen days, and now I'm back in Washington [D.C.] and I call up to Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] and the woman who hired me, her section had been wiped out, was gone.  And someone answered the phone who I had met and she said, "I'm just here handling the--" (laughter) "the aftermath of the bloodbath."  I mean, one day it was there, the next day it was gone.  And I said, "Well, I'm still owed some money when the manuscript is completed, and I need, if I'm gonna hire transcribers to transcribe these interviews, I need some money to pay them."  And so finally she put me in touch with the top editor and the top editor assigns the project to an editor who was riding high at the moment.  So I do all of that and hand in the manuscript and they send me the money and that's it.  'Cause the new editor had just had a bestselling book about Princess Diana, the last thing he was interested in is some memoir, political memoir on anti-apartheid movement, so the whole thing died.  So I kept my copy of the manuscript, and I kept all the tapes, and then never knew what to do with them, it's not my property, you know, I was doing it for someone else.  So that was that.  And, and that's how that ended because they never did the memoir.
Speaker 2: So it's, it's never gonna be--
Speaker 1: It was never published.  And I don't expect it ever will be.
Speaker 2: Now, the interest in Allan Boesak--
Speaker 1: Has died.
Speaker 2: --has died anyway, he's in--
Speaker 1: That was '91 [1991], that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --seventeen years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Maybe one day, I, who knows are, are, you gonna, well, would they ever, would they be accessible to anybody in the future (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I'm not gonna fool with trying to publish it or anything--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it's not my property, I still have the manuscript and the tapes, but I just keep them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They weren't, the editor wasn't interested, I said, "What do I do with the tapes?"  He told me to keep 'em, I keep them, but it's not my property.
Speaker 2: So you couldn't even donate 'em to the university [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] or anything?
Speaker 1: I might end up doing that, you know, and say it's not for publication, people can read through the manuscript to get detail and information--
Speaker 2: You think Allan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about the anti-apartheid--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --movement.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he, he, he subsequently had his own problems and ended up going to jail, so.
Speaker 2: Is he still in jail?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: I think he's out now.
Speaker 2: He's out, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 486772
Speaker 1: Tell us about teaching at the University of Il- University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  Now, you have a joint appointment, the journalism and African--
Speaker 2: African American studies (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) African American studies.
Speaker 2: That's how it started out, but I changed that in 2001 or 2002 to 100 percent appointment in journalism.  A number of people in, who were in academia, friends of mine told me that a joint appointment is not something you should accept because it, you end up schizophrenic.  You end up getting drawn between two departments, and that's what happened.  So after 2001, I made arrangements to take my 25 percent in African American studies and move it over to journalism but still remain an, an affiliate, faculty affiliate of African American studies, and I still am.  So they call on me for various things and I do that but not as much as when I was 25 percent in African American studies.  You follow me?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So at any rate I accept the appointment, I come and I start teaching journalism, the first semester I just teach advanced reporting.  And I wasn't sure about how to approach it and a number of the faculty helped me with--they showed me their syllabi for teaching the course and I put together an amalgamated syllabi from several professors, something that I was comfortable with and began teaching.  And I, and I was telling the professors there that I wasn't sure about what I was doing and they said, "Wing it.  You know more than the students."  (Laughter) So that's what I did the first semester.  And at, at times I'd get to running off in class in the seminar, it's really a seminar, I teach it on a seminar basis, I get to running off and I look at the students, they're all looking at me like, I said, "Do you know this stuff?"  They said, "No."  I said, "Oh."  (Laughter) So I had to backup and I had to learn what they knew before I start--.  I'm making assumptions about what they've been taught 'cause I'm teaching seniors and graduate students, and they didn't know what I was talking about.  They had no foundation what I was talking about so, you know, there was a period for me to adjust my approach so that I could help them benefit from what, what I knew.  And, and that worked out over a couple of years.
Story_ID: 486773
Speaker 1: What courses do you teach?  What--
Speaker 2: I teach advanced reporting, which at the U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] college it's now, no longer the College of Communications, it's the College of Media, is we're called Reporting II, so they've had an introductory course to reporting, an intermediate course and advanced course.  And then I teach the immersion journalism methodology, and each student gets to choose his or her own project and they interview one person over an eight- to nine-week period using those four parts and then doing focus interviews.  To see, one if they can get a lot deeper, to see if their presumptions about what motivates a person turn out to be correct.  And they have the same experience I do: whenever I start out with presumptions, my presumptions are always wrong after the people open up to me and tell me what really motivates them.  Every time I've done a project what I presumed turned out to be wrong.  And it's the same for my students particularly, and most of them are successful in getting people to take off their public mask.  I don't let, I don't let them do subjects such as human sexuality 'cause it's just too difficult.  It's too difficult for anybody to talk about their sexuality at any class level among any ethnic group anywhere in the world.  So I, you know, they all wanna do sex this, and sex that, and no 'cause it's gonna take you six months and you have fourteen weeks, you know, so stay away from that.  And but they, they--most of, most of the students that I've had, well, I began teaching, of course, in ninety- spring semester, spring semester of 1999, most of them have been very successful on it.  And the course has some popularity, it, it's become very popular among law students at the U of I.  So I have to limit it to four law students because they would fill it up and, and they tend to dominate, I have to intervene because they tend to dominate the class.  Anyway, they're all very accustomed to a lot of talking and so on because of the law courses, and it's generally the third year law students who take the class.  So I try to keep it even so that the students who have less experience, even with life, get a chance to participate in the seminar.  And so, i- if I have more than four students I, four law students, I can't control the class so I keep it limited to four law students (laughter).  So they fight among themselves 'cause the course among them is very popular, they find it very useful in what they intend to do in terms of practicing law, whatever law they're practicing.
Story_ID: 486774
Speaker 1: You find that over the years that that what you do for a living as a journalist has informed your outlook on life--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --basically?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I don't think I would be informed, as informed as I am now.  I don't think that I would look at human behavior the way I look at it now and understand it the way I understand it now.  And I'm still a student of student behavior.  I mean, of human behavior, I consider myself.  But things that I didn't have any clue about what motivates people, what people need to feel good about themselves, what they need to survive or think they need to survive, how evil people can really be.  I mean, Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham], when this, after the series ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash] ran, I dissolved the professional barrier between us and our friendship blossomed and there were still some very bad parts of her, I had forgiven her, her daughter had, Patty [Patty Cunningham] had forgiven her, so it wasn't in my, you know, I, I didn't feel that, I liked her.
Speaker 1: What did you learn the most about her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I felt that she had done some terrible things, particularly with her, the worst things I thought she had done was with her daughter, Patty, I really, you know.  And that was the only thing that she was genuinely ashamed of.  But, you know, I, I didn't, people ask me, I have a friend who, who's in criminal justice, said, "How can you befriend a woman like that?"  And I said, you know, you have to, you know, you can't be judgmental and running around, there are people who have, you know, all of us who are flawed, and Rosa Lee has flaws and she didn't have a lot of resources and she did something that was evil to her own child.  The child still loves the mother, her mother, so who are you to tell me, you know, how can I have a relationship with her?  I happen to like her.  So, she had been to my house, I had brought her to our house, my house, and she said, "You know, I need to move in."  I said, "No, you're not moving into my house (laughter) Rosa Lee.  You're not moving into my--."  She said, "You need a--."  I was a, a bachelor again, and she had met both my daughters [Darla Dash Washington and Destiny Dash] at different points, she said, "You need a housekeeper to come in here and take care of, help you take care of your youngest daughter."  I said, "No, I'll do it."  (Laughter) So I said, "If I, if I, if you moved in with me your children, your drug addicted children would follow you and that's not happening."  (Laughter) Then that would never happen anyway.  But and we were, she was teasing me, she was really teasing me 'cause she knew that wasn't gonna happen.  But we became good friends and I gave her my home number which at the time was unlisted.  And the only thing I had to stop her from doing 'cause, you know, the drug addiction and the methadone now she was up at 5:00 in the morning craving methadone, the clinic didn't open 'til 7:30 and she was already up, washed, dressed, ready to walk over to the clinic because she lived within walking distance of the clinic.  So she'd start calling me at 6:30 in the morning to chat.  And I said, "Rosa Lee, you're the only person in the world that's gonna call somebody 6:30 in the morning to chat."  So she stopped, I got her to stop doing that.  Or she would call and say, "Look, I didn't want you to pick up the phone go back to bed, I wanna leave a message on your voicema- voicemail."  So that became, and then we would meet outside of working hours 'cause I was off on another project now.
Story_ID: 486775
Speaker 1: One of the things that Rosa Lee [Rosa Lee Cunningham], well, Rosa Lee in terms of boundaries, one of the things that Rosa Lee always harassed me about during the project ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash] was to give her advice, and I would never give her any advice.  I said, "Rosa Lee, I can't give you advice."  And she said, "Well, why not?"  I said, "It's unethical.  If I give you advice and you do what I suggest you do, then I can't write about that ethically."  And she said, "Well, why are you worried about ethics?"  'Cause that was not a big concern of hers, it wasn't a concern at all.  And I said, "Because, you know, I, I have to feel good about what I'm doing and it's unethical for me to give you advice."  And after a while when she would, she would, she never gave up on that part.  After a while I said, you know, "I already told you it's unethical, I'm gonna go through that again, but I know you well enough that you're not gonna follow my advice."  And she said, "Well, why do you say that?"  I said, "Because you're always gonna make the decision that's easiest for you to do.  And the advice that I have for you is not going to be easy, and you're not gonna follow it, like letting all these drug addicted children live off of you.  These are adult children.  It's time for you to do something different.  And Alvin [Alvin Cunningham] and Eric [Eric Wright] come over you, when they get on your last nerve you ask Alvin and Eric to come over--," her two children that never got involved in crime or drugs, "and chase them out of the house, and they come over and they do that and then a couple of hours later they come and knock on the door and you let 'em right back in, you know."  And these are conversations that we would have after the project was published.  And she would ask me for advice, I said, "You're not gone follow my advice, I'm gone tell you what you need to do, but you're not gone follow my advice.  You know, 'cause, you know, you're just stubborn and hardheaded and too soft," (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when--
Speaker 1: And then she would, even during the project she would threaten to go upside my head, you know, every other day she was fussing at me about something.  And we would just laugh.  One time she did that because I had gotten on her last nerve asking her about how her mother [Rosetta Lawrence Wright] beat her, I wanted a description 'cause I wanted to be able to describe that.  And we were sitting in the front seat of my car and, and, and this is another demonstration of her strength.  So I'm sitting in the driver's seat, she's in the front passenger seat, and she reached over and grabbed me with her left hand and pulled me to her, I was surprised, I was startled, she was so strong, and then tried to hit me in the face with her right hand and I blocked her, and she kept trying and I kept blocking her and then we both broke down laughing.  I said, "You're crazy."  (Laughter) "Crazy woman, what are you doing?"  She said, "I'm tired of you picking on, at me about my mother, that's how she used to beat me, I was gonna show you."  Now, we're sitting here laughing and we're laughing so hard that the tears are beginning to run down her face, we can't stop laughing.  And her granddaughter, her six or, her granddaughter at this time was about six, I had met the granddaughter when, no, she was a little older, 'cause I had met the daughter in '88 [1988] when she was five, this is about '91 [1991], her granddaughter comes out of the house and she sees us sitting in front of the apartment building laughing in the front seat and she thinks (laughter) we're both going crazy.  And finally when Rosa Lee gets her breath, she says, "That's all right, that's all right, I'll be in in a few minutes, we're just sharing a joke," you know.  So that wasn't in the series, but I wrote about that scene in the book ['Rosa Lee: A Mother and Her Family in Urban America,' Leon Dash], yeah.  That was quite, that was quite funny.
Story_ID: 486776
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there anything that you would, any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think I would drink if I could correct that, I wouldn't have gotten into the alcoholic syndrome that I did get in to but that's in hindsight.  I mean, when it was happening I didn't realize it was happening.  And the people I hung out with both in my personal life and, and in my professional life were heavy drinkers, so we all drank heavily, and I didn't see myself as any different.  And I can't pinpoint the period, the actually point when I think I crossed into alcoholism, daily alcohol content, daily alcohol intake.
Story_ID: 486777
Speaker 1: Again, when you look back at everything you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Hm.  Well, I'm only sixty-four, what legacy?  When I'm eighty-four you ask me about my legacy (laughter).  I don't know, I hope that I've provided some information for people and some insight into people who were trapped in intergenerational poverty and both with the adolescent childbearing study ['At Risk: Chronicles of Teenage Pregnancy,' Leon Dash] and the Rosa Lee study ['Rosa Lee's Story: The Series,' Leon Dash], and the young male killers ['Young Male Killers: America's Urban Street Wars,' Leon Dash].  I think my Africa coverage was straight forward and honest, and I hope that provided some insight into behavior in that arena, right.  That's all.
Story_ID: 486778
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I really would like to see, there's, estimated one-third of the black population in the United S- still, still trapped in poverty and they are leave, being left further and further behind, really.  And the killings you see in Chicago [Illinois] and all the major cities are part of that being left behind.  The chasm between the black middle class and the black poor has widened, widened considerably over the past ten years.  You're talking about people who have no computer literacy, have heard of the Internet but don't know anything about getting into the Internet.  Are still not being taught to read.  When you look at the U.S. prison population, I gave a talk to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], NAAC fundraiser a couple of years ago and I looked up the statistics, the statistics may have shifted a bit but I don't think that they have shifted considerably.  And when I looked it up in 2006, 47 percent of the U.S. prison population of 2.1 million people were made up of African American men.  Those men are all, for the most part, the sons of adolescent girls that began their childbearing as adolescents, unwed adolescents.  And those men also, for the most part, almost across the board, are reading at a third grade level and that continues.  The public--
Speaker 1: There's a clear correlation between--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The public school system is doing nothing from my point of view for that population, nothing.
Story_ID: 486779
Speaker 1: I've asked you something about your family.  But what would you consider your family today?  Are you, are, are you married again or, or do you, I know you have two, two, two daughters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been, you know, after the second marriage, I was not, (laughter) I haven't been, I haven't married.  I haven't remarried.  I am seeing someone who is supposed to join me in Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire] this, I mean, not Abidjan--in, I met her in Abidjan, you've heard me talk about her, she's supposed to, she's now finishing up a long study in Jamaica at the University of West Indies [University of the West Indies], Kingston [Jamaica].  She's supposed to join me this August, I don't know if she will, in Abidja- I mean, in Urbana-Champaign [Illinois], we'll see how that works out, you know.  There's a big question mark still there 'cause she's been admitted to the University of Illinois' [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] Institute of Communications Research [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] through their Ph.D. program, and she's supposed to report on August 25th, so.
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2: That's, that's what, the last we spoke she said that was her intention and that was last week, yeah.  And I'm always teasing her, I said, yeah, but I'm in here waiting for you for a hundred years.  She said you only been there ten.  Yeah, you know, that kind of thing.  So we'll see, we'll see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have any grandchildren?
Speaker 2: I have three grandsons with my oldest daughter [Darla Dash Washington].  One is a step-grandson but I don't distinguish, it's the middle boy.  Her oldest son is sixteen, he turned sixteen on the 16th of July.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He turned seventeen, I'm sorry, seventeen.  The middle boy, her stepson, Nathaniel [ph.] is thirteen, and her youngest, Cole [ph.] is eight.  He was born January of 2000, January 5th, yeah.  And my daughter's on her second husband, my oldest daughter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My youngest daughter [Destiny Dash], sees a friend of hers that she's known since elementary school.  He has also cerebral palsy, it afflicts him, it gives him a different disability but they've been seeing each other off and on since they were teenagers, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So no grandchildren with the youngest daughter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Though she would like some children, yeah, she talks about it.  She, her intention is to have some children.  I don't know what the, I'm not gone call his name, I don't know what his intention is, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause she's now twenty-eight.  And she's, she's completely independent.  She lives on her own, she works at the Strathmore music center [The Music Center at Strathmore] in Bethesda, Maryland [North Bethesda, Maryland].  And lives in--I've moved her to a new apartment, she was living in Chevy Chase, Maryland, and May 15th I moved her into a new apartment in downtown Silver Spring, Maryland, 'cause it's better for her logistically getting around and getting back and forth to work and so on.  And but she's fully independent because she went through that University of Illinois program and was fiercely depen- fiercely determined to be independent.  And the first two years she lived with me (laughter) when she came to the U of I.  And she said if you never grade another paper of mine in life it'll be too soon (laughter).  'Cause I would grade the papers like I grade my students' paper with red ink and she, "No, no, no, no, I'm moving into the dorm," (laughter) "I mean, I, I'm moving out of here."  I said, "Where are you going?"  "I'm moving into the dorm."  So she moved into Beckwith Hall, which is a dormitory on the U of I campus for students with disabilities.  She lived there for two years and then she moved into her own apartment on campus, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And then when she moved back to Washington [D.C.], she said she told her mother, no, I'm not moving in with you, you're as bad as my father (laughter).
Story_ID: 486780
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that we probably should have before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There probably is but I, I can't think of it at the moment because I'm tired and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, there's only one more question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we've got about two minutes, I think.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And that question is, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Open, honest reporter, that's all, journalist, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
