Story_ID: 671318
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Judith M. Davenport, J-U-D-I-T-H, M-period, Davenport, D-A-V-E-N-P-O-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us your middle name?
Speaker 2: Marylyn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: People call me Judy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 10, 1939, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired dentist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 20, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at our home in Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts, on Martha's Vineyard.
Story_ID: 671319
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  Probably some sort of chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oranges and greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and Nassau [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Never say never.
Story_ID: 671320
Speaker 1: Well when I ask you about your family history, I wanna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Joseph W. Loftin] side of the family, but we wanna start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Thelma Allease, A-L-L-E-A-S-E, McMullen, M-C-capital M-U-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her married name?
Speaker 2: Loftin.
Speaker 1: Loftin, okay.
Speaker 2: L-O-F-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and, and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Rochester, New York, on May 18, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side of the family, we can go back pretty far.  In fact, my mother--my grandmother [Anna McMullen] was born in Akron, Ohio, not really in Akron, in--right outside of Akron--I'm tryin' to remember, it begins with an M--Marietta, Ohio.  And my grandmother and my cousin, Lizzie [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Outside of Akron?
Speaker 2: Outside--I think it's outside--not outside of Akron, it's--I think it's
Speaker 1: That'd be--yeah, Marietta's down in the opposite end.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm tryin' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, but--
Speaker 2: --but, my parents, my grandmother--
Speaker 1: --Massillon [Ohio] is near, is it Massillon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's not where it is.
Speaker 1: Okay--yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm--I--my grandmother was born in Ohio.  Now whether--I--I'm pretty sure she was born in Marietta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was the fact that she ended up in Akron as a--has nothing to do with why--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where she was born.  But my grandmother and my cousin, Lizzie, Elizabeth--what was--I can't remember her last name; I'm blocking on it.  But they applied for membership in the Daughters of the American Revolution [DAR] and--because they could trace their ancestry back that far.  And they were accepted.  And it was held--the, the meeting or the luncheon was held at the Portage Hotel in Akron, Ohio, and my mother--I mean, my grandmother (cough) and my cousin, her first cousin, went to Akron, Ohio--
Story_ID: 671321
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we have them applying for membership with the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution].
Speaker 1: Right.  There was an article in the Akron Beacon Journal, which is the local newspaper asking people to send their history in and they were going to have a--you know, soliciting members for the DAR.  So my grandmother and her cousin submitted their information and they were accepted.  They received a letter saying please come to the luncheon at the Portage Hotel in Akron, Ohio, downtown Akron.  So my mother--my grandmother and cousin Lizzie got themselves all together and they went to the luncheon with their letter, and when they saw my cousin and my grandmother, they said--now they were very, very clever, because they asked for their letter, which they presented, and when they saw my mother--my grandmother, and my cousin, they said there was a mistake, but they kept the letter.  See, this--they didn't--we didn't have any faxes or Xeroxes or copies, so we never--you know, we don't have any record other than what my grandmother and Cousin Lizzie, said.  But they went to the--to the luncheon and they were told, "Oh, no, obviously this is a mistake."  But, the bottom line is, we could trace--they could trace their ancestry back to the American Revolution, so--
Speaker 2: Okay, now this, this event occurred in the 1930s, right?
Speaker 1: I'd say either the twenty--I don't really know the date.  I'd say maybe--I'm saying the '30s [1930s] but it was probably before that.  I--you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --maybe it was the '30s [1930s].  I--for, for whatever reason, I'm thinking it was the '30s [1930s].  But based on--it was probably in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was, you know--
Story_ID: 671322
Speaker 1: Now do you know the stories from that side of the family that--about those ancestors or any stories about those ancestors?
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle--my grandmother's [Anna McMullen] brother or uncle fought in the Civil War and we have a picture of my grandmother's--of my uncle and his wife standing on the porch in his Civil War uniform.  And--what else do we know about--the, the--
Speaker 1: What was his name, do you know?
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  I just have the picture.  I think it's on the back of the picture.  You have to understand, my grandmother and my grandfather [James H. McMullen] had almost two families.  They were married but my grandmother had--my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] was an aunt when she was born, so--my grandmother had three children--had five children all together.  But my Aunt Vi [ph.] who, and my uncle--one died in childbirth.  My Aunt Vi was my mother's older sister.  My mother was the youngest and her sister was four years older than she is.  So these children were--probably my grandmother got married at like nineteen, so of course she had a child right away--she had three children right away.  And then fifteen--twenty years later, my mother and my aunt were born, so these--that's one of the reasons there's kind of a disconnect because as in most families, the older children know more about what really happened than the younger ones.  So--but I knew my grandmother, so my grandmother told me about going to the Portage Hotel [Akron, Ohio] and, and the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution], but a lot of the other history of the family we really--we have some records, but not a lot because most of the information, my Aunt Vi, who died young, was the--and my uncle who died very--as a teenager, the information is not as refined as it would've been had my mother and my aunt been the, the older children.
Story_ID: 671323
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down from that side of the family about any of the ancestors?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, my, my grandmother [Anna McMullen] was--my grandfather [James H. McMullen] was a minister in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church and my grandmother--my grandparents moved--you know, the church--the AME Zion church is run by a board of bishops and you just keep moving back and all around.  And my grandmother had all these, you know, these children, and the older ones, the little ones, she had to have--make sure they were in--you know, went to school--went to school, so she said to my grandfather that she had to put down roots some place.  She could not continue living off these church places--you know, parsonage here, parsonage there.  So she settled in--she decided to--since she was from Akron [Ohio]--I mean, from Ohio, and my grandfather was pastoring a church in Akron, she said this is where I will build my house.  So she bought this property and they--that's where our family home was because she was just tired of the constant moving--you know, every--the annual conference--general conference is every four years and you could be moved.  She said she was tired of being moved from pillar to post and she had to have her own set of roots, so--
Speaker 1: Now, now how did he resolve that in terms of his relationship with the church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my grandfather ran for bishop and he was one of those people that my grandmother used to say, "Mac, you know the pen is mightier than the sword."  And he was editor of The Star of Zion, which was the newspaper of the--the church paper.  And he would write editorials about what he thought was--you know, he would speak his mind and, of course, speaking your mind in those days, even today, he created enemies, and they literally blackballed him from the bishopric, so--and literally, like, I think the last time he ran, which was in the '30s [1930s] 'cause he died in 1937--'37 [1937]--'38 [1938], the last time he ran, he was--he was so--he had become embittered because they were using what he thought was helpful for the church against him, and he really--you know, he really just couldn't believe that the church would be so narrow, and--that they would black--it wasn't--well, it wasn't a blackball, but it was.  They--because he couldn't believe that the--his colleagues would turn against him and because of what he believed, which he thought they all believed, but--and he said they all believed it but they're afraid to say it.  And because my grandfather spoke up, they--he felt that--but he never--he said--he never--he was bitter, but he said he would do it again rather than, you know, see to what they believe just so he could become bishop.  He said he would have to always speak what he believed.
Speaker 1: Now do you know what the source of conflict was or what the difference was?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--I really--I don't know, but from what my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] says, it was, you know, should the church do--become political, saying should the church take certain stands even though it didn't seem as though all the ministers were in agreement.  I think it was a political thing.  But, but it had to do with church doctrine and that's--he felt that there were certain things that the church should do and was not doing and the church was--didn't feel that this was something that should be publicized, and he would speak about.
Story_ID: 671324
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he wanted a more activist church?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He wanted a more activist church and they--
Speaker 1: Which is ironic 'cause A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion was formed as an activist--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --church--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --in the first place by James Varick back in the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but they--
Speaker 1: --1830s [sic. 1820s].
Speaker 2: He--they didn't--it's amazing, you know, you think, yes, they would really want--I mean, he would say that, I'm only speaking what--based on what the church was founded on and, well, you know, church politics is just like any other politics, very, very tough.
Speaker 1: Right.  And now it wasn't until the--until the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] that some of our black churches that had become real conservative started breaking out, you know, of that.
Speaker 2: And, and my grandfather was--he was one of the founders of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Akron [Ohio] and he was their first president, but--so he was an activist person, but the church was still a little--this is back in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].  The church was not speaking out against things that he felt.  And I'm sure probably it had to do with lynching and all that, but the church didn't wanna get too--not that they didn't believe in it, but they didn't wanna get too politically involved, and he felt that was a mistake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: James H. McMullen.
Story_ID: 671325
Speaker 1: --Did your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] talk about growing up?  Did she talk, talk about growing up in Akron [Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: Well, she grew up--she grew up in New York, literally.  See, they--this was back--remember, they're the second set.  She grew up in--not really--she moved to Akron when she was about ten, but she lived in Poughkeepsie, New York, because--
Speaker 1: Okay, so she started off in Poughkeepsie, okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in Rochester.  She moved to Poughkeepsie and--
Speaker 1: So her father [James H. McMullen] had a, a--was a pastor of a church in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Poughkeepsie first?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she--her growing up--well, she was a PK as she said; she was a preacher's kid.  And she--I think they had a pretty--they, they had this constant moving, which my grandmother [Anna McMullen] felt was bad for them, which is why she said, look--they had lived in--they lived in a little town in Georgia, my grandmother said, you know--because she had to send my, my aunt, my oldest, Aunt Vi [ph.], to a little girls school because she said the little--that little black school in Georgia was hardly acceptable (laughter).  So after that--after the Georgia experience, she said, "No, we've--we're--we've got to do something," and then she ended up moving back to Akron, and it's probably about nineteen-twenty--'21 [1921], '22 [1922] because they were--during the [Great] Depression, they were--they were living in Akron in--you know, in our house in Akron.
Story_ID: 671326
Speaker 1: So your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] had a decent education then?  Her mother [Anna McMullen] was watching out for her.
Speaker 2: Her mother was watching out for her, but my mother--my grandmother did not--my grandmother saved--well, my mother was going to nursing school and my grandmother had put her money aside for nursing school and she put it in the bank because she knew the banker; that was her friend from high school.  And--because my grandmother grew up in Akron [Ohio].  She--and she had two guys who roomed--rented rooms on her third floor and one was the janitor at the bank, and he said--this was in 1929.  He said, "Miss Mac, you should take your money out of that bank," said, "Thelma's tuition, Thelma and Anna Mae's [ph.] tuition, you should take your money out."  "I'm keeping my money in the Akron General Savings or whatever."  But she was a very, you know, kind of dowager type woman.  And she says, "I'm not taking my money out of the bank."  And so, he said, "Well, Miss Mac, you know, I wish you would just take a little out."  Anyway, she lost her money in the bank--
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-nine [1929].
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-nine [1929].
Speaker 1: Stock market crashed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The banks fell--
Speaker 1: --in 1929.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That's correct.  That is absolutely correct.  So--and my mother didn't go to nursing school because it was--times were very tough in 1929, but all of her money she lost in the collapse of the bank.  I mean, I don't know how much money it was.  All I know is that my grandmother said if only she had listened to the guy, because he was a janitor at the bank, but he knew what was going on because he was sweeping the floors.  He said, take--but again, he couldn't tell her that because probably she would've said, "Oh, this is absolutely ridiculous."  But that was a, a kind of a difficult point in--for my--for my grandmother and my grandfather [James H. McMullen].
Speaker 1: So a lot of people in those days lost a lot of property, a lot of status dropped and everything because of that crash.
Speaker 2: Well, she still had her property, but she certainly lost her money, a lot of money in the bank.  Because she just--she, she believed that, you know, you should put your money in the bank rather than under the mattress like some people.  She would've been better off under the mattress (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: Well, she was probably progressive thinking for those days--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but who could've foresaw that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  She thought going to the bank was--and she had this property, so she would collect her rent, go and take it, put it directly into the bank into this account, and--
Story_ID: 671327
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of personality did your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] have--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother--my parents started a catering business and my father [Joseph W. Loftin] was a Pullman porter.  And in 1957, he--my mother--not 1957.  They started a catering business--God, I can't even remember--in the early '50s [1950s] and my dad left the railroad in '57 [1957] and he went to work for the aircraft division of U.S. Steel [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And they had this little catering business and my, my mother--U.S. Steel, the aircraft division was the private planes for the executives and my mother used to make the sandwiches for the--for the planes, so--but, but she had a catering business on--you know, they'd been catering for--since--she was an excellent cook.  My mother was a fabulous cook.  And she had this--she had a catering business.  They started in probably 1950, Loftin Party Service [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and, yeah, she did some pretty fabulous parties.  So my sister [Beverley Jo-Anne Bates] and I grew up, and my brother [Joseph W. Loftin], as the--I mean, knowing all about fine foods because my parents had the--we were the testers.  She would say, "Oh, how does this taste?"  Oh, okay.  And--
Speaker 1: So she had an entrepreneurial kinda personality and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Very, very outgoing personality and she could plan your parties and tell you what to serve, and she brought all the--she did everything, I mean, so--and she had her, her help.  The one thing about being a caterer's child is that when the help is ill, the children, Jo-Anne and I, had to go.  I mean, the party had to go on, so if somebody was sick, Jo-Anne or I or both of us were called into service.
Story_ID: 671328
Speaker 1: So the household when you grew up was you and your, your sister [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] and your parents [Thelma McMullen Loftin and Joseph W. Loftin] basically, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the three older children--
Speaker 2: Jo-Anne's the oldest, I'm the middle, and my brother's [Joseph W. Loftin] the youngest.  He's seven years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're part of the second set of--they were in the household at the same time, right?
Speaker 2: We were all in the household the same time.  I don't know what you mean?
Speaker 1: No, you were--you were saying earlier you were part of the second set of children, that--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I said my grand--my mother was part of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your mother's--
Speaker 2: --a second set of children--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, we're all in the same--Jo-Anne and I are eighteen months apart and Buddy [ph.]--now, our brother is seven years younger and he is, of course, the prince.  But, but Jo-Anne--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  I'm sorry.  I got it mixed up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that was my--no, we all grew up in the same household, no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So are you the oldest or the--
Speaker 2: I'm the middle one.
Speaker 1: In the middle, okay.  All right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 671329
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Joseph W. Loftin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine--oh, 9/24/10 [September 24, 1910], Hogansville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hogansville?
Speaker 2: H-O-G-A-N-S-ville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace his ancestors?
Speaker 2: I really don't know much about his family, we really don't.  I mean, we were trying to put together a family tree when--and my father and his--my father is seventeen years younger than his sister--nine--pardon me, nineteen years younger than his sister.  She was married when he was born or getting married when he--right after he was born.  But he was--they moved from Hogansville to Atlanta [Georgia] when he was about two and then they moved from Atlanta to Akron [Ohio] when he was about six.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--
Speaker 2: And his father--his father, Benjamin [Loftin], and his mother, Josephine [Loftin]--his mother was part Indian [Native American], and his grandmother--he--his grandmother was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian.  And--but we--you know, we don't have much information about--I really don't have much information about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did his parents do?
Speaker 2: His father was a laborer.  His mother was a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he get a chance to finish high school and everything?
Speaker 2: He finished high school.  My dad finished high school.  And both my parents had about a year of college, but they really--they didn't--and it was at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], but they didn't--neither of them finished, but they instilled in us the determination--
Story_ID: 671330
Speaker 1: --Because my [maternal] grandfather [James H. McMullen] had a law degree.  He was a--he graduated from Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] and he--Boston University law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], and I forget where he went to the seminary.
Speaker 2: Now this is your, your father's [Joseph W. Loftin] father [Benjamin Loftin]?
Speaker 1: This is my, my mother's [Thelma McMullen Loftin] father.
Speaker 2: Your, your mother's father, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] guy, the firebrand.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he came out of Livingstone in, in--
Speaker 1: Livingstone College.
Speaker 2: --North Carolina?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--okay.  And Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, he, he was well educated for those days, yeah.
Story_ID: 671331
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Thelma McMullen Loftin and Joseph W. Loftin] met that's passed down or--?
Speaker 2: How did they meet?  My dad--I have to get the story right.  I think they met--did they meet in high school?  I can't remember.  But--no, it is--it's a funny story because my dad was dating someone else and my grandmother [Anna McMullen] was pretty tough on the guys to date her daughters.  She wasn't--she wasn't too keen on this.  So my mother and--she wanted--she got so nervous when she was bringing my dad--when it was time for my dad to meet her mother 'cause she kept saying, "Oh, Joe, you know, my mother is this, my mother is that."  So, daddy went over to my grandmother's and she was sitting on the porch, and she came--he, he came up and he says, "Good afternoon, Miss Mac, how are you?" and blah, blah, blah, very polite.  So she said, "And what are your intentions?"  So my dad said, "Miss Mac, I'm only here to talk about your daughter who you have raised to be a lovely young lady," according to my grandmother.  And my grandmother, she used to intimidate guys so badly that she was shocked that my father was not intimidated.  So he said--she said--well, he said, "I thought I would like to take Thelma," something at church, which was--oh, they met at church, that's right (laughter).  But my dad used to be Baptist, but he said the better looking girls were over at the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church, so he started going to the A.M.E. Zion Church; that's where they met.  And he said to my grandmother that he would like to take my mother to some church something.  And my grandmother said--she looked at her watch and she said, "It's two o'clock, four o'clock Thelma must be back."  And so my dad, you know, he took her, and they walked to church or whatever it was.  And she said, "Oh, and I will be there at the event also," so there was no--there was no--anyway, they got to the event and my father just kind of, you know, wore my grandmother down because she was not bending.  She was not bending at all even though--and she said, your--"Joseph has very nice ways, but I think you can do better."  I mean, she was not a--she was not kind.  But anyway, my father--
Speaker 1: Were they in high school at that point?
Speaker 2: They were out of high school.  They were--my dad--let's see, because my grandmother--my mother got married at twenty-one, twenty--twenty-one, so she was out of high school.  And she was working as--what was she doing?  Working as a secretary or something.
Speaker 1: So this is about 1935 or so?
Speaker 2: Right.  I think about nineteen--it was about 1935, '36 [1936].  So--no, they were out of high school.  He did--they went to different high schools.  But--so my mother wasn't exactly a kid but, you know, she was, of course, still living in her mother's home.  And my father finally just wore her down and he asked my mother--my grandmother, grandparents, if, if he could marry her.  And the funny thing is, you know, when hearing the story, I don't know what my grandfather [James H. McMullen] was doing (laughter)--had to do with this, but he's--it was my grandmother who ruled the roost with the girls.  So anyway, they had a--they got married a couple years--it took him a couple years and they got married.  And my mother said my grandmother was concerned that, you know, what kind of job did my father have?  How was he going to support this wife?  And they ended up--when they finally--they got engaged and they got married, and my father said that he could not live in Akron [Ohio] because he would always be under the hand of Anna McMullen and she ruled with an iron fist.
Speaker 1: What was her name again? Sorry.
Speaker 2: Anna.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anna McMullen.  So--but everyone called her Miss Mac.  That was her name (laughter).  Everyone called her Miss Mac.
Story_ID: 671332
Speaker 1: --My parents [Thelma McMullen Loftin and Joseph W. Loftin] married and moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and that's where we got, where we were.
Speaker 2: Now, was he already a Pullman porter at this point?
Speaker 1: No, he was not a Pullman porter at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was really working at a steel mill [U.S. Steel] in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But a friend of his got him involved with the railroad company and he became a Pullman porter in the--
Speaker 2: The steel mills in those days in Pittsburgh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was rough on black people.
Speaker 1: Very rough.  Very--
Speaker 2: That's what I've--
Speaker 1: --very rough.
Speaker 2: There's been a movie made about it--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  It was tough.  They--
Speaker 2: --and everything.  It's--
Speaker 1: No, it was a very--yeah, very tough.  So he--I think my dad got laid off and my--this friend of theirs said, "Look, why don't you come and work for the railroad company?"  And he was one of those Pullman porters who crossed the rails.
Speaker 2: Okay, now this is the [Great] Depression we're still talking about, in the middle of the, the Depression where things got very, very rough.
Speaker 1: Right.  Things were rough.  I mean, things were rough.  I think my parents had it pretty tough when they first got started, really.
Story_ID: 671333
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me, what is your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory.  I remember when I learned to read.  I--it was just--I came home from school [Burgwin Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--I think I must've been in kindergarten and I said, "Mom [Thelma McMullen Loftin], mom, I can read!"  I mean, that--I just remember so vividly the fact that I--you know, I could really read and--because my mother was a big book person, I mean, a big reader, and she always read us wonderful stories.  Every night we had stories.  And I just remember--you know, she could read them, you know, we just sat there and listened.  And the first time--the--I just remember being able to say, I can read.  So that's one of my earliest memories.
Story_ID: 671334
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hot rolls.  My mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] used to make these rolls and you could just smell them.  You saw them--she'd make the rolls and they were rising and then she would put 'em in the oven and that smell lingers with me today.  It's a fond memory.  What else?  What did you say, sights?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Christmas, the Christmas tree, decorating the tree.  Sights, sounds--and sounds--rainy days, pitter-patter of rain, what are you gonna do?  Reading, get a book, read a story, play a game.  We played--we played a lot of games.  We played cards, we played Monopoly, we played Sorry, we--I mean, we just--we--that's, that's what we did.  We sat around and played games.
Story_ID: 671335
Speaker 1: Now Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] is a--has a hilly landscape.  I don't know, what, what did your neighborhood look like?
Speaker 2: Hilly.  All neighborhoods (laughter) are hilly in Pittsburgh.  But--and literally, I grew up in the--from--for about ten years in a housing project in Pittsburgh, and we were one of the first families, and we lived there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is something that we need to pause and, and chew on because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --housing projects when they were first built were actually not so bad.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They were fine.  I mean, it was--you had to be an intact family, you had to have a source of income, all that, yeah.  We were--we were the first--one of the first families in this--
Speaker 1: And people actually were fighting to get into the projects.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they were fighting to get into them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, they were decent housing.  It was decent housing for, for that time.  This was nineteen-forty--I think we lived in '42 [1942]--forty--'44 [1944] 'cause we moved in '54 [1954].  Yeah, that was very nice housing.
Speaker 1: And the services actually were there in those days.
Speaker 2: Service was there and literally we had very decent neighbors.  We had lawyers, doctors as our neighbors; this is the funny part.  But, you know, today, it's different.  But the thing is, when we lived in public housing, it was stopgap housing.  It wasn't really, you know, a way of life.  It was a--it was just something--
Speaker 1: Transition housing.
Speaker 2: --transition, right.  Today, people buy these little starter homes, but, you know, in those days, you didn't buy a starter home.  You, you bought a home and that was your home.  So we lived in--we lived in the, you know, public housing for ten years, from the time I--
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of the projects?
Speaker 2: Glen Hazel.
Speaker 1: Glen Hazel?
Speaker 2: Glen Hazel Heights [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's between Hazelwood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and Homestead [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--so what was that neighborhood like, I mean, you said you had neighbors of all--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --different persuasions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had people of all--we, we had a tennis pro (laughter), we had a lawyer, several lawyers.  We had teachers, educators.  It was the--it was the same as any other neighborhood.  The--and people only--you know, people lived there--the lawyer--I'm trying to remember--they, they stayed for maybe five years.  The--and people used--were--used public housing as a cheap way of living while they were going to school, so it was another--the only difference was, they were so kind of--they weren't as close.  There was a public housing project in--close to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  That's not the one that we lived in.  It was a little bit more ghetto-ish, even then.  But, you know, really our housing, you know, was--we had a group of intelligent people and it was a very close knit community.
Story_ID: 671336
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little girl?  What kind of little girl were you and what were your favorite things to do?
Speaker 2: Prim and prissy (laughter).  Go to the library, read.  I was considered very nerdy, to be very honest (laughter), very I would say kinda focused, didn't have a lot of friends, and was kind of--I had--I was--I guess I would just--I would say I was an ambitious kid and I had ideas different than, than my friends, and I focused on, you know, doing well in school.  And so I was--you know, I was a little different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I take it from what you described of your grandmother [Anna McMullen] applying for membership in the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution] and some of the--and your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] as a catering background, being able to explain how to hold an event to people and those sort of things that you had a lot of tradition of middle class behavior, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, for a long--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --time.
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I was--I would not say that I was the average kid.  I think people called me a snob, you know.  I was a little different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in your neighbor--well, even in the neighborhood with a lot of different occupations, you still kinda had a sort of a--
Speaker 2: Well, they were older than I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the kids my age were not--I, I had a friend--you know, of course I did have some friends, but they were not--we weren't, you know, thinking the same.  They--I was--I knew what I wanted to do.  I wasn't sure that they did.  And for me, my goal was doing well in school.
Story_ID: 671337
Speaker 1: Now did you have any heroes or role models that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Our minister was very active in promoting the kids when we went to Sunday school.  Our minister was very active in promoting this.  Our Sunday school teachers--I had a wonderful, wonderful Sunday school teacher who was probably a role model.  Then, I had this grandmother [Anna McMullen] who (laughter), who was constantly reminding you of, you know, what you should do.  And, you know, we would spend our summers, a couple weeks with my grandparents in--with my grandmother.  At that time, my aunt and her husband lived there with my grandmother because obviously she was old.  We had an old grandmother because my grandmother--my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] and my aunt were--my grandmother was so old when they were born, so my grandmother was--she died when she was eighty-six and I was a freshman in college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], so she was seventy when, you know, when we were kids.  That was old for a grandmother versus most kids grandmothers were in their fifties, late forties, and our grandmother was seventy, seventy-two, seventy-five.  So--but she was tough 'til the day she died.  And she was--you know, she had these standards and she, she had two daughters, and she insisted that, you know, they did so-and-so, and she was bound and determined that we were going to not--we were going to go to school.  I mean, my mother and my aunt--she blamed herself constantly for her money--for having put--not taking her money out and letting that opportunity slip away, because my mother and my aunt, they were both devastated.  But she--and, and as a result of not having that year to go, that time to go away to school, my aunt was a secretary, she was not going to school, she's the older.  But my mother who had planned this whole career of nursing, she was devastated, and then she just didn't want to do it any--when, when it was--you know, when the time came and she couldn't do it.  So my grandmother was bound and determined that this mistake would not happen again.  So she constantly reminded my sister and me that there was a higher calling and we had to do it.  So she was--she was a very strong influence.
Story_ID: 671338
Speaker 1: Now did your grandmother [Anna McMullen] have a chance to go to college when she was coming up?
Speaker 2: No, she did not, but she finished high school.  But she did not have a chance to go to college.  She also had--she was also a little bit prejudiced because she didn't--she grew up in Akron [Ohio] and she didn't believe in black colleges [HBCUs] because my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] and my aunt could've gone to a black college in the South.  She wouldn't.
Speaker 1: She wasn't gonna go for it.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  She wasn't going for any of those little southern--which of course was a mistake, you know.  But she, she had this northern philosophy that, you know, southerners were inferior.  There's--you know, that's just the way she was.
Speaker 1: Her family tradition had been formed basically in, in Ohio, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: All her relatives were born--she would say, "All the Morrisons [ph.] are from the North," (laughter), so--
Speaker 1: So her maiden name was Morris?
Speaker 2: Morrison.
Speaker 1: Morrison.
Speaker 2: Morrison.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So she--that was--she had that little bias about, about black schools in the South.  I mean, she just--even though her husband [James H. McMullen] went to Livingstone [College, Salisbury, North Carolina], she just--she just didn't--I remember talking, she says, "You wouldn't want to go down there."  I mean, she (laughter)--you know, she--I guess the South was so much--was so different at that time and she, she saw those--when she had to put my aunt Vi [ph.] in that little private school, she said those--she said the schools in the South, she just dismissed unless they were private, and she--the colleges, she just--for whatever reason she had nothing--she would not let them go south to school, which, you know, we think was a mistake.
Story_ID: 671339
Speaker 1: Now when she [Davenport's maternal grandmother, Anna McMullen] did the research on her ancestors for the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution] contest, were those ancestors on the Morrison [ph.] side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that she--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And when you asked me the name, you--and it was Morrison, the uncle who fought in the Civil War, he was a Morrison.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did they have a tradition of being from some place--I guess they had a tradition of being some place from the east, you know, I guess to have been in, in the Revolutionary War.  Did they--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  And the, the sad thing is, my--when--my aunt had a lot of this information because she lived in my grandmother's house after my grandmother got to a certain age, and she had all that.  She had all my grandfather's [James H. McMullen] books, all his law books.  She gave them to--oh, this I could still kill her for--but, she gave all of his law books to--who did she give them to?  This law firm that was my grandmother's.  She believed in this lawyer.  So she gave all this stuff away.  And she was not really--I'm just surprised that she's not--she was not the historian because Jo-Anne [Loftin Bates] and I became so interested, and we went over to her house and we tried to find all this information.  And then our family home was taken over by the state, the City [of Akron, Ohio] for--they put a road through it, and they had to--they held out--they--there were three pieces of property but--that my grandmother left--that they tried to hold onto but, you know, when the state wants something, they're going to get it.
Speaker 1: That's eminent domain, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so they, they ended up taking it.  They took the--they sold it.  I mean, it wasn't a matter of take--it was going to happen, so they ended up selling it.  But we had--we had a lot of--there were so many things in that house because my grandmother built that house in 1920--1920--in the '20s [1920s], and there were so many things in it.  Because the one thing--my grandfather--she would always say--they--my parents--my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] called her father Poppa, said, "Poppa always said Anna's gotta have her mattress and I have to have my books wherever we move," so the two things would--they were constantly moving, my grandmother with this mattress and my grandfather with these books.  Now these books, I don't know why my--I don't--I just don't know where they are.  She said she gave them to--and she has--she has a daughter, but--and two sons, but I don't--maybe one of them has the books, but my aunt started to get a little daffy and I think part of it was the fact that they were going to tear down the house and she had to get rid of all this stuff.  So--but we--you know, there are--we have a lot of missing pieces because we don't know what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you know, possibly at some point, someone could reconstruct all this history, but a lot of it's been scattered.
Speaker 2: A lot of it's been--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, just thought I'd ask about the Morrison side in case somebody watching this, you know, is interested in following up on, you know, that.
Story_ID: 671340
Speaker 1: Tell me about grade school.  Now where, where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Burgwin Elementary School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-U-R-G-W-I-N.
Speaker 1: Burgwin Elementary.
Speaker 2: Elementary.
Speaker 1: And what side of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] did you live and go to school?
Speaker 2: This is in Hazelwood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Hazelwood.  Okay.  Now in those days did--was there like a black side of town for Pittsburgh or?
Speaker 2: Now, this was a--I never went to a black school.  I never even had a black teacher until ninth grade.  So this was an integrated school.  There were mostly white, a lot of foreigners, a lot of Polish kids.  In fact, on parents night, often some of the parents--the kids would have to come because the parents didn't speak English.  But, yeah I went there from first--from K through six [kindergarten to sixth grade].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're there from K through, through six and--well what was school like?  Now you say you really liked school, you're kind of a--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: --nerdy kid.
Speaker 2: It was--school was fun.  School was an opportunity to explore, to find out--I mean, I looked forward to learning every day.  I mean, it was--it was--I would say--we went to school and we expected to learn, the teachers expected us to learn, and as a result, we did learn.  And, you know, our parents [Thelma McMullen Loftin and Joseph W. Loftin] believed 100 percent in what the teacher said.  The teacher said you did something, you did it, period.  And we had a, well-rounded--you know, you had activities, you had--we went to the museums, we went to the planetarium, we went--field trips, and school was, you know, fun.
Story_ID: 671341
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] for those who are not familiar with it is a very cultural city, a lot, lot of cultural activities in Pittsburgh to attend and to--the museums and libraries, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a big library [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh - Main] in Oakland [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  But every neighborhood had its own library, so we had a library that, you know, you could go to.  And at that time, you could--you know, I remember--I remember getting my library card, bringing it home, like I got my card, and taking out books and that was basically--that was your summer activity if you didn't go to--if you didn't go away to visit your grandparents, which most kids did.  You know, when we were coming along, summer you were off to visit somebody.  But--
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite books?  Could--do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.  I remember a book--I remember reading 'Not as a Stranger [ph.].'  I think I was--I don't remember what grade, probably sixth--fifth or sixth grade, and I remember I used to read--it's funny because I'm blanking on what--'Alice in Wonderland' [sic. 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,' Lewis Carroll].  Why is it I cannot--blank--think of a single book that--it was so long ago I can't remember (laughter).  I'm trying to remember what was my favorite book.
Speaker 1: Well, don't get stuck.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well--if you remember something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but was your family into music when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  We were not really into, into music.  Not at all.  I would have to say that music was not--my father [Joseph W. Loftin] played the violin, so classical music was something that we listened to.  But my sister [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] and I were not totally into classical music, but that's what my father loved and my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] too, so we didn't--but we didn't have a lot of--we didn't have a lot of records, but my parents loved Marian Anderson, so we had Marian Anderson records and we had the classical records.  And my father tried--my sister tried playing the violin.  I quite--I couldn't quite get it.  I took piano lessons; I couldn't quite get that either, (laughter) but obviously I had a tin ear.  But--and I certainly couldn't sing.
Story_ID: 671342
Speaker 1: Did the family go to church a lot or--?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were very involved.  I mean, my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin], 'til the day she died, I think my mother missed church maybe ten Sundays in her life.  She didn't believe in missing church.
Speaker 1: It was A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion?
Speaker 2: A.M.E. Zion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, so--but we were not--they were not big gospel music people either.  I mean, I would have to say literally that music was really not as much a part of my life growing up as it is in my life today, and we just--we had--we had records.  But we had--we listened to the radio and we listened to Frank Sinatra and Nat King Cole and the--those kinds of records.
Speaker 1: Kinda easy listening kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My parents didn't like for us to listen to the radio station that we currently own, but (laughter), they didn't like that kind of music.  But, you know, they tried us with the classical.  We weren't really buying that, so we settled on the, you know, what was popular at the time, which was--
Speaker 1: 'Your Hit Parade' type stuff.
Speaker 2: 'Hit Parade,' yes.  That's--that's what we listened to.  And, and we listened to the popular music stations on the radio 'cause we did listen to the radio (background noise), but we didn't--we weren't--we were not record buyers.
Story_ID: 215760
Speaker 1: Tell us again that story about your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] taking broadcast classes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my father [Joseph W. Loftin]--well, it started out--this was about 1948 and my father said--my father and mother were looking at, you know, their income, and they said, look, we're gonna have to do something to--you know, in order to educate these kids.  So he said to my mother, "Why don't you think about what you think you could do," and--because in other words, you're gonna have to get a job.  So my mother took this course in--everyone said she had such a beautiful voice and she was always the preacher's child, so she was always speaking in church.  So she took this course and she did well and her--one of the teachers recommended that she apply for this job that was opening up in Homestead [Pennsylvania] at WHOD [WHOD-AM].  So my mother went there, and they did the test, the voice-over, and they loved her voice.  They said, "Oh, you're fabulous."  They--so my mother thought, you know, she had really gotten the job, but they told her that she was not ethnic enough.  And the job was taken over--well, the person who got the job was a very good family friend of ours, Mary [Dee] Dudley, who became Mary Dee (laughter).  So--she lived right around the corner from us.  So--(laughter)--
Speaker 1: Is this the same [HistoryMaker] Merri Dee that came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Mary Dee--exactly.  Mary Dudley (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) WGN[-TV, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh [sic.].
Speaker 1: I think she was--
Speaker 2: Mary Dudley.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She is the person who got the job over my mother.
Speaker 1: She's been on the 'Oprah' show and all that, you know.
Speaker 2: Mary--Mary Dee was out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a while.  She was started in Pittsburgh, then she went to Philadelphia.  She died about--she died some time ago, and her daughter, Little Dee [ph.], a little bit older than I am, Shirley [ph.]--the twins--Shirley--Shirlane [ph.], and Sherwood [ph.], but they--that was our neighborhood.  They grew up in our neighborhood.  And Mary Dudley got the job that my mother was turned down because she wasn't ethnic enough.  (Laughter) And today, we own that station.  That's the ironic part (laughter).  My mother used to always say, she said, "It turned out all right in the end," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they--your parents turned to catering, you know--
Speaker 2: And my--then that didn't work out, so my dad said, well, all right, you're such a great cook, let's try that.  So they started out with, I think it was through church friends and people, somebody needed a wedding, and my mother said, "Well, I think I--I'll plan that for you," and she did all the food.  And then they put an ad in the telephone book, Loftin Party Service, and that was the beginning.  It was amazing.  Got a telephone line, everything, and next thing I knew, my mother was working like a slave (laughter).  And--but that's how--that's how my sister [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] and I went to school.
Story_ID: 215761
Speaker 1: Is this about the time that you went to another school, that you moved to another grade school?
Speaker 2: High school?  Junior high?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I went to Gladstone Junior High [sic. Gladstone Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Gladstone?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Now, are there--are there any teachers or students there that really stand out in Gladstone?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was a teacher, Miss Taggard [ph.] who was--I was a big speller and I won the spelling bee in sixth, seventh, and eighth grade, and Miss Taggard was my coach.  And then there was another teacher, my math teacher.  I didn't have her until ninth grade, but she was--Miss Peeler [ph.].  She was my first black teacher and I--she's--it turned out her nephew and I were in--we went to [Taylor Allderdice] High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] together and he married my college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] classmate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math and English.
Speaker 1: That pretty much covers it.  If you're good in math and English, then pretty much--
Speaker 2: Well, those were my favorite subjects.  And I also liked science, but I would--I would have to say math and English were my--and I liked the languages, but that was--I loved languages.
Speaker 1: So did you have language in middle school?
Speaker 2: Latin and Spanish.  No, I didn't have that until high school.  Yeah, Latin and Spanish, ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I took all Latin ninth, tenth, eleventh grade.
Story_ID: 215762
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities in school?  Did you do any athletic stuff?
Speaker 2: Yes, I played hockey, field hockey, and what else?  Hockey was our big thing.  Yeah, I was very involved in sports.  We had a--I was--I did gymnastics.  I know it was crazy, but, yeah, I did a little gymnastics from--I started in grade school, and I was even on television for--doing--on the 'Howdy Doody' (laughter) show doing some gymnastics.
Speaker 1: You made the 'Howdy Doody' show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The 'Howdy Doody' show back in--
Speaker 1: Now that's a big deal.
Speaker 2: But it was back in--
Speaker 1: That's a--for those days.
Speaker 2: It was--it was in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and they had the happy tooth and--what was that guy?  It was filmed in, in Pittsburgh [sic.] at [Channel 3] WDTV [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, was, was, was 'Howdy Doody' actually--did it actually originate in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, but I know I was on that show.
Speaker 1: With--
Speaker 2: I think it was in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: With Buffalo Bob--
Speaker 2: Buffalo Bob and--
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: --the tooth-somebody.
Speaker 1: I remember the, the--yeah, the tooth and Princess Summerfall Winterspring.
Speaker 2: Princess Summerfall Winterspring (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I was on that show.  What was I--I, I--gymnastics--I was doing tumbling.  At the time, you know, oh, she's double-jointed.  You know, that was one of those--the words.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, that's great.  You know, that's--
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: So you weren't completely sedentary 'cause you were--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no--
Speaker 1: --the way described yourself, you're reading all the time and so you were doing things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, no, I was doing other things.  I wasn't--it's just that.  Yeah, I was--I was always doing something.  It wasn't that I was--you know, I wasn't a housebound little--it's just that I wasn't as--the things I was doing were not the normal things (laughter).  People weren't doing gymnastics.  Black kids weren't doing gymnastics back then.
Speaker 1: So the popular culture things in the black community were--you weren't--you weren't as into some of--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --those things.
Speaker 2: But--yeah.  I forgot to put my little--and I was, you know, the, the spelling was my big thing and I spent a lot of time doing--coaching.  I really--I just missed going to Washington [D.C.].  I was so upset with myself.  That was my--and that was my last shot because it was in eighth grade.  But--
Speaker 1: What happened?  You won a spelling bee and--
Speaker 2: You, you--I won the local and then you have to go and compete in the, the big group to see who wins the state--the city, and then the state, then you go to Washington.  So I'm--I'll never forget the word I missed on either, of course.  It was incendiary (laughter) and I spelled it incorrectly.  But, you know, it was--that was my--that was in the semi-finals that--it was in the finals.  I was in the finals and it was my last year because I was in eighth grade, and there were three of us, a guy, Frank [ph.], who ended up going to high school with me, we both went to high school together, and I don't remember the other person.  But I missed incendiary and that was--I was very upset with myself, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say field hockey was a big deal in school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: --in Pittsburgh then?
Speaker 2: It was what our gym teacher believed in, you know, and you did what your gym teacher believed.  And we would get up in the morning and you'd have to be at school at 7:30, 7:00, 7-7:30 in order to play field hockey and be on the field, and that's what we played.  We played volleyball, but I didn't play--I mean, I wasn't--my sister [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] is five-nine, five-ten, so basketball was not even in my agenda.  You know, she says, "You're too short (laughter)," but--so I didn't--and I wasn't a good basketball player anyway.  We also played softball.  I forgot.  We played softball, softball, field hockey, and volleyball.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were like very active in, in school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Yep, yep, yep.
Story_ID: 215763
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Taylor Allderdice High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Allberdice [ph.].
Speaker 2: Taylor Allderdice.
Speaker 1: Taylor Allberdice, okay.  Now how do you spell Allberdice?
Speaker 2: A-L-L-D-E-R-D-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Allderdice.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry, Allderdice.
Speaker 2: That's in Squirrel Hill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is an--this is an integrated setting, too?
Speaker 2: It was--the majority of the kids at Taylor Allderdice High School were Jewish.  There was a small minority of white kids and there was an even smaller minority of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was it like going to Taylor Allderdice?
Speaker 2: Well, Allderdice was a very eye-opening experience for me because at Allderdice--when you go to a school like Allderdice, you really wanna be Jewish because they had fraternities and sororities, and, I mean, they had a wonderful little group.  And all my friends--they were my friends because most of the blacks were not in the academic programs.  So there were few of us--and there was a guy who went to junior high  [Gladstone Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with me also, my buddy all through high school, in fact I still see him, we're still friends today.  He and I were in the academic program and that was like it (laughter).  So, so my friends--I made more friends when I got to high school because, of course, we had something in common.  I had a lot of--a lot in common with these kids because we were all--we were all very ambitious and--I don't wanna say focused--they knew what they were gonna do.  I mean, they all knew where they were going and so I was like, oh, these are people who really kind of know--this is what I'm talking about.  This wasn't the--these were not the same kinds of kids that I had gone to junior high school with.  There were a few.  But there was a very smart girl in my sister's [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] class who--she was top of her class, but she had no intentions of going to college.  Jo-Anne--they would say, "Why?"  And she said, "I'm gonna be a secretary, there's no reason for me to go to college."  And I remember Jo-Anne talking about this girl who was a friend of hers, and she said, "I can't believe she's white.  She has accepted the fact that this is her level."  But I got to--so when I got to Allderdice, I, I--you know, I made--I made friends because literally they're talking about this today.  The people would talk about you if you were smart in high school, in school, which is why I had a problem.  So once I got to Allderdice and I found that, you know, I had other friends, it was fine.  So I kind of probably blossomed as I got to Allderdice.
Speaker 1: So you were encouraged to be smart.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well because the competition--I wasn't--I never listened to what the other kids were saying, but they would say, oh--you get your report card and, you, you know, how--"How'd you do?" and, oh--you just put your cards away and said, "Oh, I did okay (laughter)," you know.  You go home to your parents, parents would say what--"How did you do?"  That was important, but it wasn't really as important to the local black kids that you do well.  In fact, that was like a sign of trying to be white even--this is back then, so I just kind of left it alone.
Story_ID: 215764
Speaker 1: [Taylor] Allderdice [High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], now, being a mostly Jewish school, were you aware at that time that Jews were sort of a minority in the country as well as blacks?
Speaker 2: Yes because my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin]--a lot of my mother's customers were Jewish, so--and my mother had very wealthy white people and rich Jews, so we knew that the Jews were a minority because the--we knew wealthy whites who were constantly making sure (laughter) that--from my parents' conversations, from what they would say at parties and things, you know, "These white folks really do not like these Jews."  So we knew--we knew that--we knew the difference, definitely.  We knew the difference early on.  But, you know, we didn't have a--we felt that the Jewish kids were friendly to us, so--and my parents felt that her Jewish customers were loyal, so--but we definitely, we did know the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did you notice anything about the way the, the Jewish kids interacted with each other and how their, their, their families, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the--we just knew they were close-knit.  And I used to go to their homes because we were--you know, we'd have--they would have these school club parties or whatever and they would--you know, whoever would have it, so I was friendly with them.  And they would come--by then, we had moved, they would come to my house too.  So it was not a--it was a different situation than, than junior high school [Gladstone Middle School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 215765
Speaker 1: The kids [at Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] were brighter and it was a tracking system, so--which was not--which was not good for everybody because the academic program--there were kids who just, you know, kinda went through.  That was a track.  You didn't have to take but so much of this and so much of that, and at the end you got a diploma, whereas in the academic program, you know, you had to have so much math, so much science, so much English, so--it was a--it was--it was a program that encouraged you.  It, it was--it was a college prep course; that's, that's what they called it.  It was college prep versus academic--not academic, versus--
Speaker 2: A general course.
Speaker 1: --general.  And then they had the, the secretarial program.
Speaker 2: Business, yeah.
Speaker 1: Business.  So there were three ways--I mean, you could be in any one of those.  But, you know, the number of the blacks in the academic program were--and still--they still tried to mess over you.  I mean, I graduated with high honors and they were not going to give it to me.  My mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] had to go up to the school and say, "I have every report card she ever made," and they told me, it was an honest mistake.  I mean, you know (laughter), they changed it, but an honest mistake.  Now I did not say that the administrators of the school were that fair.  They were trying to tell me I wasn't--no reason for me to take the SATs (laughter).  You know, this just--so the prejudice was definitely there.  "Now, Judy, where you gonna go to school? Well, I think you should go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]."  So, "Okay, fine," you know.
Story_ID: 215766
Speaker 1: I wanted to go to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  I don't know why I wanted to go to Ohio State, but I wanted to go to Ohio State.  And I received a scholarship to Chatham [College; Chatham University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] through our minister, full scholarship.  I did not want to go to Chatham.
Speaker 2: Chatham.  Now where is Chatham?
Speaker 1: It's a all girls school in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did not want to go to Chatham.  I wanted to get away from home.  So my mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin] never even discussed it.  I mean, it was a given I was going to Chatham.  She never even--fortunately, my father [Joseph W. Loftin] said--because my sister [Jo-Anne Loftin Bates] had gone to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and my father said, "I don't think it's fair that we should force Judy to go to Chatham even though she has a scholarship and we certainly could use the money, but I don't think it's fair to force her to go to Chatham if that--she does not want to go."  So--but he said, "But you are not going to Ohio State and pay out of state tuition.  If you wanna go to a state school, you will be going to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]."  Well, I was grateful, you know (laughter), anything to get outta that--outta that Chatham deal, and I ended up going to Penn State.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, Penn State's up in State College [Pennsylvania] in the middle of the--kinda the middle of the state sorta?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the mountains, actually, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's in Mount Nittany, right there in the valley, Nittany Valley.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well how'd you like Penn State?  I mean--
Speaker 1: I had a ball.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In fact, I--this--the, the achiever, had such a good time that I was close to being kicked out or my mother was gonna pull me out with a hook.  I had--I had never had that much freedom in my life.  I had never--you know, I'd never been that exposed.  There were boys.  I was having a ball.  Everybody was the same thinking--it was--I was having such a good time that I had forgotten my reason for being there, and my freshman year was a disaster, and my mother was going to pull me out.  But I--you know, I got my act together and I finished, but I had--I mean, I was having a wonderful time, just a wonderful time.  I mean, I had forgotten all those little nerdy things I was--(laughter) forgotten all that.  But--
Speaker 2: So you, you came out of high school in '57 [1957], '57 [1957] you said?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I was like, oh, gracious.  And my sister was at a black school, so they were--they had more controls.  We had more freedom than--we had more freedom as freshman than Jo-Anne had as a senior, so--and I, I really was not prepared for that (laughter) kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now explain the, the--that dynamic because people may not realize, especially today--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --that there was that difference in those days.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Well we had house mothers and we had dorms, but we didn't have to be in.  We had--freshman year, we had freshman orientation.  There was like four weeks which you had to be in at eight o'clock, but after that, you had--you didn't have to be in until eleven o'clock.  And Jo-Anne (laughter), they had room checks and all--at, at West Virginia State, they had a house mother.  We had a house mother, but we didn't have--she wasn't like--not like Jo-Anne's, Miss Shumate [ph.] who was--(laughter) in town, they called her The Shoe, knocking on your door and then opening it, you know.  So we didn't--we didn't have that kind of--I mean, she was there and there were dorm monitors on the floor, but basically you kinda came and went as you pleased.  We--you could go out, in and out of the dorm, as long as you were in before a certain hour.  Jo-Anne--they didn't have any of that nonsense.  They were in the dorm at eight o'clock every night senior year.  So we--it--
Speaker 2: Eight o'clock?
Speaker 1: Eight.
Speaker 2: Eight o'clock.
Speaker 1: They had weekends, but we didn't have--we were--we had, oh, so much freedom.  It was--it was amazing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So were there many other black students at Penn State when you were there?
Speaker 1: Oh, my class brought in a lot of blacks.  My class literally brought in more blacks than there were on campus, so we had a field day.  I mean (laughter), that's why we were so crazed.  We had--and, and there were--the guys all gravitated to this whole class of freshman, and here I was dating a senior, oh, gracious, this is--going to these parties and, oh.  It was fun, but I had kind of forgotten (laughter) what I was there for.
Story_ID: 215767
Speaker 1: Are there any notable fellow students or teachers that you--that you can tell us about at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Fellow students?
Speaker 1: Yeah or teachers.
Speaker 2: No, there, there were no--we had one, one black guy on campus, and that was Pressley (ph.[GG1]) and he lives up here--he has a house up here.  What was his first name?  And he was--he was the assistant chaplain, but--and he started this group called Entree New [ph.] for black kids.  There weren't--you know, we didn't have a lot of black kids up there, but--and I'm trying to think of who else, what students--what were the students up there?  Well, one of the students is--who was up there, you know, [HistoryMaker] Stan Lathan, the--his brother was Ron's [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] classmate.
Speaker 1: Stan Lathan is in production--
Speaker 2: Production company.
Speaker 1: --in California.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: His brother--he went to Penn State also.  He and his brother--his brother was a couple years ahead of me and his--Stan is a couple years behind me.  But I knew Bill [William] Lathan.  His brother's also--his brother's a physician, but he's also an actor--he's also in theater.  And who else was up there with us?
Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson there when you were there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The historian?  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was there with, with Ron.  I'm trying to think of who else was in the--was up there with us, who--I can't think of any notable--
Speaker 1: Or friends.  They don't have to be necessarily people we know, but--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --people that made an impact on you, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, people who made an impact on me that--my classmates.  There was a girl that I--who--from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who ended up marrying a guy that went to [Taylor] Allderdice [High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with me, we were both--she was a premed major.  I was a--I, I started out in prelaw because I didn't know what I wanted to do, and they give you these tests and they said I should go into law, but I didn't do that.  But anyway, I ended up in medical technology, which it--which you could use as premed if you wanted, but you didn't have to do all the--everything premed.  And Phil [ph.], Philacine [ph.]--we called her BoBo [ph.]--and I--she lived across the hall from me and we, we went to--we've--she's, she's a--she just retired as business school dean at UCLA [UC Davis Graduate School of Management, Davis, California] at--University of California at Davis, but we both had similar careers in that we--I did mine the reverse of hers.  She went--after she married, she went right to graduate school and then she had her children, and I did the reverse, so--but we've--you know, we've kept in contact because of our--and I just saw her just a couple weeks ago--a couple--about a month ago.  So she and I were, were close and--I'm trying to think of who else was--I see all the--I mean, we're still in contact with, with my--with those--with the kids from my--from my class and the class behind me.  I was--I had a lot of friends in the class behind me because I switched my major, so the kids that were in the sciences that were behind me were in the same--I was in the same--taking the same courses as they, so--but we all--we were all literally--in my freshman year, we were all having a good time and--because none of us had had that kind of freedom, and we had to really get it together and get focused in, in our sophomore year and continue after that.
Story_ID: 215768
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Any professors make a impact on you that you can really--anybody who was a mentor or--
Speaker 2: There was a--I did an extern--an internship in--under a guy by the name of Louis Metevia [ph.].  He was a guy from Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and he was a, a--he was a grad student working on a Ph.D. and I worked in this research lab, and he really got me involved in how to thoroughly research a project--a--and the import--not the importance, but the significance of what research can really do and how it starts out.  And I ended up--that's what I--where, where I ended up working when I finished school as a result of having been involved with him.  But, you know, I'll be honest with you.  Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] is a very large university as you know, and professors, by the time you get to your senior year, you then will become involved with a professor.  And I must say that I didn't really have any close, close relationships with any of the--with any of my professors.  I can't--I mean, I liked them and I was close to several, but not to the point that I remember it today.
Story_ID: 216441
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you meet your husband [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] in--at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my freshman year.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then he graduated and then I had to settle down and get to work.  Then, we had a long distance romance for three years.
Speaker 1: So did you get married right after--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: --after school or?
Speaker 2: I came out and I worked at--I worked in a--as a research--a researcher at the University of Pittsburgh in the medical school [University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and then--I did that for a year and then we got married.  And Ron had graduated from law school by then and we moved to Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now was he practicing law in Connecticut that--
Speaker 2: No, we, we had assumed that he would practice law in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but when he finished law school, he, he was second in his class and he got a fellowship to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] to get a masters in law, and a masters in law is a teaching degree.  So, the end--that was--he never practiced and we ended up back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and his job offers were the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] which we were not going to go to.  It was funny because the guy was a southerner and we--he was saying--this was 1963, and he said, "Now, Ron, I want you to look at the University of Akron."  So, I'm thinking, he's talking about this, and the guy was from Mississippi.  So I'm thinking, I said, "Why is he talking to us about a university in Mississippi in 1963?"  But his accent was so thick that he wasn't saying Akrin [ph.]--we--I thought it was Acorn or Alcorn--he was saying Akron.  So once we figured that out, we said, no we're not going there.  And the other choice was some university in the Midwest in North Dakota, the University of Masuku [ph.] in Africa in Ghana, and Duquesne University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so we were grateful to get the job at Duquesne University.  Those options were not very exciting, so that's how we ended up back in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Were you--were you glad to be back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] with your family and--
Speaker 2: I had mixed feelings because I had been so bound and determined to leave Pittsburgh that I couldn't believe that I was coming back to Pittsburgh.  But, you know, my parents [Joseph W. Loftin and Thelma McMullen Loftin] were there.  We [Davenport and her husband, HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] had a young baby and we told my parents, we said, "Don't get adjusted to this.  We're only gonna be here three to five years, max," and we've been there ever since (laughter), so--but, yes, I really did--I wasn't--I wasn't excited about going home but I wasn't--you know, I wasn't upset, I just could not believe that of all the cities in the world, in the United States that I would end up back in Pittsburgh.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, one, one of the choices is Akron [Ohio], you know, too (laughter).
Speaker 2: Or--those--that's my other point.  I was going to family either way.  So--but Akron is smaller than Pittsburgh, so we definitely took Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 216442
Speaker 1: So you had your children I think first before you went back to graduate school then, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had all my children before I went back to graduate school.  I--we were going to--on vacation, we were going to the Bahamas, and I said to Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport], "I am sick of filling out these applications of putting occupation, housewife."  I said, "I have got to do something about this.  I think it's time for me to go back to school."  And this was about nineteen--I had always gone back to school--I had always taken courses.  I took--because I could take courses very--for a very nominal fee at Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So while Ron was there starting in '63 [1963], I think in '64 [1964], I started, I'd just take a course.  I took--I took every art history course they had, I took literature courses, and then I decided to take a course in cell biology to see if those juices were still flowing and that's when I decided, okay, I know what I've gotta do.  And I said I'm gonna do something in the sciences.  So I decided to apply for--I said I gotta do something.  That was the women's movement.  All my--everyone was back in school doing something.  I said, I gotta do something.  So I went to--I applied to the [University of Pittsburgh] Graduate School of Public Health [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and my kids were six--let's see Ronnie was probably about eight--eight or ten, and--ten, eight, and five.
Speaker 1: Now this is at Duquesne graduate school?
Speaker 2: No, this is Pitt--
Speaker 1: Pitt, okay.
Speaker 2: --Graduate School of Public Health.  See when I was going to school before, the kids were in school or I had a babysitter, was taking one class, you could figure it out, it wasn't difficult.  But, you know, graduate school is a little bit more difficult, so I--it's a little bit more structured, not as structured as dental school, but, you know, more structured.
Story_ID: 216443
Speaker 1: So I had to do a thesis and I did my thesis on a dental health program in--at the--at Allegheny General Hospital [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] which was a program in which kids got dental treatment if their parents signed a form but the parents didn't have to be there.  Most of the reason--one of the main reasons children do not seek--I mean children don't have proper dental care is because the parents are responsible for seeing to it that they get to the dentist.  So this was a way--this program was a way of taking the responsibility of getting the child to the office away from the parent by them signing a note.  And the school was involved.  There was a bus that would go to the school on certain days, these kids would come in, and they were brought into our clinic.  So this program really fascinated me.  I just--it was wonderful.  It was a great program and I saw these kids getting all kinds of dental care and, you know, I was--and I'd always had dental problems of my own.  So I said to one of the doctors in the program, I said, "Dr. [Harold] Binstock, you know, I--you know, I think I'm really just a frustrated dentist.  I really should've gone to dental school."  So he said, "Judy, it's not too late."  So I said, "What do you mean?"  So he said, "What did you major in?  What's your grade"--so I told him, I said, " I was in medical technology but it was--you know, I said I had all--every chemistry course they offered, I had physics, I had math," I said--he said, "Why don't you apply to dental school?"  So I said, "Do you really think so?"  So he said, "Yeah."  So I applied.  I got the application and I just, stupidly, I just went and sat in at the--took the DAT, the Dental Aptitude Test, and I did poorly on the aptitude test.  Well, I was furious with myself.  So I said, get your brain together, get the book.  There is a book on the Dental Aptitudes.  Everybody studies for the Med CATs [Medical College Admission Test (MCAT)].  I remember kids studying for the Med CATs when I was in college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  Get the book, do the homework, take the test--retake the test.  So I did that and I did very well on the test, so I took my application, et cetera, up to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and they said, "Well, you know, you look like a strong student, but, you know, we're not--why don't you take organic chemistry in the summer?"  Well, organic chemistry I had already had, and I said, "I already had organic."  They said, "Yeah, but, you know, maybe it was--it's old."  Organic is never old, but anyway, so they made me--they suggested that I take this organic chemistry course, which was four weeks, four hours a day, and I took the course and I did very well in the course.  They didn't make me take the lab, but I took the course.  And I took my grade in to the dean of admissions and he said, "You got a B in organic chemistry in the four-week summer program?  Most kids fail."  I said, "Yes."  He said, "You're in."
Story_ID: 216444
Speaker 1: I was accepted [to the University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Now, there was one other little problem that I had been accepted and the dean--he said I was accepted but I didn't have my letter.  The dean wanted to interview me.  Well, this is 1975, the summer of '75 [1975] or the--yeah, the summer of '75 [1975], and he wanted to interview me with my husband [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport].  So, you know, we go in there and I came out of that interview, I was furious because he never really talked to me.  Essentially, if my husband had said he didn't want me to go to dental school, I wouldn't have been in.  I said this is ridiculous.  I mean, I thought the interview was for me, you know.  I don't know why--I couldn't figure out why Ron was there in the first place.  But essentially, what he was saying was--because my husband was a dean at the time, dean to dean, tell me how you feel about this.  It was awful, absolutely awful.  But, I did get in.  But that was--I will never forget him for that (laughter).  Then he--I mean, he was fine ever since--after that, I never--I never had a problem with him, but he did do that little bit of dirt and I said, "Ron"--when we left, I said, "What was that about other than if you say no, I don't get in."  Because I had--you know, they said I'll type up your letter, he told me you're in, and then I get this call to come to the dean's office, so it's little tidbits of sexism, but the rest was history (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, some kind of politics on campus I guess or something, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, I think--
Speaker 2: You think they thought they might lose him if they didn't try to figure out--
Speaker 1: No, no, no--I think what he was--
Speaker 2: --where he stood or?
Speaker 1: I think what he was saying is that he knew the responsibilities of a dean, as a dean of the dental school, and he wanted to know if Ron was in favor of this commitment on my part and whether it was going to interfere with his--sexism.  That's the only thing, the only way to describe it, but Ron was very acquiescing and he, too, was furious, but we got over it.  And that was it.
Story_ID: 216445
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how was dental school [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Now dental school was serious business.  Graduate school doesn't even apply.  Dental school is a serious--I mean, you know, any professional school is serious and it's, it's not, you know, a course here, a course there.  It's a four-year commitment and you have to do it eight hours a day, eight to ten hours a day, not counting studying.  But what--with me, we immediately formed a study group and there were--my class brought in more women than there were at the dental school at the time.  There were nineteen women in my class and there were one, two, three, four, five, five black women.  And one of the girls was a girl that had gone to my church, so I've--I knew her, and another girl was from Detroit [Michigan], and another girl was from North Carolina, but she was one of those that was recruited by them.  She was a theater arts major.  They sent her to New London to--this is--remember this is 1970, in the '70s [1970s], all the money was going around.  They sent her to New London to take the courses and to qualify and then they accepted her to Pitt, and then, you know, they paid her tuition, they paid her child--she had a child, they paid his school--it was--anyway, Norma [ph.] flunked out clean.  But Mona [ph.], Debbie [ph.], and I, you know, struggled and we really--they met at my house every night Monday through Thursday.  We did not study on Friday or Saturday--so, pardon me, Sunday through Thursday.  And I was married, they were not, so I had the house and I could also feed them, which was important.  Whatever we had leftover, they would eat.  And, you know, every night from eight thirty--from eight o'clock until whenever we finished, sometimes it was two, three in the morning, we, we hit the books, and it was that support group.  And we're friends to this day.  Debbie--I'm a godmother to Debbie's children.  I, I just talked to her just the other day, so--and Mona, you know, they--we've been, you know, we--that was a very--it was a--considering--I told you about my high--my college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], it was--it was a very close-knit relationship that I really didn't have in, in college.  It was that bonding.  We knew exactly what we were doing.  We were focused.  We all--I mean, we just kind of--and that's why Norma just couldn't hang with us.
Story_ID: 216446
Speaker 1: And it [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was tough.  I mean, we [Davenport's study group of women] were--we have all cried many a day in the bathroom because the professors were racist, they were sexist, and--you know, and they were just downright mean, so we had each other.  One day I had said I was dropping out.  I said, "I'm not taking this, I'm quitting," (laughter).
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Well, professors--we had a professor who my kids, my kids said, "My mother has this dental school--this course called Virgilio [ph.], it's really--he's--it's really, really mean."  That was the professor's name (laughter), you know.  But, he was mean.  I mean, he would just do things to make you, you know, crack.  And then he was sleeping with one of our classmates, which, but anyway that was another story.  But he would do things like you'd have to make these bridges and he would--there was--you had to solder, and he would check the--"Not hard enough."  I mean, he--they were cruel.  Believe me, they were cruel.  They were very, very difficult.  You--I mean, all the women.  Every day, you could see in that bathroom, there was somebody in there crying.  Somebody had messed over one of us.  But the women kind of--you know, we all kinda bonded and--but it was tough along with the racism.  So--but literally, sexism was worse.  Racism, eh.  And the guys had that too, but it really wasn't racism, it was sexism.  And every woman in that dental school class--any--everyone women in the dental school who came through that dental school will tell you the same thing.
Story_ID: 216447
Speaker 1: And we did have one black professor who took us all aside at the beginning of the year and he said, "Look, the dental school [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] is tough, but you got here and you'll get out if you do things the right way."  And the right--he said, "I'm going to meet with you, all who want to come in after school," class was over at five o'clock, "after school for an hour, hour and a half, and I'm gonna give you the hints on how to make sure that you pass."  And everybody who went to that class finished.  Those who came in sometimes a little bit late, "Oh I can't make it this afternoon"--but he told us, he said, "Dental school is like an escalator.  They don't let you in if they don't think you can get off.  And once you get in, you can ride to the top unless you do something stupid, such as keep walking backwards (laughter)."  And, and literally, I mean, Dr. Watson [ph.], he was proudest of our class because we had more blacks than any other kids--any other class, and we all came out on time, had our practicals, passed the boards.  We did everything just like he told us and, you know, that was--but he was--you talking about a mentor, he was a mentor.  And, you know, we were--that was so unlike my undergraduate experience (laughter).  But it was tough.  I mean, it was--
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you came out in seventy--
Speaker 1: '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: '79 [1979], okay.
Story_ID: 216448
Speaker 1: So did you set up practice immediately in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I went to practice with a group of friends who had a practice in Pittsburgh, and I started--I took the summer off because I said, "I am going to the vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] and I'm gonna spend two months on the vineyard.  I am not going to do anything."  So that was my--I took my--that summer off and I went back to Pittsburgh, and I started working the day after Labor Day for these two guys who had a very nice practice in Shadyside [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I had been there two weeks, maybe three--it was the end of September.  I will never forget the date, it was the night the [Pittsburgh] Pirates [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] won the [Major League Baseball] World Series.  The office burned to the ground.  I couldn't believe it.  The office burned to the ground.
Speaker 1: Did it have anything to do with the World Series or?
Speaker 2: No, it had nothing to do with the World Series.  But that's just how I remember the day--it--the same day.  I couldn't believe it.  So here I was out of a job.  I mean, they were trying to--you know, there were friends who let people--let them use their office and, you know--I had so few--I hadn't been there a month, I mean I (laughter) didn't have many patients.  So I went to--I went to the dental school [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I told the dean who had--didn't want--wanted--who had to interview my husband [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport], that I--you know, my plight.  So he says, "Okay, Judy, he says, well right now"--there was a professor of mine, Dr. Jani [ph.], an Indian, who needed a, a--wanted to go to India for six weeks or four, four months.  So he said, "Why don't--Dr. Jani was one of your professors and I think he speaks highly of you, why don't you talk to him because I know he wants to go to India."  So I did and I, I worked Dr. Jani's practice for about--for four months while he was in India, but that still was--I didn't wanna work there.  So my dear dean said, "Oh, Judy, I have the perfect job for you."  So I said, "What?"  So he calls me and he tells me to go to the VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs].  And I went to the VA and interviewed, but--and I got the job, but I didn't want it and I didn't take it.  He was upset with me because I know he had pulled strings.  But I didn't want that job because it was these old men setting--you know, it's a VA hospital.  He said, "Well it has benefits and everything, you'll"--I said, eh.  So anyway, I didn't take the job.  So, of course, that meant that I had also burned my bridges at the dental school.  And at that time, there was a--they were starting this new thing, department store dentistry, and one of my professors, an orthodontist, was working there.  And this guy who started it was looking for a dentist.  Of course he wanted rookies because he didn't wanna--didn't wanna pay us that much.  So anyway, I went there and he hired me and he hired another one of my classmates.  So--and that--the concept was good but Alan [ph.] had a few problems, which I wasn't really comfortable with and--it start--the first year was great.  Second year, one of the funders pulled out, got sick, and after that it went downhill.  So anyway, Alan was going to fire me because I wouldn't write his drugs for his friends, so I said, "Hey, you know, I guess I have to go."  So, I said, "You're not gonna fire me because I'm quitting."  And at that time, we didn't have a restrictive covenant.  So, a friend of mine was three blocks away, so I moved in, I shared space with this guy, I started my own practice, nineteen-seven--1982, and I practiced for eighteen, eighteen years in downtown Pittsburgh, and that's, that's just how it, it happened.
Story_ID: 216449
Speaker 1: Were your, your clients mixed basically or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  My practice was probably 60/40 white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--it was a general practice.  I even--I'm even in the book.  I even have a little book over here of--I'm in the book, 'Going to the Dentist' [Fred Rodgers].  Mr. Rogers' first experience book was filmed in my office.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I'll show it to you.  I'll show it to you.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mr. Rogers first--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I'll show it to you.
Speaker 1: Well that's something.
Speaker 2: And I had a lot--I mean, I don't know why, but I love what I did and I thought I was a good dentist.  I was--I'm in the African American museum [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History] in Detroit [Michigan].  I'm in the video, 'Women in Dentistry' at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  We've, you know--the--my career as a dentist is probably the most fulfilling part of my life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What--what'd you like the most about it?
Speaker 2: Well, what I really liked about it is the, the fact that you could make really a difference.  You could make a difference in someone.  And a person comes to you and you can--even if you don't do it yourself, sometimes it's a period--a process in which you say, "Okay, well we can do--we'll start here and then I'm gonna refer you to so-and-so, and then you're gonna do this, and then you're gonna do this, and then you're gonna do this, but at the end, you're really gonna have a beautiful smile," and that's, that's what makes it all worth while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dental--it seems to me, the dental problems--I mean, dentistry is not, not that old a profession as such.  In fact--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it's very old.
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of--well, in the old days, like barbers could--would pull your teeth, and, and if you had a toothache or they would treat people--I mean, in terms of a, a scientific practice and stuff like that.  Martin Delany in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was, was a dentist at--in the beginning.  He was trained to pull teeth.  A lot of pictures you see from 19th century people aren't smiling.  And I think--it's not just because of the shutter speed--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --of the camera either.  I think it's because they probably didn't have a lot of teeth.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's absolutely right.  Right.  But dentistry, dentistry has changed so drastically from, you know, what it used to be.  First of all, we don't just, you know, pull teeth.  When in doubt, take it out.  We--that's--you don't do that.  You know, we--you, you treat the whole mouth, not just the symptomatic tooth.  I mean, you treat the tooth, but you look at the mouth as a whole rather than just the tooth that's bothering you today.  So you have to understand that, you know, if you take this tooth out, the impact that it's gonna have on your whole mouth versus just the fact that you're in pain, so let me just take this tooth out, which makes a difference in the way--you know, I never talk to a person in pain because a person in pain doesn't care about tomorrow.  They are only interested in getting the pain eliminated.  So if I had a patient who came to me with, you know, excruciating pain, what I would do is I would numb the patient up, let them sit.  You know, you can be--you become rational after your pain is gone.  But when you're in pain, you are irrational.  And you don't care if it's your front tooth.  You want it out, you want it done, you'll deal with the pain--you'll deal with the replacement tomorrow, but right now--so, the thing about dealing with the whole mouth rather than the problem as it presents itself is one of the beauties of dentistry.  Because you talk--after you're out of pain, then you can talk to a person.  But you can't talk to someone who's in pain.  It's just ridiculous.  They are only interested in one thing.  So the nice--what I like about dentistry is that you, you have the opportunity to present a whole list of things, a whole range.  Because there--you don't--you don't have to do this, you don't have to do this.  You have option A, B, C.  I say always--I would tell my patients, I said, "Look, you can ride in a Chevy, you can ride in a Cadillac, you can ride in a Rolls.  They're all gonna get you to the same place, but what are you really looking for?  So--but you have options.  You can decide.  If you wanna buy the Cadillac, fine.  You--if you don't wanna buy the Cadillac, fine.  But know that you do have the option of going really to the top or just, you know"--so.
Story_ID: 671343
Speaker 1: Off camera we were talking about how trips to the dentist used to be for middle age people, especially--they'd go to the dentist and come back with no teeth, right?
Speaker 2: No teeth, and then they were without them for six weeks.  And today, even if you have to have dentures, you know, we do immediate dentures.  And immediate dentures are absolutely fabulous.  Because you take a person who really was looking very, very bad.  I'm talking about gross decay or pyorrhea, whatever you wanna call it.  But today, we take an impression, we make them a set of teeth and when you--when you take the teeth out, you immediately put in something, so they look better immediately, immediately.  When they leave, they automatically look--and it gives you--it gives you a sense of self-worth when you--when your teeth are really, really--when you're--it gives you a sense of self-worth to go from having looked horribly, which you were talking like this all the time (covering mouth) to being able to smile, and it's an immediate thing.  It's not something that you--I call it the immediate gratification denture because you come in looking bad, you leave looking great, and you're happy as a clam.  But--so you don't have to wait six weeks to--for your gums to heal.  All that, it's old school stuff.  You don't have to do that.  And--I mean, assuming the health of a person.  I mean, you know, there, there are conditions in which you cannot do that immediately, but--and dentures, the best set of dentures, 15 percent as effective as your own teeth.
Speaker 1: Is that fifty or?
Speaker 2: Fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen percent effective.
Speaker 2: As effective as your own teeth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now let's, let's look at this figure, now.  What are we losing with dentures?  I mean, 15 percent is--doesn't seem to be very much.
Speaker 2: It's not.  But it doesn't mean--it just--the point is to let you know how effective your own teeth are.  Because you can go side-to-side, back, forth, all these things without, you know, your jaw moving because these are the teeth in your jaw.  But when you have dentures, you have to chew on both sides at the same time to get an effective bite.  So you might--you--I'm sure you have a favorite side for chewing, everybody does.  Not with dentures.  You don't chew on both sides at the same, they're gonna rock.  That's, that's the big--that's the biggest problem.  Plus, you have no taste.  You know, where do you get the taste at the tongue of your mouth?  (Laughter) I mean, just--it, it--it's, it's weird, but think about it.  Very, very weird.  That little plastic up there doesn't really tell you whether it's salty or not (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 671344
Speaker 1: For the black community, what has all these changes meant?  I mean, is dentistry more affordable for black--
Speaker 2: Yes it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) folks now and more accessible?
Speaker 2: --because you can get affordable dentistry.  You--there's really no excuse for not going to the dentist today.  You can find a dentist.  The problem is, there are dental--first of all, when in doubt, go to the dental school.  That's always your best bet.  It takes time, you have to be patient, but the dental school is where they--you know, the students are working under a professor.  And if you have a really bad case, they'll take you in the graduate program.  But there are so many opportunities.  Dentists are opening up everywhere.  Now I'm not saying that it's the best dentistry available, but that's why I say, when in doubt, if you have a serious problem, go to the dental school if you don't--if you're not going to go to a private dentist versus some of these clinics.  Because some of these clinics, like I said, I started out as a rookie in 1979 at a department store and, you know, I was a rookie just like everyone else.  It used to be that when you graduated from dental school, you went to the service, and the service trained you; it really--it really did.  But kids today are coming out of dental school, they're so in debt, so in debt.  Dental school is very expensive.  They're so in debt, they take these jobs, they're doing things, anything to make money to try and pay back the debts.  Because when I came out of dental school [University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], companies were there.  Here, I'll set you up.  They were willing to give you loans.  Those days are gone.  So, you know, kids--you don't have--literally, if you don't have a parent who has a practice for you to go into or you don't know somebody, it's gonna be very, very hard in the cities, major cities, to make it on your own.  I would be hard-pressed to do what I did twenty years ago today.  You--unless I'm in a small town.  A small town, the insurance method, a payment, you just--it's--it would be very, very difficult, if not impossible to do--first of all, you normally come out of school--I came out of school debt-free fortunately, but most, most don't.  And you have all those loans to pay back.  So your choices are the service, the public health--the--there's a public health program or one of these clinics.  And the problem with so many of these clinics is that you get--you start learning bad habits.  And dentistry is one of those things in which you make a little mistake in the initial--in the initial preparation, by the time you're ready to put the crown on, you know, it's--oh, your--it's, it's--it multiplies.  And it's, it's a very precise science.  It's a very precise science.  And, you know, we deal in millimeters and, you know, you have to be--you just have to be very careful.  And if you go into one of these programs and you're fresh out of school, I mean, you've learned, but, you know, you're--school is still school (laughter).  You've learned, but when you're putting these things into practice and you don't have anyone looking over your shoulder, if you don't--if--and, and you can, you know, you can kinda fudge this and fudge that, but it really--and that's what happens in a lot of these clinics.  Because now they're just trying to make money and they want you to make X amount, and that's what you're gonna get paid on.  So, you know, you're production oriented rather than perfection oriented.
Story_ID: 671345
Speaker 1: So you say, dentists--well, dental care is, is more accessible now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --than it's ever been.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And they have all these programs for kids, CHIP [Children's Health Insurance] Program, that's the one in--one in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], so--through, through Highmark Blue Shield [Pennsylvania], they have all these--they had a lot--you can get dental care today.  There's really no excuse.  And then you have to have a dental exam to get into--every kid has to have one I think it's first and third grade, so--you, you--it's not like you've not been exposed.  You have to have it in the public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how--I mean, are, are there certain dental problems that are common to black people?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what are they?
Speaker 2: Primarily for black man, it's a prognathic jaw, the lower jaw is bigger than the--sits out more than the upper jaw.  That's the--that's the main problem.  That's a problem with black males.  And today, it's so--you know, I--I've seen kids who were six years old who came in and their lower teeth were in front of their upper teeth, and today you can do so many things.  I look at those kids--you see them when they're about five years old and the parents are very upset because the jaw, it's not working.  And we send them--it's so treatable.  And I look at these kids, I see them in two years, and their teeth are fine, and it's like amazing.  So there are lots--there are lots of things that you can do, especially if you address problems early, so many problems.  And so much cheaper to do it when you address it early.  And you were talking about blacks, well the lower jaw grows faster, but if you take out all the teeth, you'll see people with like a witch's chin.  The lower--if that's--even if they have upper teeth, they remove the lower teeth, that chin will start to drift.  So you need, you know, to keep your teeth as long as you can, especially the lowers.  Anyone--an upper denture, anyone can wear an upper denture unless you have a cleft palate or something.  Lower dentures are very difficult to fit (background noise), very difficult, much more difficult than an upper.
Story_ID: 671346
Speaker 1: Are you a member of any of the black dental societies or?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I'm not a member of any of them.  I keep my license--
Speaker 1: But you did--you were, were at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I keep my license and I keep my, my drug license, and my Pennsylvania license.  That's all I keep now.
Speaker 1: When you came out of school [University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], were, were you a member of the American Dental Association?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then there was a--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a National Dental Association?
Speaker 2: There's a National Dental Association.  I joined that.  I was a member of that for a couple--for a few years.  I didn't really stay with that because the--my office that had burned down--when I joined, when I started in that office, they were very big into the NDA, and I joined.  And then, I don't know what happened, but it kind of--I could never make their meetings, which were always in August, and I just kinda drifted away, and it was just another fee for me to pay, so--
Speaker 1: It wasn't of particular use to you at that point.
Speaker 2: No, it really wasn't to me personally.  I know, you know, many--my classmates, they're involved.  But it wasn't really--it wasn't really useful to me.  And you have to remember that I was an older student.  I graduated--I turned forty the year I graduated from dental school, so I wasn't--you know, it wasn't something that I was going to really get involved in.  I--you know, as I said, I joined it.  I think I was in it for about five years and then I, I just kinda let it go and I stayed with the ADA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how, how long did you practice?
Speaker 2: Twenty years.
Speaker 1: Twenty?  Okay.
Story_ID: 671347
Speaker 1: Now, during this period of time, now, you all are involved in broadcasting, too.  You started becoming involved in broadcasting--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --so how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: We [Davenport and her husband, HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] started the broadcasting company [Sheridan Broadcasting Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in 1972 and we had said this was gonna be our way to make sure our kids could go to any college that they wanted to go to.  And Ron was still at the law school [Duquesne University School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I was just finishing up a degree in public health, couldn't find a job.  That's the other thing, in 1972--when I graduated from--'73 [1973], from [University of Pittsburgh] Graduate School of Public Health [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the bottom was falling out in the social welfare programs, and the very program that started, started me going to dental school [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was cut, and they were cutting all--so many of the programs.  And I said, "Well, you know," I wanted to go to dental school and I said, you know, "I better hedge my bets.  I better go to dental school."  Because going to dental school versus medical school--people ask why I went to medical--didn't go to medical school.  I had no desire to go to medical school.  I worked in the hospital and I had no intentions of ever being a doctor, but a dentist, fine.  So, I said, the nice thing about a dental--dentistry is that four years in and you're out.  You don't have to do an internship; you don't have to do anything.  All you have to do is pass your boards and you can start practicing immediately.  And by the time I came out of dental school, my son was in--I came out in '79 [1979]--he was in tenth grade, eleventh grade, so by the time I started working, you know, I was making--and I was making good money, I really was making very good money working over there at the--that dental center.  So this was a way of a guaranteed income four years after you finish school.  So that--and we really didn't do anything with the radio station.  We just--we thought that someone else would live our dream.
Story_ID: 671348
Speaker 1: Now what station did you buy and how did you come into that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We bought four radio stations.  In 1972, we bought WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], WILD [WILD Radio] in Boston [Massachusetts], WAMO--AMF [ph.] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], WILD in Boston, and WUFO [WUFO Radio] in Buffalo [New York].
Speaker 1: Now what gave you the idea to buy radio stations or did you come into--
Speaker 2: Well, Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] and I were talking and we would always talk about ways in which we could, you know, have an independent source of income, and we thought about banks, banking, and we thought about newspapers.  And Ron is a very--he's a big reader of biographies, and he had noted that many people had made their, gotten start in, in radio, and one of them was [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson.  So we were looking and he said, you know, black radio, radio is an interesting thing.  We didn't care if it was black, white, green or indifferent.  But we figured if we were into black radio, whatever we were in, we, we wanted something that did not make us dependent on white folks for an income.  So this opportunity--Ron had a student who was researching the opportunities for--in broadcasting, banking, and newspapers.  Because John [H.] Sengsacke was a friend; we knew the [Pittsburgh] Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] people.  So anyway, it turned out that these four radio stations were available, and we started getting excited about it, you know.  I said--I said, "Ron, that's the old station that they rejected mom from, you know (laughter) that?"  So he said, "Yes."  So we--you know, we put together--there were about four of us, Maggie [ph.], Art [ph.], Reagan [ph.]--there were four of us.  We put together a group and the bank--we put some money in, but the bank lent us the money to buy these radio stations.  And Ron had--Ron was very active in our community and he had made some very good friends, and one of them was a banker and--Johnny Myer [ph.], vouched for us to get this loan.  He was president of Mellon Bank [Mellon Financial Corporation; BNY Mellon, New York, New York], and that's how we got the loan.  But we--you know, we hired the staff, and we thought, oh, this will be ideal, we'll just live off this income.  But, you know, (laughter) it doesn't work that way often--very often.
Story_ID: 671349
Speaker 1: So we ended up--Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] was dean  and he was being kicked around as the dean at the law school [Duquesne University School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and he wanted to retire--resign, but he wanted to build a building, so he built the building and then he resigned and he went to work with--as a rainmaker at a law firm, which fortunately, his secretary, Kathy [ph.], who is still with him today--she went also and, and we realized that this was--I knew it was a mistake from the day he went there, but he stayed--he decided to stay.  And--
Speaker 2: Now what is a rainmaker at a law firm?
Speaker 1: A person who brings in money (laughter), brings in business and essentially.  So finally--and Ron wasn't doing much raining (laughter), wasn't making much rain, so he said, "Why am I making money for them?"  He gave them a big client and then he, he says, "Why am I doing this for them?  I have a business.  I could make my own money."  So with--Kathy and I--by this time, she was miserable there and she said, "Judy [HistoryMaker Dr. Judith M. Davenport], we gotta do something."  I said, "Kathy, I hate it, Ron's miserable, I'm miserable," so she said--I said, "Kathy, you work on him at your end and I'll work on him at my end to go and run our business," because we weren't really satisfied with this guy who was running our business who had begun to think that it was his business, that he had founded it.  So, bottom line, Ron left the law firm, went over to the business, and he's been there ever since.
Speaker 2: Now, was it already named Sheridan Broadcasting [Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: That's our--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: No, we named it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We named it Sheridan Broadcasting.  We had a little contest in the family, "So what are we gonna call the business?"  We--after no one could come up with a name, we lived on Sheridan Avenue [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and we were not very original.  We called it Sheridan Broadcasting Corporation (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Simple.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now how did you all decide on format for the--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was already urban contemporary.  There were black radio stations at the time.  We didn't have to do any of that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there was already--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 2: These stations already were--had a certain kind of programming.  Did you--did you think about how to make 'em different or anything or how to make 'em--
Speaker 1: Remember, we weren't even working there.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We were--we--none of that happened until 1984 when Ron went to work for the--for, for us, for himself, that's when you start to think about, you know, what are we doing?  How can we be different?  How can we do this?  Blah-blah-blah-blah-blah.  But before that, no, we weren't--we never--we thought this was just our little cash cow that was gonna (laughter)--doesn't work that way.
Speaker 2: So you have to get involved to really make it work?
Speaker 1: You have to get involved, yeah.  I didn't get involved because by then, I was practicing.  But, yeah, Ron did it full-time.
Story_ID: 671350
Speaker 1: Now in terms of your own activities in the community, you--you've been a volunteer for several--
Speaker 2: Oh, I've been volunteering for years.
Speaker 1: --things, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm involved with--my--right now, my biggest project is Carlow College [Carlow University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]; I'm the board chair, and it's a major job.  It's almost like a full-time job.  And I'm also a board member of the Howard Heinz Endowment [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which in today's world as you--the political situation, is also major, major, time consuming--we meet twice a year, two days a year--I mean, four days a year.  And I'm involved with the Alvin Ailey [American] Dance Theater [New York, New York], the Carnegie Museum [Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Pittsburgh Public Theater [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and a few other things, but I'm a busy person.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now how did you get involved with Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 2: Well, they were looking for--they were talking to my--to Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] about being on their board, and Ron said--I don't know anything about dance.  He said, "You should talk to my wife," because I served on the board of the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] since its inception, so I do quite a bit about, you know, dance and running a--not running a--I knew the--as a board member how dance companies operate.  So they called me and we met and we talked, and, and I love dance, so they asked me to--I asked to see their numbers and they said everything was fine, and I said, "Fine, good."  So I said, "Are you getting ready for a capital campaign because, you know, you"--they'll wanna jump onto the board and they're gonna ask you for a ton of money.  And they said, "No, no, no."  So I went to my first board meeting in November.  I saw those numbers--the company is hemorrhaging red.  The next--before I even get that fully in my mind, Alvin Ailey dies, so I'm like, what did I get into?  But we had a, a strong savior in Michael Kaiser who came in and we brought in Judith Jamison, and, you know, it's like, everything's coming up roses.  We are probably--we are the best--we are the--not the best--we have the best financial situation of any dance company in America, so now it's a little easier to serve on the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question--well, before I get into that.  What's your--what's your favorite, I guess, volunteer effort or your, your favorite--your, your--
Speaker 2: What's the one that I'm most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the thing that, that you're the most interested in?
Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey (background noise).  Alvin Ailey's number one.
Story_ID: 671351
Speaker 1: (Background noise) When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  There's one thing.  I would--I would be a better college student [at Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] (laughter).  That's, that's the only thing I would do differently.  I would study a little harder in my, you know, especially my freshman year.  That's--other than that, I think--I don't think I would do one thing differently.
Story_ID: 671352
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are some of your hopes and concerns for, for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, God.  I wish we would just take care of our own.  I wish--I know people talk about Bill Cosby's statement, but I really feel that, you know, we have to be responsible for ourselves, and we cannot expect others to take care of our problems.  Education, we--parents have got to expect more, take an active part in the community, in the school system.  Otherwise--you know, I just read the thing on charter schools.  Charter schools--charter schools are fine but the best way to train, to teach, and to educate kids is through the--is through the public school system.  And, you know, if we strengthened our public school system--systems throughout the country, we would have a much--that's teachers, maybe it's a dress code for kids, I don't know.  But it's some--it, it requires different things in different communities.  But the bottom line is, the parents and the community have got to take responsibility for these kids.  I mean, you know, we just--we just can't expect other people to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Churches, everybody.
Story_ID: 671353
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done up to this point, what would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy, I try not to think about it.  I just think that I would want people to say that, again, never say never.  You can do anything you want to do if you put your mind to it and that's what I told my kids.  Don't tell me that you can't do it, just, you know--if you--you never know until you try.  So, you know, if at first you don't succeed, try, try again.  But, you know, I, I just think that I would never want anyone to say that somebody told them they couldn't do something and, therefore, they believed it and they didn't try or couldn't do it because they were black.  I mean, my parents [Joseph W. Loftin and Thelma McMullen Loftin] would never accept any nonsense like that.  My mother would say, "You went outta here black this morning, so what happened between the time you left and the time you got back that you can't do what you were going out there to do?  What, what does your having black have to do with it?"  So, I mean, we, we would never have used that.  My kids would never use that as an excuse.  And I really think that it's not an excuse.
Story_ID: 671354
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Thelma McMullen Loftin]--well, was your mother around when you finished dental school [University Of Pittsburgh School Of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both my parents were around when I finished dental school.  And the truth, I did forget to mention this, that my father [Joseph W. Loftin]--I should've mentioned this, I forgot--my father was a dental technician, but couldn't get a job, yeah.  I, I remember we had a set of teeth in our house and Jo-Anne [Loftin Bates] and I, we'd play with 'em, but--
Speaker 1: You remember that big tooth from '[The] Howdy Doody [Show],' too?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).  But you couldn't--but he couldn't get a job.  He set teeth, but he couldn't get a job, so, I guess it was kind of, you know, in my genes that I--because he wanted to be a dentist, but he couldn't get a job and then he, he really apprenticed under a dentist, but he didn't have any money to go to school, so--and, you know, the--all this hit around 1929 when my dad was nineteen years of age, 1929.
Story_ID: 671355
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) (Pause) As someone who always made an effort to find--to look for the best in everything and everyone.
