Story_ID: 26657
Speaker 1: Our [The HistoryMakers] videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Robert Philip Dottin, R-O-B-E-R-T P-H-I-L-I-P D-O-T-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 5th, 1943 in Port of Spain, Trinidad.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And Larry can you reintroduce yourself?  I cut off the beginning, sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's all we need.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 1: I am a professor in the Department of Biological Sciences at Hunter College [New York] and I'm also the Director of the Center for Study of Gene Structure and Function at Hunter College.  I'm a scientist.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And well what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is April 11th, 2013.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are at Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, 10065.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 26658
Speaker 1: Now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do have a favorite food.  It's grilled seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think it's green, seems to be that way.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, this time.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Valldemossa which is in Majorca in Spain, a small town.
Speaker 1: And the last one of this series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26659
Speaker 1: All right. Well I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we're going to keep them separate and put them together at some point.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lena Decoteau, L-E-N-A D-E-C-O-T-E-A-U.
Speaker 1: Okay, C-E, I mean D-E-C-O-T-E-A--
Speaker 2: --E-A-U.
Speaker 1: --U, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And now is there a story behind her name?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of, nor from my father either.
Speaker 1: Now Decoteau is French, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I assume it's from some plantation owner or something like that.  I believe that's also the case with Dottin which is my father's name.  I believe that it originated in that way but I'm not sure.  There--at one time people were investigating this family because when I was a post-doctoral fellow in, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] in Cambridge [Massachusetts], I went into a bank one day and when I was leaving the teller shouted out to me, Dr. Dottin, you left something or something like that.  And someone came up to me and said oh, you're a Dottin?  And so he embraced me, invited me to his family reunion which was going to take place the next week but I was going off to Europe and I couldn't.  But then I followed up and got interested in some of the background that he had been pursuing and so I learned that there were some Dottins in Spain and others who had built the Panama Canal, gone from Barbados to build the Panama Canal and many of them after that went either on the West Coast of Seattle or to, on the East Coast to Cambridge and that's where that group was.  And--
Speaker 1: And these are white Dottins?
Speaker 2: There are both kinds I believe.  There were, some of them were from Spain and I, I'm not sure how they were connected but they were part of that group too in the study that they were doing at that time.  And, but most of them were you know sons of slaves and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the fellow that saw you in the bank, was he white or black?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Black, okay, all right.  So you were related to some other Dottins on--
Speaker 2: Many of them from Barbados, yes, who went all over.  It's a small family really.  In Trinidad there are very few Dottins.  I assume that they're relatives but that, or that we're related but we don't know that for sure.  Many of them came from Barbados.
Speaker 1: There's an interaction between all the islands at some point or another but I guess you could, if you moved away from the island of origin, then you would be, it's easy for family to get isolated and not know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right, yes, yeah that happens I'm sure yes.  And sometimes of course they have in big families they have family reunions which bring back people together.  In my family we, the reunions are relatively small among the cousins and so on and so we never really get in touch with people who are distant cousins.  So, and we don't have a big family.
Speaker 1: So what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Grenada and in, May 8th in 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about them?
Speaker 2: Not very far.  My, I know that she has ironically some Scottish ancestry and there's a lot of mixture of course among the children of slaves.  And that she came, she was born in Grenada but had, but then lived most of her life in Trinidad.  She had, I think she was the only child and she lived with cousins and met my father in, I guess in their young adults.
Speaker 1: Did she come over from Trinidad as a youth?
Speaker 2: Yes very, as a very young girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she stayed with cousins you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was brought up by--
Speaker 1: Now did she--what did her parents do for a living do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know her parents so that--my maternal grandparents I know nothing about.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever discuss you know the circumstances and why you know she-- did she come over by herself or with siblings or--?
Speaker 2: I think she came over with these people who basically adopted her.
Story_ID: 26660
Speaker 1: Now did she [Dottin's mother, Lena Decoteau] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: I think her education was relatively limited in formal education, high school and that kind of thing perhaps, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother like pursue like a professional you know--?
Speaker 2: No, she was a homemaker or housewife or did, made some clothes, items of clothing for us and so on as well but wasn't employed in any other way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you from either Grenada or Trinidad?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think she knew very little about her life in Grenada or her parents and so on.  But I knew some of the people who, with whom she lived and who brought her up and you know they were very warm and friendly and so on.  My own recollection is lacking with respect to her background.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did your mother talk about in her aspirations as a youth did she want to you know sing or pursue something that she didn't get a chance to pursue?
Speaker 2: In a vague way because you know she of course, she was very, a very intelligent woman, very savvy and very much focused on the kids.  There were four of us and she really brought us up in ways that were really amazing in my, in retrospect, the amount of energy that she devoted to us and taking us around. She drove us every place and made sure that we you know, we were well prepared for school and so on, and basically fulfilled whatever ambitions that she had through, in a vicarious way in a way, through her children.  She wanted us to be outstanding and to succeed in whatever we did and so--and she was the major parent.  My dad was in with what's called the Merchant Marines I guess and as, and on an, as an engineer on the ship.  And so he was away for long periods while we were very young and so she really managed the household and so on and really took charge, did it very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26661
Speaker 1: Well let's go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: His name is William Chelston Dottin.  Chelston is spelled C-H-E-L-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on May 31st, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, your mother and your father, born in May?
Speaker 2: Yes, many of us in that family.  It's quite coincidental.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well as I mentioned they came from Barbados and I guess my grandfather came from Barbados and he lived in Trinidad.  He worked in a foundry I believe, and I knew him as a child.  When I knew him he was already disabled, didn't walk much.  I believe he had a cane and so on.  And you know I remember him and sort of joking with him and so on.  He lived, I don't know when he was born but he lived to a very old age I think and so did my grandmother whose name was Ruth.  They were very cheerful, supportive kind of people and my father had other sisters, four sisters or three sisters and they also lived in Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your father discuss growing up, what it was like for him growing up in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know he was, he studied a lot.  He was very sort of academic and he was always trying to advance himself taking these foreign exams and so on to qualify for different kinds of, levels of engineering basically and that was something he did all of his life.  He also tinkered a lot with--he loved that kind of activity and taught us that as well, fixing cars and so on when he was not doing, working on ships and that kind of thing.  And he did that his whole, for his whole life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he liked to fix things and?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he also did post-secondary courses that you know gave him the kind of certificates and so on that were required for him to you know, to be qualified as a ship's engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he was a ship's engineer and a Merchant Marine?
Speaker 2: Sort of yeah.  It's what you would now call them Merchant Marines, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he would, where would he sail to?
Speaker 2: Different parts of the world.  As he grew older he, his--you know he did less of that for shorter distances and then worked in places like where ships were being built or repaired in Trinidad.  But you know for many years he went on these journeys to England and sometimes I think to Africa as well and he did a lot of sailing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of any of the ships he--?
Speaker 2: I think one of them was called the 'Ciudad Bolivar'.
Speaker 1: The Sweet--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Ciudad for "city" in Espanol and Bolivar, B-O-L-I-V-A-R, as in Simon, Simon Bolivar [Venezuelan military and political leader. Bolivar played a key role in Latin America's successful struggle for independence from the Spanish Empire, and is today considered one of the most influential politicians in the history of the Americas].
Speaker 1: The George Washington of South America.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26662
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Lena Decoteau and William Chelston Dottin] met and fell in love?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that story.  I know that they courted and they lived in the same area for a long time and--but I believe my sister probably knows that story but I don't.  I know that there was some tension between my parents', my mother's, my mother and her--and my father's family in terms of you know perhaps disapproval or what, I don't know what it was.  But that's what my sister told me anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --father's family didn't approve of your mother?
Speaker 2: I--it may be something like that or his you know some of his relatives.  I, by the time we were growing up there was none of that anymore.  I mean of course the, whatever the difficulties then had been reconciled and I knew my mother's cousins.  They, we played with them as much as we played with my aunts and uncles who were from, on my father's side of the family so that was not an issue in my childhood although it may have been something that my sister learned about that had happened prior to our being around, to us being around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26663
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' [Lena Decoteau and William Chelston Dottin] personalities, their dispositions, their habits, what their interests were, how they walked, how they talked, how they looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: It's an interesting question.  I think I take, with my looks and so on, I think I take after my father.  My, with respect to--I think many of the things that I remember most in terms of values and so on, probably my mother because she was the one who was around most and really sort of inculcated in us a very strong sense of vision and ambition and discipline and so on and she was you know in charge of the household.  My father we sort of feared in a way because you know if--when he came home if we did anything wrong and you know, it was like you know he never really punished us but just the thought of having to face you know this person coming in, it was scary.  But you know he was very loving and welcoming too but--
Speaker 1: But she used him as a threat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right as is often the case now I know.
Speaker 1: Just wait till this big guy comes--
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Story_ID: 26664
Speaker 1: So well, how many siblings do you have and where do you fit in order?  Can you name them all for me?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My oldest sister, her name is Patricia and then I have an older brother whose name is Courtney and I'm third among the four and then I have a younger sister whose name is Catherine, with a C, C-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your family?
Speaker 2: That's my family.  That's my immediate family.
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, did the household consist of you and your brothers and sisters, your mother [Lena Decoteau] and father [William Chelston Dottin]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were there any other relatives that lived with you or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not--from time to time I think we had a cousin who came from Grenada I believe and who would stay with us while she was going to Teachers Training College or something like that.  But usually it was just, it was a simple, nuclear family and that's what I, that's how it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26665
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do.  It was funny because I spoke about this at my mother's [Lena Decoteau] funeral.  Be, it was, we had, where we lived, I remember being afraid of--because I would see the shadows on a window at night moving around and that was as very early memory, kind of scary in a way, until my mother took us, took me out in the middle of the night once, walked me down the street and showed me how the street lamp was shining on the window, and the trees blowing in the wind would cast this moving shadow on the window.  And what I did say at the funeral was that was my first really exposure to physics.  She showed me how, made it much more understandable and logical even though it was in the middle of the night and that was what she did.  She was like that too in a way, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26666
Speaker 1: Now can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in for us and just--and give us a sense of what it was like to grow up in Trinidad.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well it's in the tropics and you know warm and very friendly people.  I remember we were not, we were relatively poor.  My--I guess they would, it would be middle class in Trinidad but we--the place where I remember most was now at--, there was one time when I lived in a place called South Key which is where my father [William Chelston Dottin] lived and I guess I, for some time I might have lived in that house while my mother [Lena Decoteau] was ill I think and my father was away.  But in general we lived in a place called Gloster Lodger.
Speaker 1: Gloster?
Speaker 2: G-L-O-S-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Lodge?
Speaker 2: I guess it was Gloster Lodge Road in Port of Spain [Trinidad] and a small wooden house and I knew some of the neighbors and so on.  Not a lot of space to play or anything like that I think, but still a very kind of a warm place, very friendly.  I walked--my school was a few miles away.  My elementary school that I went to which is called Tranquility and they took me to school.  I remember after a while I protested that I can do it myself and then they--and I got lost one time trying to do it by myself and someone took me on a bicycle and saw me, and took me home.  Of course that would never happen in these days but I knew where I lived and I told this guy and then he just put me on the bar of the bicycle and rode me home, dropped me off.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, must have been very young.  I was in elementary school and probably just after or just going into the first year of elementary school from--
Speaker 1: You were about six years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably something like that, five.  But anyway, so that was where we lived for a while and then we moved to a more kind of suburban place where I spent most of my life in a place called Diego Martin.  And that was where most of my, I spent most of my childhood and teenage years, a very you know middle class kind of place.  My sister still lives there and I thought it was a very privileged environment, not wealthy but you know there were lots of other families around, we had lots of friends and little competitions riding bicycles around a circle or attending--we had movies sometimes on the roundabout.  They would, someone would put the, a friend (unclear) from, who was a neighbor, would show these movies, but you know music and so on.  And that was really very inspiring and a major contribution to sort of community building in a way.  And most of the kids were very successful people in their adults, the ones I remember, a whole group of people, many of whom I still know.  And some of them were in high school with me and others went to different high schools and that was a very rich environment to be, to grow in, to grow up in, I thought.  I still do think so.  And it was certainly not a wealthy environment but you know people with very high standards and expectations and values and sort of a common view, a middle class, ambitious, the Trinidadian dream like the American dream.  People wanted to move on.  So that's the environment I grew up in.
Story_ID: 26667
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well lots of dense vegetation from the hills around and so on.  And the music, quite a bit of music and--
Speaker 1: What kind of music?
Speaker 2: Well in Trinidad the radio was, you know you played, people played music and played the radio and that kind of thing. I listened to the radio a lot for, sort of listened to, at night to the BBC and things like that.  And my, in my family my dad [William Chelston Dottin] wanted us all to learn an instrument.  I was not very good at the piano.  My sister was much better and my brother played the violin and they want--and I was so relieved that I had no skills really.  I turned the pages of the music when he brought guests home to, and then he would want them to perform and I was, I felt lucky that I had no skills because it seemed so, such a horrible experience to have to play for other people.  In retrospect now I regret that I hadn't you know learned enough about playing the piano and so, and although I took many years of lessons and so on.  But I really had no aptitude for it although they did.  And I remember that one of, I made a sort of Faustian deal [Faust is the protagonist of a classic German legend; a highly successful scholar but one dissatisfied with his life who therefore makes a pact with the Devil, exchanging his soul for unlimited knowledge and worldly pleasures] with my mother [Lena Decoteau] when I was in high school because she wanted us to continue learning some instrument.  And I said well if I stayed at the top of my class I could drop the piano and she agreed reluctantly and so that's what I did.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So if you would have slipped, you would have went back to the keyboard?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And now I love music and so I actually--one time, a few years ago I went back to Trinidad for a sabbatical and I worked at the university there.  But I learned to play the pan.  I play the steel pan which is a native instrument there that's a sort of highly developed skill now.  I--not for me, I'm just a beginner still but I really enjoy doing that.
Story_ID: 26668
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about sights and sounds and smells, talking about some of the music that you heard.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now was that just piano, classical music you were listening to in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: No, calypso is a--other kinds of music, rock and roll I guess at that time.  But we were sort of exposed to all of those types, including classical music.  And as I mentioned my brother and sister were far more advanced in that than I was.  But you know later on I sort of developed an appreciation even in high school for music and classical music and things like that, and which I continue to follow.  Later on in life I sort of really picked up on jazz and have been, all my life been sort of following that.  So--
Speaker 1: What about sights and smells?
Speaker 2: Well it's a Caribbean and you know there are lots of beautiful beaches and so on in different parts of the Caribbean.  Trinidad has a few, Tobago which is the other island in this nation, has many more.  I love Tobago in terms of beautiful sights more than I did Trinidad, and I always go back to Tobago whenever I go there.
Story_ID: 26669
Speaker 1: Now Tobago is smaller right [than Trinidad]?
Speaker 2: It's much smaller, much smaller and the population is much smaller as well. And--
Speaker 1: There's no major city there or--?
Speaker 2: No, just Scarborough [capital city of Tobago] and it's a simpler life.  Trinidad is very hectic.  There's a lot of, well for both countries you know they're developed on energy, oil and natural gas are the main thing sort of in those countries.  It's the largest supplier of liquefied natural gas to the United States and the oil which was discovered in 1910 is now--almost the terrestrial oil is now almost depleted but they continue to discover new fields off shore.  And it's very close to Venezuela as you probably know and so--and Venezuela is also a major supplier of oil too in the United States.  So they've been relatively fortunate compared with other Caribbean Islands because they have benefited from having a large amount of the income, a disproportionate amount of the wealth comes now through oil and gas.  Of course that's only temporary and they will run out of that at some point.  The other islands have a different character because they are more dependent on tourism and Trinidad is not, so you don't find people as kind of you know catering to tourists as much as you would say the Bahamas where you know that's the whole livelihood of the nation depends on being polite to foreigners.  And that has its disadvantages as well as assets too.
Speaker 1: Does that account for, you think that accounts for some of the feisty nature of the Trinidadians and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah.  I think they much more see themselves as you know inferior to none and have--and that's, I think in some respects I think that's a very good thing, but in others of course you sometimes come across as being sort of arrogant or condescending.
Speaker 1: Now I think I've mentioned this to about everybody that we've interviewed from Trinidad but Trinidad is a home of so many political activists and agitators--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --C.L.R. James [Afro-Trinidadian historian, journalist, socialist theorist and essayist], Ross McConin, (Unclear) Moore--
Speaker 2: Right, Tony Martin [Trinidad-born professor of Africana Studies at Wellesley College; lecturer and prolific author of scholarly articles about Black History, primarily the Black Nationalist leader Marcus Garvey].
Speaker 1: Tony Martin who just passed away.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So I mean what was the political situation when you were born in 1943 when you were a little kid?  Had the island achieved independence?
Speaker 2: No, it hadn't achieved independence at that time and it achieved independence in 1961.  I remember I was in high school and I was now recruited as an aide because during the independence celebrations they brought people from all over the world, diplomats.  And we were, a group of students were selected to be liaison aides and I went with the, I was chosen to work with the ambassador from Denmark and we sort of drove around and showed him the place and that kind of thing.  We were trained.  I have a letter from the prime minister, I'll send it to you, which you know sort of congratulates us for doing this kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So what year is this when--?
Speaker 2: It was 1961 I think.
Speaker 1: 1961.  Is that the year of independence?
Speaker 2: Independence, yeah.
Speaker 1: '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: But, so I worked as an aide for the Danish Ambassador then during these celebrations.  Eric Williams [first Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago; served from 1956 until his death in 1981] was the prime minister, the first one.  He's written books about independence and slavery for instance.
Story_ID: 26670
Speaker 1: Of course there are other writers who lived in Trinidad who are famous, Naipaul [Sir Vidiadhar Surajprasad "V. S." Naipaul] having, being one of those.
Speaker 2: Oh, V.S. Naipaul from, that's right, he's from Trinidad.
Speaker 1: He won the Nobel Prize.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And Derek [Anton] Wolcott lived in Trinidad most of his life.  He also won the Nobel Prize.
Speaker 2: The famous playwright and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Derek Wolcott.
Speaker 1: Right, he wrote 'Omeros', which is a long book like Homer's [Iliad and Odyssey]--well he called it 'Omeros'.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: That was Wolcott.
Speaker 2: I know he read--he wrote a play that performed here in New York City that was called 'Dream On Monkey Mountain'.
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  Yeah.  So there are some Nobel Laureates from--well he was born in St. Lucia.  He wasn't born in Trinidad, but he lived most of his life in Trinidad.
Speaker 2: So, now I forgot about V.S. Naipaul.
Speaker 1: Naipaul, you know he won his prize eventually after looking down on all the other South American writers and thinking that he should have been given the prize.  You know he deserved it and so--not my favorite writer.  He's a little bit too, he's an Anglophile, you know and he tends to be not very sympathetic toward the third world people.
Speaker 2: Now he's of East Indian--?
Speaker 1: Yes.  About forty percent of the population in Trinidad are from Indian origin.  They came as indentured laborers after slavery was abolished.  But about forty percent are African origin, Afro-Caribbean and they came as slaves.  The Indians were given land after slavery was--as part of the deal.  When slavery was abolished the Brit, Britain in its wisdom decided not to bring in any African people to continue to work on the plantations and instead they brought people from India.  So in places like Guyana and Trinidad there's, the population is sort of equally matched in that way.
Speaker 2: Now what is the Anglo-population of Trinidad?
Speaker 1: From England?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Or whites in general?
Speaker 1: Whites in, yeah. I think it's probably about maybe ten percent or so, maybe a little bit less.
Speaker 2: Now is there a special place for mixed race people in Trinidad?  Is there--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a lot of mixtures.  You know they have these people called "Douglas" who are people who are mixed Indian and African and of course there's a, it's a very mixed society.  Although of course the predominant groups are still there, the Africans and the Indians and so on.  But there are lots of people who are mixed blood so--and even the Africans of course genetically are quite diverse because they were just brought from any part, they gathered them up in South Africa.
Story_ID: 26671
Speaker 1: And as you know Africa has the most, the greatest diversity of people.  In fact I went to Africa in November last year to help with a genomics project which was funded by the National Institutes of Health [NIH] from the United States and one of the things that they are interested in studying is the genomes of--that's where human beings originated.  And that's--this project is to develop genomics in Africa by Africans.  And we went because of our expertise and collaborations which I've been doing for a while and also because we knew a lot about video conferencing for health purposes and things like that so we could help them, and we still do.  We do, we have two students from Africa who live in Africa who take part in my course by video conferencing when I have it on Saturdays in this room or else from home.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you say, when you speak about this diversity of--
Speaker 1: Genomes.
Speaker 2: --yeah, genomes in Africa you speak as a geneticist.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Which is a, that's a lot, you know that's different from just somebody just saying that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when you speak that way are you speaking about well you know just a part of Africa or the whole thing or--?
Speaker 1: Well I think the whole thing, it's a very diverse country.  The genotypes are you know very, very varied and so it's a tremendous pool of genetic information that hasn't been studied much.  And the National Institutes of Health here in its wisdom have recognized that this is an important thing because you know not only do you get viruses and organisms that people have not seen or studied before, but even among the human beings you have a tremendous amount of diversity and that's very valuable to, and maybe necessary for our future salvation in a way because it brings in much more diversity and perhaps more vigor.  And it, so they're interested in doing this and this H3Africa [Human Heredity and Health in Africa Initiative] project is one which is the Collins, Francis Collins who was the head of the National Institutes of Health went over to Addis Ababa [Ethiopia] to the--at the opening of this grant and so did the head of the Wellcome Trust which is the English, a large English corporation which funds research in Britain and they're also putting money into that project.  Now our role is relatively minor.  We wanted to help, they asked us to help in setting up collaborations because they have people in Cape Town [South Africa] and other people in Addis Ababa and other people in Abuja, Nigeria and they want to talk to each other and get these projects going.  So we went over to help with that and we continue to do that now.
Speaker 2: So when did that project--?
Speaker 1: November last year we went.
Speaker 2: November of last year.
Speaker 1: And it was started off--the grant was awarded in October.  The consortium had existed, been formed before that and they had some funding from diverse sources but these were the major input of funds to do that.  And so it's just taking off and I think it's, I got some mail yesterday they were asking for advice on meetings that were going to be taking place in Nairobi [Kenya] and so on.  It's a good project to be involved in I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm going to ask you some more about it when we get towards the end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More details.
Story_ID: 26672
Speaker 1: Okay so as a youngster growing up in Trinidad--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: You mean apart from girls and things like that?
Speaker 1: Well we're going to start as a little kid first.
Speaker 2: Oh as a kid.
Speaker 1: We haven't gotten to puberty yet.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The, I think that you know sports and so on were the major things of course.  Everybody wanted to be a cricket player and--
Speaker 1: So cricket's the biggest sport?
Speaker 2: Oh, cricket was a big sport at that time and soccer was minor.  Now it's the other way around and now my interest in terms of sports and--I'm sort of a soccer fanatic.  But the, you know I played in high school and elementary school we played a lot of sport and I, but I was always at the top of the class.  I always was a very serious student, very competitive, didn't want anybody to be better than me and so throughout my career that's been--
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: I believe it was Tranquility School it was called.  That was the one, that's where, the preschool I went there and I remember that's the place where I got lost when I was trying to make it home on my own to--
Speaker 1: Now is this a public school or a private school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a public school.
Speaker 1: Public school--government school.
Speaker 2: Government fund--public school.
Speaker 1: And why the name Tranquility?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think that was, they had a preschool, it's still there and then they have the elementary school and the high school and I went to them.  And--
Speaker 1: So you went there all the way through--?
Speaker 2: No, to the elementary school and the preschool.  I went to high school in Catholic school.  I went to two high schools, one was called Fatima and I went there for five years.  It's a system that's very much like the British system of education and after five years you take what's called General Certificate of Education or O-levels and you take that and you can go out after that and get a job.  Or the students who are outstanding can do two extra years and that was called, and take these exams which were given by--from England and that was advanced level [A-level].  I took my O-levels at Fatima [College] and because I wanted to do science and in a unique combination which is physics, chemistry and zoology for A-levels, you only took three subjects.  For O-levels, for the five years you took many different subjects and then you took the exams in with about you know seven or six or seven different topics, Latin, French or whatever.  I took Latin and lots of science.  And so I spent fives years in Fatima College and again I topped the school and won a scholarship to do--what's called a house scholarship which would allow me to go to St. Mary's [College] to do advanced levels.
Speaker 1: So St. Mary is--?
Speaker 2: --which is another Catholic college there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these would be called high schools here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: But they're called college--
Speaker 2: This is high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: So St. Mary's College and Fatima College--?
Speaker 2: Right, those are two high schools.
Story_ID: 26673
Speaker 1: So I want to go back to the grade school at Tranquility [School, Port of Spain, Trinidad] and do you remember your first introduction to--well you talked about your mother [Lena Decoteau] introducing you to the light, the shadows.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: But what about at school, what was your first introduction to science at school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember in Tranquility that that was--we must have done biology and we must, and a lot of math.  It was very focused on passing the exams which were required to get into these, excuse me, these high schools which were very competitive.  And parents spent a lot of time making sure that their kids could compete well to get into, there were three major high schools in the northern part of Trinidad that everybody wanted to go to.  One was Fatima [College], the one I was, I went to first, the other one was St. Mary's [College] and the other one--and both, both of those were Catholic boy schools.  And the third one, schools were all segregated at that time, boys and girls.  And the third--
Speaker 1: Boys and girls but not racially?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  The third one was called Queens Royal College and that was for the Protestants.  So two of the three top high schools in the north part of the country were Catholic schools and then there were several other government schools, high schools apart from Queens Royal College which was also government, that were quite, were not regarded as competitive.  And so getting into Fatima or St. Mary's was a high priority in many of the middle class parents.
Speaker 1: Now are there any teachers at the elementary school level that you remember that were outstanding that you particularly--?
Speaker 2: I remember my one teacher whose name was Blake who had, I think he had, he was epileptic in some way and the kids were, would know, of course very cruel and the kind of mocking behind his back.  And he I thought was an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: And what did he--?
Speaker 2: I think he taught many subjects but mainly English and so on.  And then, but--and of course in those days we had corporal punishment.  You know you messed around you got whipped or something.
Speaker 1: With a stick or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And, of course, so that school, elementary school was you know pretty simple I thought.  It was very competitive but I did well in that and I got into the school that I wanted to go to which was Fatima [College].
Story_ID: 26674
Speaker 1: Now by that time, by the time you got into Fatima [College] were you, I assume you had algebra and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the standards in high school then were very high compared with what you have now.  I mean you know you did algebra, geometry and those kinds of things.  We did, by the time I left--you know you did calculus in high school for instance.  Or some of the students in A-levels [advanced levels], people who were doing A-levels did calculus if they were doing math, physics and chemistry as their choices.  I was doing math--sorry, I was doing physics, chemistry and zoology so I did math up to the level of ordinary level [General Certificate of Education, O-level] in high school but for advanced level I never did math.  I had to learn it on my own.  I did calculus on my own because the--when we were talking, when we were doing physics it was calculus based physics in high school in, at A-level and so I had to do it.
Speaker 1: So when you were in elementary school you learned calculus on your own?
Speaker 2: No, I--in ordinary level, in high school I learned calculus on my own.
Speaker 1: At O-level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I did calculus on my own so I could physics which, calculus based physics in, for A-level yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you have to find a tutor for that or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You did it yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had a tutor while I was in, I guess when I was doing O levels, we must have had a tutor.  I remember someone coming to help us in homework but I can't remember who that was.  But we did have, my mother [Lena Decoteau] had us tutored at some point in my high school.  I can't remember who the tutor was but yeah we did have one.
Story_ID: 26675
Speaker 1: So you learned calculus on your own.  Now did you, were you able to, did you have any trouble with the tests?
Speaker 2: Well the only time I started taking calculus as a course was when I went to the University of Toronto [Canada].  And so I took calculus there because that's a course that you have to take.  I was in an honors course, honors science which is a four year--, at that time University of Toronto, you had to do well to be admitted.  It's the best university in Canada.  And you had to--and the honors courses were four years long and general courses were three years long.  So for the honors students you know everybody had to know calculus.  So I took my first calculus course in the University of Toronto, but by then I knew enough calc--, I did, I topped the--I got ninety nine percent or something in calculus.
Speaker 1: But you were self taught though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were pretty, you know retentive when it came to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had to learn it, in a way I had to go back and get my high school books and practice it and so on.  But it's pretty mechanical I thought, the stuff we were learning anyway.  It seemed like I did have a lot of trouble learning it but--and then I was much more aggressive and competitive and wanted to stay at the top all the time.  It was a kind of--
Speaker 1: What do you attribute your aggressiveness and competitiveness to--?
Speaker 2: I don't know it's something I get--I think I got that from my mother [Lena Decoteau] but, about you know--my father [William Chelston Dottin] was a little more reticent.  He was very smart but he, you know he didn't sort of push us as my mother had set really high expectations.  So--
Story_ID: 26676
Speaker 1: Did you have any well role models, any heroes in the neighborhood in terms of science and math, anything like that?
Speaker 2: In science and math, not in particular.  You know there were people I knew who were doctors and lawyers and so on and I knew that these were things that you needed to do in order to become one.  So, and I was interested in science and many of my colleagues in high school, especially in A-levels [advanced levels] were already you know, they were the ones who were competing for big scholarships that the government would award to the best students in the country to go to any university you want in the world.  And so those were the people that I sort of hung out with and they were a lot of fun.  It's not like they were just nerds and stuff.  They you know, they would talk football which is soccer and sports and so on, movies, that kind of stuff.  And they were racially that was a very diverse group too, people who were Indians, Chinese and everybody.  You know in this country they have this kind of illusion that the Chinese are, sort of beat the curve and make life difficult because they are on top of their classes and so on.  In Trinidad, they were just like everybody else, you know, you just compete and it came out that way.  Everybody you know, everybody was kind of a random distribution of the people who were there in the school at that time.  Some of the white kids had much more privilege in terms of affluence and so on where they came from, their parents and that kind of thing but they were struggling too in terms--and it was very, very tough, very high levels of education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I went to university it was, you know it wasn't so hard anymore.
Speaker 1: Now at Fatima College [high school] were there any particular teachers who stand out as mentors?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some of the priests were outstanding.  One, I remember one guy who was called Father Hawkins was a really very special person.  They used to have a--one guy who was called a dean of studies and another one was called the dean of discipline right, and he was the dean of studies.  If you did anything bad you'd have to go to him because you weren't doing enough homework or whatever.  He had a strap and he would sort of hit you on the hand for punishment or you'd have detention or something.  But this guy, you felt so bad because you know he would stand up and he'd tell you, you know you'd have to fight and resist these temptations to do nonsense all the time. Make sure you focus on your work.  He'd make you feel so, you'd feel, why don't you just you know hit me and let me go kind of thing. But you know he gave you these lectures and made you feel that you know you really have to pull your socks up you know.  And I admired him a lot.  He was really a special guy.  The dean of discipline seemed more sadistic in my opinion and he just seemed more interested in sort of punishing you.  But then we had, I had other people, my Spanish teacher, Julian was one and I had a friend who's still a friend Lennox Morris [ph.], he was teaching math at the time and several other good teachers I thought.  It was a good high school and so that was, I was lucky to be there.  And I had friends, lifelong friends who I still know who were there.  And then I went to St. Mary's College [high school] and that was more--
Speaker 1: Well let me just ask about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --this other one first.  Did you have any social clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. There were lots of them.  They had the choir of course was a big one.  My brother was a, was good at singing and so on.  And the priest who was in charge of that thought that somehow this must have been a genetically endowed thing and that I should be a good singer.  He put me in the choir on the basis of the fact that he knew my brother I think, and I was miserable, horrible, like a really awful singer.  And eventually I just backed off and said you know--and he realized that you know it was hopeless.
Speaker 1: Now you were the top student right at Fatima?
Speaker 2: In a, yeah academically in my class yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you--did you run for student body president or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  I was in small clubs.  Of course I played soccer.  I was a goal keeper and cricket, I was a wicket keeper and I did some chess that was big.  I still play chess and my son [Garreth Dottin] does too.  And I did fretwork which is kind of an ancient skill of making holes in wood and making all kinds of shape and--shapes, and I enjoyed that and some book clubs I think.  But I wasn't in, really outstanding in any of those sort of leadership roles as you know head of the student body or anything like that.
Story_ID: 26677
Speaker 1: Okay. So now 1961, that was your last year in high school, I mean what we would call high school (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think, well I can't remember now, could be.
Speaker 1: It's the independence year, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're in high school.  Are you in your last year or next to last year?
Speaker 2: Probably around there, I can't remember which one it was.  I can't remember when I left.  I know I went to university in '64 [1964], and I spent about two years between leaving high school and going into university.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So '61 [1961], were you at Fatima [College; high school] or--?
Speaker 2: I think I was at St. Mary's [College; high school] by then.
Speaker 1: St. Mary's, okay.  Now were, did your family discuss the independence a lot or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean that was a big thing, right?  We had these--colonialism was you know obviously something that we benefitted from educationally because you got this kind of a high level model but you know they suffered from a lot of sort of British exploitation and the Brits down there were very condescending.  They thought they were the best, God's gift to the world and so on.  And then you know Williams, Eric Williams [first Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago; served from 1956 until his death in 1981] moved in and had the "University of Woodford Square" [Woodford Square, site for many debates on economic as and politics] he called it where he assembled all these masses of people and gave political speeches about you know how to get the British off your backs and so on and to get independence.  It was a peaceful transition.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about you know why it was a peaceful transition, you know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I mean there was no major you know agitation in terms of like military things.  And at that time many countries were already going for independence from Britain and it was to Britain's advantage in some cases to abandon those colonies because there was no longer economically beneficial to them.  They had exploited the sugar cane plantations and those kind of things.  Some of them, some countries had oil and those kinds of resources, especially in Africa.  But, so many countries wanted to be rid of Britain and Britain wanted to be rid of them.  In the case of Trinidad, I mean there, it was certainly independence, economic independence was certainly feasible because of oil but still I mean the management systems and so on were questionable.  And the politicians of course were, there's been a long tradition of sort of selfish people kind of--not so much corruption although that has happened too.  But yeah, it was just a natural thing that was happening all over the world.  Of course you know already you had the United States for a long time before that, 1776 and then you had Haiti and of course Venezuela and Simon Bolivar [Venezuelan military and political leader who played a key role in Latin America's successful struggle for independence from the Spanish Empire; considered one of the most influential politicians in the history of the Americas] and all those other kinds of efforts to get rid of the colonial dominance and move toward independence.  And Africa, you know you had Nigeria and Tanganyika and so on which were moving in those directions as well.  So--
Speaker 1: Right, the--
Speaker 2: Williams was a leader in that he had gone to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] and worked there I believe as a professor and had come back and tried to make those changes.  There were people who were against him of course but he succeeded in arguing and winning.  He formed a party which is still in existence, it's called The People's National Movement and he was the most charismatic leader of them.  His successors are not, have not been so successful.  Some of them have been really inept in a way but they have been in power for a long time.  And so that was the sort of climate in which it came about.
Speaker 1: But in those days I think it would be really special to be a high school senior at the eve of your country's independence.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And to be given an assignment like the one you were given to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a big plum.  I remember around people in my--there was, you know I wasn't the only one.  There were many other people in that, who were in advanced level [A-level] did that.  It was really a very special trip at that time because you know it sort of put you--you mingled with people who had a much bigger world view you know.  I hardly knew anything about Denmark except what I heard on the radio.  And that kind of--later in my life when I went to Denmark I contacted the relatives of the guy who had given me, who was the ambassador at that time because I spent some time living in Denmark doing science in the University of Copenhagen for maybe about six, seven months or so.  And so it was very, I felt very privileged then to do that at the independence, time of independence, yes.
Speaker 1: Now was there, I mean did you get a chance to meet the prime minister?  I know Trinidad is smaller than (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  It's a small--I never met him.  I mean as I mentioned I met, I have a letter from him which he sent years later.  I'm wondering whether--yeah.  He sent that letter you know thanking all the people for participating in this event and so on, very sort of written with a typewriter at that time.  They didn't have these printers, high speed printers with anything and I have it at home, framed and I'll send you a copy when--with the rest of this stuff.
Story_ID: 26678
Speaker 1: So from your vantage point I mean was there, what kind of celebration was here for independence?
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of, you know they had all kinds of balls and things of that--we went to part of that.  But there were a lot of festivities and you know presentation of the country in a good light and people were elated and it was an exciting time.  So, that was a, I imagine it's like 1976 here when you know the independence anniversaries were taking place and so on.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I suppose I mean I think for African Americans at least for some of us it wasn't the same kind of a feeling you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know for, in Trinidad then independence, yeah it probably was different.  The government in Trinidad was mainly like the people you know.  There were Indians and Africans who ran the country.  More African, Afro-Caribbean and Indo-Caribbean I should say and more of the Afro-Caribbeans were in power for a longer time.  Now it's the other way around, the Indo-Caribbeans were running the country.  But in the United States of course that's not the case.  Now you have an African American who is the president but before that you've never had that.
Speaker 1: Got you.
Speaker 2: So I think that sort of changes the psyche of the population because you know among the African Americans here they've never had that except when Obama [President Barack Obama, 44th and current president of the United States] came in.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: When the country was--achieved independence, many of us were slaves.
Speaker 2: Yeah, slaves, right.  Exactly right.
Speaker 1: Wouldn't have the same kind of reference.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Of course there were slaves in Trinidad as well, my parents, my great-grandparents and so on.  But sort of the experience since then has been different.  I feel that Trinidadians are not as sympathetic as they should be toward African Americans, especially the ones who come here.  The people who come here are privileged.  They've been selected out of the best high schools, immigrants are usually like that.  They're the ones who are most educated and most aggressive and they have high expectations and so on like me.  But they tend to--I think they're not sympathetic enough to the plight of African Americans who have been going to bad schools and have had disadvantage, serious disadvantages that you know make them much less competitive.  And when you hear people like Tom Sowell [Thomas Sowell, American economist, social theorist, political philosopher, and author] and so on, the guy at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] talking about oh, you know the Caribbean, African Caribbean people can do so well here, why can't the Afro-Americans?  It's--and he's an African American.  It's really stupid because you know the circumstances are so different.  First of all the ones who come here are much--are already selected.  It's not like representing the population in Trinidad and secondly, they've had a different kind of expect, expectation and experience in--
Speaker 1: So it would be like if you took the cream of the crop of the African Americans and sent them to Trinidad--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --they would probably think that all African American people are superior.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's so stupid, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  But I guess that was really something then and so it didn't take--like was it a celebration one day, several days?
Speaker 2: No, it went for I think weeks must be.  I can't remember exactly but yeah, it went for a while.
Speaker 1: Did the queen come?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Or a representative?
Speaker 2: But I think yeah, a representative and they had lots of high representatives and people like that and different kinds of celebrations and so on. High expectations which of course were not met.  The government that ran the country after that had all kinds of problems, inexperience, corruption and so on.  They sort of bumbled along and they still do that there.  You know they're not efficient, they're not as sort of focused and technology driven and all these other kinds of things that you would want to have in a country.  But Trinidad is relatively fortunate, I mean in spite of all these limitations and organization and determination, first of all they have the oil money which is keeping them afloat.  And also they've never had--there was one coup in the country, an attempted coup that lasted a short time.  But the government has always been sort of a constitutional republic.  At one time it was like a part of the British Empire but now it's a republic.  But it's mainly been driven in that way with elections and you know not a lot of military interference and that kind of thing, in contrast with many of the South American countries which have had tremendous problems, like Venezuela for instance, which is only thirty miles away from Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  (Unclear) is close to the what they call the Old Spanish Main or whatever, the top of South America?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.  It, there's a little peninsula that comes out and you can, on a clear day you can see Venezuela from Trinidad.  It's not the highly inhabited parts of Venezuela but you know they have beaches and so on over there and you can see the coastline.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26679
Speaker 1: So at St. Mary's College [in Port of Spain, Trinidad; high school; advance level], now were there any important teachers of St. Mary's or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There were two Knox priests.  One was called Knox by day and the other one was called Knox by night because one was black and the other was white.  And both of them I thought were good and one was, he had taught me biology and I forget what Knox by day did, maybe physics.
Speaker 1: Knox by day and Knox by night (unclear).
Speaker 2: Kids make up all kinds of things.  So one was, one taught me zoology, that was Knox by day and I think the other guy taught me physics.
Speaker 1: That was Knox by night, right?
Speaker 2: Knox by night, yes.  They were both good, I liked them.  And there weren't many subjects that we did you know because you, by then you're sort of a science major and in fact when I went to university I had to sort of broaden my thing because you were taking many other subjects in addition to organic chemistry and all that stuff even though I was in--and honors was a very specialized thing but you still have to do English.  Well I did English for A [advanced] levels too but more literature and things like that in college which was good at University of Toronto [Canada].
Speaker 1: So did you graduate at the top of your class at St. Mary's?
Speaker 2: At St. Mary's, yes.  I was--I don't think I was the best student.  There were other students who were doing very well and who were--the combination of courses I was doing was unique as I mentioned because people were doing physics, chemistry and math.  And, or they were doing chemistry, botany and zoology and I took a different--a mix of those two.  I took physics, chemistry and zoology so I had to teach myself certain things like calculus, which was done in the math section and I didn't do that.  But you know I was up there with the rest.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I got scholarships for going abroad and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got scholarships right away.
Story_ID: 26680
Speaker 1: Now you said that you stayed, you were in Trinidad another two years before you went to--?
Speaker 2: Right, I taught a little bit at one of the, at--you could teach as like sort of a junior teacher at Fatima College [Port of Spain, Trinidad; high school] which I had left for a while, two years before.  And then I went, I worked at the university as a technician, at the University of Trinidad and Tobago in the chemical engineering department so both of those were sort of academic oriented type of activities.  I was really learning stuff too.  And then I went to Toronto [Canada].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was there a reason you stayed around for two more years, I mean for two years before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It wasn't so common to go away right after you left high school as it is here.  I mean people just go right into college.  For one thing you had to get enough money to save to go, and which I was accumulating, and then--, those were the considerations.  I knew that I would be going to university but--
Speaker 1: Now was the University of the Toronto simply the best university to go to?
Speaker 2: In my opinion, yes.  I mean when I got the scholarship to go to the university and then they asked me to choose where you want to go, you know.  And I didn't want to go to Oxford [University, Oxford, England] or some place like that because somehow going, the idea of going to Britain was not so appealing.
Speaker 1: I think we should say this cause when we discussed this on the phone in the office, a lot of people didn't understand the connection in the British Commonwealth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know so they wondered why you didn't go to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] or go to school in the United States?  I said well it's a British Commonwealth and Canada and you know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right.  And the other part of it is going to the United States at the time was scary because it had--there were all these you know race things going on.  And I said well you know--
Speaker 1: Race was at the height of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  So I said I don't want to go to Britain.  I had enough of those people and I didn't want to---I wanted to go to the United States eventually but I felt that you know this may not be the best move for me right now.  So I picked what I thought was the best university in Canada which it still is.  I mean it's ranked among the top in the world, ten top.  And I went there and I just applied, that's the only place that I applied.
Speaker 1: Now did--one Trinidadian that came over and did get involved in the civil rights movement was--
Speaker 2: Stokely [Stokely Carmichael, also known as Kwame Ture, was a Trinidadian-American black activist of the 1960s American Civil Rights Movement].
Speaker 1: Stokely Carmichael.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Did you know him in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: No, I never knew him, never met him.
Speaker 1: You're about the same age I think or very close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he, I think he's a little older but yes.  I mean there were people from the Caribbean have been a lot involved in many of the civil rights things in this country, made a lot of contributions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, going all the way back to Marcus Garvey [Jamaican political leader, publisher, journalist, entrepreneur, and orator].
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so for that reason I went to Canada, I went to the University of Toronto and that's where I ended up.  I liked it a lot.  I did get involved in some of the politics because the Vietnam War [Cold War-era military conflict that occurred in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia from November 1, 1955 to the fall of Saigon, Vietnam, on April 30, 1975] was going on, we went outside the United States Embassy on Avenue, University Avenue, and protested and so on, listened to all the speeches and took part in demonstrations and so on trying to end the war.  But I never sort of got involved in any of the radical movements or anything like that.
Story_ID: 26681
Speaker 1: Now what's the, I mean what was the toughest part of going to Toronto [Canada]?  I mean well I know the cold had to really be a part of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'd say there's a kind of a cultural thing that you have to transcend.  For me it was, I guess I had a lot of confidence about--self-confidence.  That helped a lot in terms of getting into the culture of the university [University of Toronto] and so on.  The temp-the climate was you know formidable, that was a challenge.  And, but you know there were lots of West Indians that were there too, and African students. Not many in the sciences.
Speaker 1: Did you have relatives there or any friends there already?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I don't think so.  I don't think so, not in Toronto.  But once I got there, there was a group of West Indians and they had a club, a West Indian club and so on.  I didn't really have enough--most of them were in humanities and they had much more time on their hands to do things and you know socialize and people who were in the sciences just, you know you had thirty-one hours of classes every week with labs and all this kind of stuff.  You really had to work and so you didn't have a lot of time to, for those kinds of social interactions which are important I think.  But you just had to make hard choices.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what had you--now you majored it in biosciences, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I majored in microbiology as an undergraduate.  But, so I did a lot of science courses, physics, chemistry, organic chemistry, lots of biology courses and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's microbiology, not just plain biology (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Later on I did more microbiology.
Speaker 1: Now were there any particular teachers there that were mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Many of them weren't in the sciences of course.   I can't remember the names of many of them right offhand but there were a lot of good teachers.  I worked, I did summer--one, I guess I did one summer in working in labs.  Most of the time I had to work to make money to stay in school. So summer jobs--in the winter I worked--I just went to school, but in the summers I worked.
Speaker 1: But what kind of work would you do in the summer?  Would it be lab work around here or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  One summer I was a stevedore loading up trucks on the dock that were going off to different parts of Canada and lifting up refrigerators with my roommate, tossing these things around as they came around on a belt or something.  My roommate at that time, he became a, he was a lawyer and he is a lawyer.  He's retired now and he became the attorney general of Trinidad, but we at college we were working there tossing stuff around.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Anthony Smart [ph.], and then I had two other roommates from the Bahamas, two brothers, Anthony and Frank Davis, they're in the Bahamas.  One is a dentist and the other one is a businessman.  But anyway, so those are the kind of jobs.  And one summer--I left the picture there which--I spent prospecting in the, way up in northern Quebec [Canada], in Noranda [mines], a place called--or northern Ontario [Canada]--which is you know dig, working, prospecting for anything that's valuable in the ground with a geology company looking for copper and digging rocks and so on, making maps of the area to see whether these mining companies could come in and drill for things.  So I didn't--later on I worked one summer in a lab. That was a very transformative experience.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the microbiology lab?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with--so summer research was important but in the beginning I couldn't afford to do that and so I worked in those other jobs which were quite challenging in a way.
Speaker 1: Now did you go back at any point during this period?
Speaker 2: Occasionally I would--I couldn't afford to go back all, you know like every summer or anything but I went back once or twice.  I spent a lot of my Christmases in Toronto just in the dorms living there.  People would invite you for, to come over for Christmas dinner or something.  Many times I didn't want to go because somehow I felt you know this would make me tough.  So I didn't, I you know had some sort of a foolish pride or something.  So I stayed in and I studied.  I studied a lot and I would catch up while other people were skiing or whatever.
Speaker 1: Now how were your grades at University of Toronto?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I topped the university.  I graduated first in the class for the whole university in 1968.  I guess you call that summa cum laude in the United States but we didn't have that terminology.  And I had a, my grade point average [GPA] was like almost 4, even though I was in science.  It was close to that.
Speaker 1: That's high.
Story_ID: 26682
Speaker 1: Did you have any counseling about graduate school or (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to go to--I thought I would go to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California].  By then I felt ready to go to the United States but somehow I decided to stay in Canada because I was doing--I worked with this guy called Clarence Fuerst who was a molecular biologist.
Speaker 1: His name is (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Clarence F-U-E-R-S-T.  He was a mentor.  I'd worked with him in the summer.  And I got scholarships to go on and do my masters and Ph.D. in the University of Toronto from the Government of Canada.  And so I stayed there and did my masters and Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Now what was your master's [degree] thesis about?
Speaker 2: My master's, both my master's and Ph.D. [degrees] were done with studies on a virus, a bacterial virus which was, which is called a bacteriophage.  And I worked on the way, it's a genetics problem, on the way the genes of the virus become integrated into the genes of the host, which of course we know happens with other viruses now by different mechanisms, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and so on.  In those days people knew nothing about those things but, so we were working with bacterial viruses and I worked on the integration mechanisms for my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so your master's degree, is this correct, it is was in medical biophysics?
Speaker 2: Yes, at the University of Toronto in the Ontario Cancer Institute.
Story_ID: 26683
Speaker 1: Bacterial viruses.  Those are prokaryotes.  They don't have nucleus, amoebas do.  And so this--amoebas are like the cells that are in your body, in humans, in--but they're single-celled organisms, but they have a nucleus inside of them.  Bacteria don't.  And so for my master's degree I was studying with Clarence Fuerst [at the University of Toronto, Canada], the integration of the genome of the virus into the bacterial DNA, and the mechanisms that are involved in that process.
Speaker 2: And the kind of bacteria you were studying?
Speaker 1: E-coli [Escherichia coli].
Speaker 2: E-coli.
Speaker 1: That was the most common bacteria that was used to study genetics in that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this kind of a virus has a name right?
Speaker 1: Lamda [bacteriophage Lambda, which is specific for E. coli] is the name of it.
Speaker 2: Lamda, okay.  Now, okay so you just went, you stayed and went all the way through--?
Speaker 1: Right, because I, it was easier or financially it was--I got a, of course I got scholarships for based on my performance as an undergraduate to do graduate work with a good stipend and so on, for--from the Canadian government and won prizes, so it was easier to do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went to--so I did my master's with Clarence Fuerst on bacteriophage lamda; how it integrates into the DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] of the host that it's growing in, and then I did my Ph.D. after that.
Speaker 2: And you did that under Mark Pearson?
Speaker 1: I did that in, at--with Mark Pearson, right.  In, also in, I think it was here in Toronto in the Department of--I think it was called Medical Genetics.
Speaker 2: Medical genetics, all right.  So well tell us about your Ph.D. dissertation, what was the essence?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh, the work I did, I worked, I continued to work on bacteriophage lamda, that virus, and I discovered we basically--molecular biologists and geneticists, we're all interested in control, mechanisms that control genes to be expressed and not to be expressed.  And there were proteins that are called repressors which by the very name tells you what it does.  It binds to the DNA and it prevents any expression of that gene.  It prevents it from being active.  And I worked on the most, one of the most actively studied repressors was the lamda repressor from that virus.  And one of the projects I worked on with, was with lamda virus, lamda repressor, this protein that binds a gene and prevents the genes--it controls the expression of many other genes by just binding to the DNA and preventing it from being transcribed is the term, or expressed.  And what I found was very different at the time and that is that the repressor which, it's a protein that is made by a gene.  So the repressor gene makes the repressor protein and then the repressor protein prevents other genes from being expressed.  In this way, the virus remains silent within the cell.  But I found that not only does the repressor gene prevent the synthesis of other genes, or the expression of other genes, but it also promoted it own expression.  And so it was not only a repressor, but it was an activator. So the repressor stimulated its own synthesis, and that kind of expression was called at the time, autogenous [pronounced auto-gene-ous] or autogeous [pronounced au-tog-e-nous] gene expression.  It was very unusual and that was a very--at the time, now it's totally blah--but at that time it was an important discovery because there were no examples of repressors being not only being repressors but also inducers of their own synthesis.  And it was a very competitive situation because it was a lab in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that was working on this problem too and this guy's main thing was in lam--was repressors, how they worked and so on.  And we, and we would, we were just working on regulation in general and when we found this it was a very kind of a, we had to get this paper written very quickly which we did and so on, because Mark Ptashne [molecular biologist] was hounding us to find out what we had done.  We spoke at meetings and they would send people to find out what we were doing and so on.  Science like that, it's nothing--it's very competitive as you probably know from doing these interviews.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 26684
Speaker 1: So at that time in 1973, '74 [1974]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were at the cutting edge of this research [bacteriophage lambda genetics]?
Speaker 2: Of that, yes.  Well, at that time, but--and so we did that and you know it sort of made a splash at the Gordon conferences [Gordon Research Conferences are a group of prestigious international scientific conferences organized by a non-profit organization of the same name. The conference topics cover frontier research in the biological, chemical, and physical sciences, and their related technologies] and so on.  Those are the meetings they have in New Hampshire.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about that.  I mean let's not go past it cause we don't--
Speaker 2: Well I mean my thesis advisor [mark Pearson] was elated.  Lynn Shiner was a technician and she's on the paper and Mark Pearson was my advisor and we did that.  We did other experiments on regulation with lamda as well.  But that I think was the most important one.  So you know it helps--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you delivered your paper at a conference in--?
Speaker 2: Well yeah in a few conferences but main, the one, the-in--the Gordon conferences are big conferences and you know very informal kind of thing.  Everybody walks around in shorts and so on, but very competitive.  And so we spoke at that and published the paper.  By then I was ready to move on.  I was going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and while I was at MIT they, while I was there, it was just down the street from Harvard [University] so you know they wanted to know some of the details of the experiment and so we helped them to do it and then he did, he repeated the experiment and continued with that work. That was his area.  For me it was something on my thesis but for him that was his big specialty so he really sort of went to town and did much more in detail, but--
Speaker 1: So had you planned on going further with--?
Speaker 2: With lamda?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: With, no because I was going to MIT and I was going to work on a different organism, which I did.
Story_ID: 26685
Speaker 1: So I finished my Ph.D. [degree at the University of Toronto, Canada].  I got, again, I got you know offers and scholarships.  I got something called a Centennial Scholarship which is one--the Canadian government gives five scholarships to either an M.D. or a Ph.D. nationally and then they let you go anywhere you want with it.  So I won one of the five Centennial scholarships.  I forget why they call it "centennial."  It maybe had to do with the anniversary of the nation or something.  And I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now at MIT, you focused on the--
Speaker 1: The Dictyostelium [discoideum], an amoeba, right, yeah.  So that's a eukaryote cell like the cells in your body.  They have nuclei and so on.  And I was still interested in regulation but much more in development, how these cells become specialized to form different kinds of cells, which bacteria don't do.  So this was a more complicated organism.  I, you know my work has always been on microorganisms which are like model systems for studying how specialization, those kinds of things control, regulation, genetic control.
Speaker 2: Now what's the relation between these amoeba and slime mold, are they same?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They call them--
Speaker 1: The slime molds are--it's a misnomer, because a different organ--, species that are really slime molds, but these are the cellular slime molds and they are called--and the main thing about them is that they were, they have a very defined way of behaving.  They could behave as single cells but then if they were starved they can start forming an organized structure like a multi-cellular organism would with about a hundred thousand cells and they would be specialized into tissues so you could--two tissues--so you could form them, do, test a lot of hypotheses about what makes an organism which starts off with all the same cells and the same DNA like a sperm and how they become specialized to form a multi-cellular organism with different tissues.  And so that was a model organism for doing those kinds of work.  And that's what we did at MIT.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this amoeba has a simple life cycle?
Speaker 1: Right, a very short, twenty-four hour--well six hours it grows and develops--it grows every six, doubles in, as a--but it, but the whole developmental cycle is relatively short.  By the time, in about 6--18 to 24 hours, it's already gone through development if you starved it and form a multi-cellular organism and so on.  So that's why people were interested in studying it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were studying signal transduction?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I studied, well I mean eventually I studied signal transduction because we discovered something.  That was another important discovery.  That came later.  While I was at MIT I studied that organism and looked at the organization of the structure of some RNA and so, something called messenger RNA [large family of RNA molecules that convey genetic information from DNA to the ribosome, where they specify the amino acid sequence of the protein products of gene expression] which is found in all cells.  And we looked, we discovered some new features in the RNA of these cells, of this organism.  And so we, that was, it, I don't think that that was a--you know it was published in a very important journal called 'Cell' which is still a very important journal.  But the discovery itself was not earth shattering or anything, it was just you know we found this.  We had to really work very hard and very fast to get this done, because science again was extremely competitive but you know most of the stuff you discover in science is, you know, somebody else--if you wait a while, somebody else will find it.  It's very competitive and it works like that.  In the case of the stuff on my Ph.D., I thought that was very original.  And my post-doc at MIT, it was a lot of hard work.  It involved, you know, I was, you have a short time to do things and then you have to go look for a job as a post-doc or get into some other situation cause you're just kind of forming your professional career then.  And so I worked on lamda.  I worked on Dictyostelium, those amoeba and slime molds and it was, it still is an interesting topic, something that I've continued to do.  And I did a little bit more on genetics in bacterial viruses.  I went to Copenhagen [Denmark] and worked there for a little bit.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: Oh, I went to MIT in 70-'68 [1968] I finished my--'74 [1974].  It's about probably '76 [1976] or so, I spent a few months over there.
Story_ID: 26686
Speaker 1: About 1976 [Dottin went to Copenhagen, Denmark for a few months]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so cause it's just before I went to [Johns] Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do in Copenhagen [Denmark] when you were--?
Speaker 2: I was doing some more microbiology with bacterial things and collaborating with people over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, on some of the stuff you were, the subjects you were studying, you were researching before or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, and on things that were interesting to them too.  It was enough to me to sort of get an international kind of you know--they invited me to come as a visiting professor and I had, and I did, I was--I knew I would once I got back I would be looking for jobs in the United States and so this was a good thing to do.
Story_ID: 26687
Speaker 1: What was the most significant finding from your signal transduction research on [Dictyostelium discoideum]?
Speaker 2: Well the signal transduction work I did was done while I was at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and when I came here [Hunter College, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's coming up?
Speaker 2: It's later, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], when did you go to Johns Hopkins?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I think it was about the end of 1976.  I can't remember exactly when but around then.
Speaker 1: And were you doing a post-doc at (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I was an assistant professor.
Speaker 1: Okay, you--
Speaker 2: I got a full time job.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, associate professor of biology?
Speaker 2: Assistant.
Speaker 1: Assistant, okay.  I'm sorry some of these are out of chronologic order.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: I've got to jump around a little bit.  Okay, so you were at Johns Hopkins for ten years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, from '76 [1976] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what was the focus of your research at Johns Hopkins? I worked on the Dictyostelium [discoideum], that amoeba and that work was again concerned with regulation, gene, genetic control of development and things like that.  And I, while I was there I did, I started studying signal transduction which was an important area of the research.  Poorly understood at the time but now it's no big deal.  The--this organism was a good one to do that experiment and it's--signal transduction has to do with how hormones work because these are molecules that are produced outside of cells and they activate cells to do certain things.  And there, there are some hormones that enter the cell because they are hydrophobic.  They can go through the membrane, like estrogen or something, and then they activate things inside of the cell, pathways.  Tremendous biochemical reactions as you know you can stimulate, produce something in the brain and then all of a sudden it's having an affect in your liver or kidney or something.  So those kinds of hormones, like the steroid hormones, that had---a lot of work was coming out on that from Yamamoto and other people on how they may work.  But there are other hormones that never enter a cell and they have an effect.  And in this organism we're working on, cyclic AMP [Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP, cyclic AMP or 3'-5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate) is a second messenger important in many biological processes. cAMP is derived from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and used for intracellular signal transduction in many different organisms, conveying the cAMP-dependent pathway] which is a small molecule, but it's charged, so it doesn't enter the cell, was having a profound effect on development of the cell.  It changed a lot of things in the cell and allowed them to aggregate and so on.  And there were people who were working on the mechanism of getting these cells sticky and aggregate--and what happens very early and one of them was at Hopkins too, Peter Devreotes, and we were looking more at gene expression.  And what we found was that we could use the same molecules which were known not to enter cells but to bind on the surface and we found that those things were directly turning on genes, activating them inside the cell and that's what signal trans--well signal transduction means that something is acting on the outside and it's having an effect.  Well we showed that it was actually turning on genes and at that time there were very few models where people could--there was a cancer kind of thing where some cell surface molecules were, seemed to be acting on specializing the cells or making them cancerous.  But other than that, there was very little known and we took this and we showed that these molecules could bind to molecules on the outside of the cell called receptors and trigger a whole cascade of events.  It's like one of these Rube Goldberg [Reuben Garrett Lucius "Rube" Goldberg was an American cartoonist, sculptor, author, engineer and inventor] things where you see the ball hits this and it hits something else and it activates something.  And in the end you have the mouse jumps around or whatever.  So this whole pathway was very interesting or it still is very interesting.  But what we showed is that it activates the genes inside the cell and I would say that's an important, that was an important--and this was one of the few, first few papers on that area.  Now there's thousands of papers on that, on how signal transduction works, literally thousands.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But that time it was cutting edge?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But not all the work you do as I pointed out is cutting edge.  Sometimes you do stuff it's really mundane.  The stuff I did at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was published in a great journal [Cell] but in terms of the long term of, I think it you know it was okay but I think the signal transduction is more important and the lamda repressor things are more important.
Story_ID: 26688
Speaker 1: When you choose a project, do you choose it based on just your interest or--?
Speaker 2: I--unfortunately that happens because you can you know you can choose a project that's intellectually interesting which is what I did, but you can also find that it becomes short-lived.  I guess you know in retrospect if I had chosen projects that had to do with direct, more directly with human disease it would be better professionally.  But you know there's lots of discoveries that have to be made and many of them could be done better in simple organisms so that's where I did.  Now there's a lot of stuff in neuro-biology and once people knew how to clone genes, it really makes a lot of experiments easier in human cells and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you're at Johns Hopkins till '86 [1986].  Anything else that's significant of Johns Hopkins before we go on?
Speaker 2: I would say so.  I would say that's, those--that signal transduction is a very important--I did some of that here as well.  I also, you know one of the things that while I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts; postdoctoral research], I really got interested in the fact that minorities were not doing a lot of science and becoming involved in science.  I work--and that this big disparity because I didn't see, I saw this as no big deal in a way, and wondered you know what the hell is going on here?  It's such big disparities in the representation and so on.  And I was influenced by some other people who were sort of thinking along these kinds of social aspects of science, Jonathan King was one of them.  And I worked also, I, with a judge whose name is Garrity [Judge Wendell Author Garrity, Jr.].  He died a few years ago.  He's the guy who was involved in desegregation of schools in Boston [Massachusetts], which was a tremendous--he was a judge and he wanted to get people to be monitors which would mean you would go to these schools and see what the climate is like, you know and why--and because he was going to try to start busing people around the school.  You know move the white people here and the black people there to try to get desegregation, and, because there were such disparities in performance and in the education.  But, so I spent some time working with Garrity as well because I wanted to make that my sort of contribution and--
Speaker 1: And so is this during the time period that, like William Shockley [physicist] came out with his theory of black inferiority?
Speaker 2: I think so, I can't remember exactly the chronology of that.  But they, you know in that time busing was a huge issue in Boston, right.
Speaker 1: In fact, it is around the same time actually, '73 [1973], '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: And this guy was, tried to desegregate these schools.  Garrity, he, I'm sure there's a lot of him written up in the New York Times [newspaper] or on Wikipedia and he, and so he was presiding over this and he wanted people to go into these schools and see what is the climate like in these schools?  Is it--and so they sent me to some schools in South Boston.  Or no, it was on the north end near the airport or something.  I think that's where it was.  This was a totally white neighborhood but it was very poor and I was wondering why these--and they were trying to bus people out of there into these centers of excellence or something that they were trying to make with you know mixed populations and the people in this area didn't want to leave.  This was like their garrison.  And Boston is made up of a lot of little islands and they were on this island, it's all part of Boston.  And I wondered why would they want to stay in this place because the schools were horrible.  But that was their fortress.  That's where they, you know it was a mainly Irish kind of neighborhood and that--you go in with police guards and all this stuff to see what's going on and they would treat you well when you got in.  The principal had to let you in but it was court ordered.  And I did that for a while and it kind of worked in a way.  I mean it helped to sort of soften up the hostilities.  I don't know what long term impact it's had but that was an important thing for me.
Speaker 1: So this is in nineteen seventy--? '74 [1974] or '5 [1975] or something like that around that time.  And there were a lot of--and there were a group of scientists who were also very interested in some of these social aspects.  And that's something I've sort of continued in a way, in different ways to get more minorities involved in science and doing that kind of stuff.  I have, as I told you the Just Garcia Hill [JGH; social networking website aimed at increasing the number of minorities entering science careers and at recognizing contributions to science by minority scientists] is something I formed.
Story_ID: 26689
Speaker 1: Tell us about the transition, you going from Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] to Hunter College [New York]?
Speaker 2: Okay, so I was there, at Hunter--Hunter was attractive to me.  People tried to recruit me to come there--here.  There were two minority scientists who were here, Jim Weiss and, I'm drawing a blank with his name right now.  I'll remember in a while.  But anyway these two guys wanted--they said look, Hunter is the place.  It doesn't have a large--, they don't have a lot of minority faculty here but the undergraduate population is very diverse as you probably see.  So walking into the building there's people, it's like a cross section of New York, very diverse.  And so there's a strong effort on the part of--to try to get more minorities into science and to get more faculty who could teach them and all this kind of stuff.  That was interesting to me.  And so they, you know after over a few years they'd say well we, you know we'll have this big national impact if we do, do--and so you know the people at Hunter courted me.  They wanted me to come.  I wanted to leave Baltimore anyway and I wanted to be, I was looking at jobs and I had an offer from Princeton [University] in New Jersey but it looked just like Baltimore, and I wanted to come--so I came here to do my research and also to do some of these other things that would build up minorities in science.
Story_ID: 26690
Speaker 1: So at Hunter College [New York], 1986, I guess, right, this--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was the--
Speaker 2: 1985.
Speaker 1: --the Center for the Study of Gene Structure already established when you--?
Speaker 2: Right.  There was, they had just gotten funding from the National Institutes of Health [NIH] to form this center and the, Hunter was barely considered as a minority institution by virtue of their undergraduate population. But the faculty here and still is, not as diverse as the student body.  And so the dean at that time whose name was Richard Moore got involved with this project.  He managed to get this grant from, with other, with the help of Jim Weiss [ph.] and so on, this NIH grant which would allow them to hire more minority faculty and to build this kind of project.  So it was designed to do good research in an institution which is not like, you know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] or Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], but in which is a good undergraduate population, and to set up a research kind of an infrastructure in this place.  So the first year of the grant had already been awarded and they could use some of those funds to hire people from wherever they want and so they hired me and Jim Weiss and was one of the people who sort of got me here with this--and then the dean whose name is Moore.  And so that's, that was the plan.  We were going to do, make a big change in that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what--well what did you do in that regard in terms of getting more minorities into, cause you said, I think when I came in you were saying that Jim Weiss and the other--
Speaker 2: Right, soon after I came.
Speaker 1: --they left.
Speaker 2: They left and took off.  They--for different reasons, you know people move for complicated reasons.  But anyway, Weiss when to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] where Vartan Gregorian was the president and he was trying to make something, a different kind of plan.  And Weiss I think was very frustrated.  I stayed, I decided to, I'm going to make this my project.  Not an easy one to do because there's a lot of resistance from the faculty.  They wanted the funds that were coming in but they didn't want to you know, for--it's very complicated because people were, at that time departments were very into, each department was like a little fiefdom, a medieval village and didn't, was always competing with the other departments for limited resources.  And what I was trying to do was sort of interdepartmental so it was across departments.  There were two people--, two departments that were involved in this project at the time, chemistry and biology and I thought we should diversify that and bring in bio-psychology and so on.  People were doing biological research and there was a dean that I worked with whose name was Irwin Fleisner [ph.], he's died since.  And so I worked on that project for--I still do.  It's been a lifelong struggle.  It's had a tremendous impact.
Story_ID: 26691
Speaker 1: Now you became the director in '88 [1998] right, of the Center for the Study of Gene Structure [Hunter College, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think, something like that.  But for a while I was like the--the dean was normally the head of the program, but I did most of the stuff.  And then I became the program director and eventually the principal investigator.  The president was always a principal investigator.  Donna Shalala was a president and then there were several other presidents after that.  She went to the, to work in the White House and she's now in Florida.  And then there were, Paul LeClaire [ph.] and Caputo and lots of presidents went through this place.  Now we have Jennifer Raab.
Speaker 1: Jennifer Raab (unclear)?
Speaker 2: R-A-A-B, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you said you had increased the minority faculty--
Speaker 2: Well so when I came there were ten.  Well after those two people, scientists left, there were, the Gene Center consisted of like about thirty faculty members and I was the only minority scientist there.  And now there are about fifty faculty members and about fourteen minority scientists.  So we've increased both the minority and the non-minority faculty in the, in this enterprise and we have diversified the portfolio because we now include one person from-who's a bio-anthropologist.  We have people in the physics department who are doing research that has to do with cancer and things like that, biomedical research.  We have people in chemistry which was one of the original founding departments, biology, and we also have people in bio-psychology.  So I diversified that and we've supported the hiring of white and Latino and black scientists of distinction and so we've diversified ethnically as well as scientifically and raised I would say probably all together, maybe seventy million dollars in grants which I, all most of which I participated in and wrote myself.  That brings a lot of change into a place but it also brings a lot of hostility so that's the price you pay for that kind of--
Speaker 1: Hostility from--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean people who envy what you're doing or they think that they're not getting enough of the pie and all these kind--you know it's local politics.  So, but it's, I think it's made an impact.  The National Institutes of Health [NIH] has been very supportive of what we've done, they love it.  And the other part of it is that we've brought, not only diversified within the departments, but we have brought in a lot of collaborations.  So a few years ago the science, the National Institutes of Health decided that collaboration is a very important aspect of success in science which is kind of, should be obvious but wasn't at the time.  And so they started promoting that and so did I here.  Many of the scientists resisted that.  They said I can, I need my, I have a partner that I work with at Rockefeller or some other place in New York and that's fine.  We don't need to have to have any collaborations because it's fine for me.  And I tried to advance this idea that it's a systemic kind of thing.  You need to have mechanisms in place and programs in place that would enhance collaboration and stimulate more interactions.
Story_ID: 26692
Speaker 1: So I had that kind of pushback a lot, but eventually we got that going with Weill Cornell Medical College [New York] which is just down the street here and a grant was awarded to them that would promote the interactions and they wanted to collaborate with people here because they knew that there were minority scientists here too and that this would make them look good.  And they also wanted to have--the, some of the terms of the grants said that you really can't just do this by yourself.  You have to find partners, scientific partners.  So this kind of marriage emerged and we had great successes.  We have one guy in physics for instance, who was a, who worked on lasers and he started collaborating with somebody in ophthalmology and they increased the sensitivity of ultrasound in the eye by a factor of ten so you could see much more detail when you do an ultrasound on the eye.  You've seen ultrasounds of babies, it's very grainy.  When you use lasers to generate the sound instead they found that this could make it much more sharper.  You have ten times more definition and image.  You can detect smaller tumors that way.  Those kinds of things can only come if a laser physicist starts talking with an ophthalmologist or somebody who's doing ophthalmology.  And these kinds of things kept happening all the time and then people realized well look, this is a way.  So this CTSC [Clinical and Translational Science Center, Weill Cornell Medical College] is one of the best in the nation as a result of that because it promoted a lot of collaborations.  We have a nanotechnologist in chemistry who now works on--you know about nanotechnology, it's a very highly sophisticated field.
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's where [Godfrey] Gumbs [also a HistoryMaker] was working--you said that he might be working on that.  But this is Hiroshi Matsui and he works on, he discovered a way to detect cancer cells that didn't have to have any chemical changes or biochemical changes on the outside of them.  Normally when you're looking for cancer you have to find whether there's a different protein here and so on.  But he, somehow cancer cells seem to be more elastic and he could check this on, by using his nanotechnology tools because the electrical impedance of these cells would change because when you put them in water instead of the normal environment they swell up fast and the normal cells don't do that.  And the normal cells may burst and these cells expand.  So you can see electrical changes and then he found a way to detect this.  So he's collaborating with cancer people for early detection of cancers without biomarkers on them, a major breakthrough.  Those are things that couldn't happen without these marriages.  And you know this is to the delight of the NIH and the funding agencies and it's a major progressive step in science.  So those kinds of things have happened as a result of those collaborations and I think that that's significant.  Those are not my experiments.  My experiments are plodding along and in fact have suffered because I spent a lot more time developing these strategies than I did on my own individual research but I think it has a much bigger impact and also recruiting scientists to come here and getting more minorities involved in science have been things that I can now institutionalize.  It wasn't like working with Garrity [Judge Wendell Author Garrity, Jr., who worked on desegregating schools in Boston, Massachusetts] out in north, the north end in Boston [Massachusetts]. Now I can do these things in a more effective way.
Story_ID: 26693
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Just Garcia Hill [social networking website aimed at increasing the number of minorities entering science careers and at recognizing contributions to science by minority scientists] and what does it, what does the name stand for and what is it?
Speaker 2: Well Just, Ernest Everett Just is a, an African American cell developmental biologist, and he worked on the ways--he, I've forgotten the times that he worked right now, but he was a black developmental biologist at a time when there were very few like him.  And he had these ideas that were quite revolutionary in a way because he was interested in how the membrane of cells and so on might alter their ability to become specialized.  Now we may call that signal transduction because we know exactly what molecules are involved but at the time he was more doing the embryology and so on, and a very confident guy, very progressive and so on.  And he worked at Woods Hole [Massachusetts] but he suffered a lot because his ideas weren't well accepted and there was a lot of racism he had to deal with and so on.  Eventually he got fed up and went to Europe to work and there he made more contributions and then the World War II came along and he got captured by the Nazis.  And he was sent back to the United States right, and by then he had already burned his bridges here because you know when he went there he said to hell with you guys, I'm going to be a successful scientist over here in Europe.  And so when he got back he really sort of had a hard time, he floundered a lot and so on but he made a big impact.  So he was one of the people we named the site after.  And Garcia [Fabian Garcia] who's a Latino agronomist made, developed a lot of strains of peppers and so on, pimento he worked with and he was a--he made a significant--he was a scientist. And Rosa Minoka Hill is one of the first medical doctors who was a Native American and so we named the site Just Garcia Hill and, after those three people, an African American, a Latino and Native American.  So it's basically science for minorities.
Speaker 1: So what does the, now do you have a website and what happens with the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well again we got grants to do this, right?  That's what you probably do in your field and we developed this database of scientists so that we could try to encourage them to form a network in the time when social networking was unheard of.  We would try to get them to communicate and share ideas and be mentors for the scientists and so on.  And to, so that people can know who else is out there.  If you're sitting in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you're the only minority scientist in Harvard in some department and you're coming up for tenure and you're wondering whether it's because your experiments are not good or is it because there's racism involved, you've got nobody to talk to there.  And so those were sort of important considerations.  Networking is very important.  If you can't do that, you can't be successful in whatever--and especially in science.  So for minorities who are in the majority population, we try to find them you know somebody that they can talk to and for those who are in historically black or Latino schools, Puerto Rico for instance and so on, this is a way for them to communicate.  At that time of course that wasn't heard of when we did that.  It's still chugging along.  We got a grant to do it and we, you know we have, had about 4,000 people register.  I haven't done as much with it for a while and people have taken it over, have made it much more sort of like Facebook which I don't like so much because it tends to be, the style of communication is a little bit too superficial, like you can't share real sort of information in a way that I would prefer.  But we are revamping it in some way.  So that was Just Garcia Hill, and now there are lots of other projects that are like that now, trying to get more minorities using existing technologies like internet and so on, and which allow people to reach each other across local groups and so that's what it was about.  My interest now is much more in videoconferencing as a tool for delivering health information and communicating and so on.  But I'm still involved with that.
Story_ID: 26694
Speaker 1: Are you involved in any other--now is there an organization of African American geneticists at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.  There are a lot of--minority scientists have become more organized.  They have the--, with the encouragement from the National Institutes of Health [NIH] because they see it's important to have minorities at the table if you're going to make decisions about the things that are going to affect them, right?  So they have encouraged that and we want them to be performing better.  There was a report about a year ago that showed that people who went onto--that minorities were not as successful at getting NIH grants as non-minority scientists even when they had equivalent qualifications.  And that report was devastating even to the head of the National Institute of Health, [Francis] Collins.
Speaker 1: Now when was that study?
Speaker 2: That study was published in maybe about a year or maybe a year and a half ago.  And he resolved to make steps to change that situation and he has been working on it, Collins.  They've started to build a program and other things because it's obvious that they awarded these grants which is so critical to get your science going, requires so many different skills and so on, including your contacts and who you know and where you want to school and all these kinds of things that it makes it very difficult for minorities.  Even when they're doing equivalent kinds of work and have qualifications that are similar.  So fortunately you know there are a lot of enlightened non-minorities who can push these things as well and partner and so that's what Collins decided to do about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26695
Speaker 1: One of our people doing research [The HistoryMakers] said that there are a lot of papers cited for you up until 2002 and then you don't really seem to do anymore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I spend more, much more of my time managing these things again now.  I, there are some papers which have now a focus on these broader topics which have, which are on collaboration and on recruitment of scientists and those kinds of projects, much more so now than on my individual research lab.  And this happens of course a lot with people who go into more administration.  But I still have a lab but it's not as productive, and certainly not as when I came, before I came here just because this job has really consumed much more of your time even if you have the resources in some cases to do some of the experiments.  It just takes a lot more of your energy.  You wake up in the morning with ideas about how you might be doing this better or promoting this collaboration among institutions and so on.  So it's almost impossible to really be on the bench and being productive if you want to have--I think it's in a way it's a good thing because the science that a lot of the science successes that I've had are, I think they would have been done anyway by other people.  I think that almost in American science anyway, there are so many people doing things and it's so competitive that if one guy drops out it's so robust in a way or it doesn't, it's not, then somebody else makes that discovery maybe a little bit later and so on.  But this other area is not something that--it requires sort of special skills and kind of an understanding of a lot of different fields.  So for instance you know I was in here a few days ago talking with somebody about, that we're looking at about psychology, in psychology and he was taking--I asked him questions about gene expression and so on which he doesn't know that much about but he's been interested in doing that and memory.  And one of the things I have is the ability to sort of do, to understand a lot of different things and so I could ask him questions in different areas which is a kind of a gift.  People, a lot of people can't do that.  And so I think that it has a bigger, my--those particular things have a broader impact than--
Speaker 1: Than the research.
Speaker 2: --what I would have done in that time.  So that's, I think is a--and you know there is evidence that I have, of what I've done.  It's not like if, you know he just went on vacation and hasn't been--it's, so--
Speaker 1: Well what would you say is the most significant research you know that you, finding that you contributed?
Speaker 2: I would say that those two things I discussed, one of them being the regulation by the repressor which is something I did on my Ph.D. years ago.  And then I did the stuff on the signal transduction, the regulation by the repressor of its own synthesis that is, auto regulation, autogenous regulation.  And the other one had to do with signal transduction at a time when there was not that much about it, known about it.  In both cases however, as I pointed out, you know there were other people who were right there to, would have done it anyway, even though it might, at that time it might have made a splash and so on and it was considered important.  Almost everything you do in science is like that.  You know there's--even the guys who are now doing, you know we organize symposia.  We're going to have one in a few weeks on stem cells.  There's lot of really very revolutionary discoveries now in stem cells.  People are making kidneys out of, taking stem cells to grow them up into--functional kidneys.  You can use ink jet printers to print out a kidney and things like that but--
Speaker 1: A 3-D printer and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 3-D printing, yeah.  So those things are very important and very sexy at the time.  I think that these other areas that I'm in, I've involved myself in were significant too and would not have been done without my input.  Not as much as, as if you know, I think that those are important successes too.  And you have to have a lot of confidence in what you're doing because you know you're, in doing this, these kinds of things you take risks you know and hope that it's going to work.  But some of them work and some don't and you always have other people waiting to shoot you down in that way.  I mean it's a tough business.  So, I'm happy with what I--with my choices basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26696
Speaker 1: In 2008, you published a piece, I believe 'Addressing Health and Disparities Through Multi-Institutional and Multi-Disciplinary Collaboratories', right?  That's along the same lines--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, that is on, that has to do with how to set up these kinds of things.  As I, I think I mentioned earlier you know we've been even to Africa where there's a grant that's being awarded by [Francis] Collins [American physician-geneticist noted for his discoveries of disease genes and his leadership of the Human Genome Project (HGP);  currently serves as the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)] and National Institute of Health as well as by the Wellcome Trust from England to look at the genome, genomics in Africa and the H3 Africa [The Human Heredity and Health in Africa] project is that, and so we went over to help, to--they asked us to come to help them to set up some of the collaboration arrangements and so on and we've done that.  And we continue to work on that project.  That, a lot of that has--another, the other element of videoconferencing in it for people to reach out and find things and work together or give courses and learn together and so on, collaborate.  But collaboration is very complex.  It requires a lot of different tools and skills and understanding of what, you know what's needed in different places.
Story_ID: 26697
Speaker 1: Well you just mentioned before we ended the last session about the H3Africa [The Human Heredity and Health in Africa initiative]  project, Francis Collins [American physician-geneticist noted for his discoveries of disease genes and his leadership of the Human Genome Project (HGP);  currently serves as the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So you want to elaborate some more about that?
Speaker 2: Well I mean that project arose because I had been teaching a bioinformatics course, introductory bioinformatics which I teach and I had been collaborating with people in Mississippi, several universities in Mississippi and Michigan on working on trying to build a cyber classroom where they could study something called visual analytics, which is a way of representing a lot of data in a visual way so that you can see changes.  A pie chart is a visual analytic tool because even if it's based on millions of people, you know, you can have different colors to represent different groups or whatever, people who are tall or short or weigh within a particular weight and that kind of thing and you can show changes over time with these kinds of things.  So, visual analytics is something that's really very important for large datasets and for representing them in a way that's easily understood.  And there were grants given by the National Science Foundation [NSF] to a guy, colleague whose name is Rafael Zupe [ph.] and he has--he got a group of us together to work on this.  And so, he's Nigerian and there were, and this collaboration involved people who were Chinese, whites, and all kinds from all these different universities.  And this project was a pilot project and we started with him and we again provided some of the videoconferencing tools for people to work together and also we built a module which shows how you can look at evolution and teach evolution in a way online without being there and have these visual color schemes and heat maps to show differences in species across, as the evolution goes on for a particular protein.  And so we built this environment and we got to know each other you know and so on and he knew what we had been doing here with Weill Cornell [Medical College, New York] and this clinical and translational research project now.  So when the people in Nigeria wanted to have someone who might be able to help them with collaboration that's what they did.  They called up, they asked us to come over.  So Carlos, whom you met, and I went over, we did workshops there, we got people to understand the value in the technology and how it might work and it's you know, it's ongoing there.  There's a meeting coming up with people in Nairobi [Kenya] and other parts of Africa, different countries now are collaborating and doing scientific collaborations and we're helping them with connecting and some of the bioinformatic things that they will be needing.  Now we are not experts in bioinformatics, in genomics and high-throughput sequencing and all these techniques that they might be needing, and they will get those from other places.  So our contributions--I mean we understand the projects and so on and so we are helping them in that way.  Plus, some of the, two of the students now were identified and are now a part of our course so when we run the course on Saturdays, they come in.  We either have the course in here and we have the students here or the students may be at home and they connect with cameras and so on and head pieces, they'll talk into the computers.
Speaker 1: So it's like Skype or something but with (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Sort of, but much more sophisticated because you can share the data and see the data that you're presenting and then talk to each other and they're seeing each other and they you know transmit information, jokes and everything and, but they don't have to come to the same place.  So it's an experiment in a way on how that might work in the future.  Seems to be working very well and we have of course an electronic classroom where you can put up information, slides and everything and people can work together.  And that, so that's what some of them, two of the students from there are taking the course.  We also do the videoconferencing for other projects in New York, reaching out to communities from here.  This room is a studio and we reach--we get medical doctors and experts to come in and they give talks to people in many different places at the same time, churches and communities and so on.  And they come up on the screens and they see each other and they talk about diabetes, hypertension and how to avoid it or they talk about, to people who are senior citizens in homes, how to avoid falls because a large fraction of those people who fall die as a result eventually very quickly because of the broken hips and all these things.  So that's another topic.  Sometimes we have a yoga person in here who might be getting people in different places to get up from their chairs and do yoga and those kinds of things.  So it's prevention is the emphasis there rather than having to take more and more pills and so on.  The emphasis there is on prevention.  But in any case, with the Africa project it's more bioinformatics and genomics that they're focused on.
Story_ID: 26698
Speaker 1: And in Africa you're working in certain--what countries are you currently--?
Speaker 2: Well that project, we haven't been to these countries.  The only place we went to is Nigeria and the capital is where we want to, it's called Abuja.  Abuja is a new, relatively new city in the middle of Nigeria.  It used to be Lagos which in the south, a teeming city with lots of people and so on.  But Abuja was built like you know a European city in the middle of place and with all kinds of fancy facilities and so on and diplomats and everything, it's like Washington [District of Columbia], very well put away.  But, and so that's--we went there because that's what, they asked us to come and went there and that's one of the nodes in this whole project.  So there's one node in Addis Ababa [Ethiopia], there's a node in Cape Town [South Africa] and several other places.  Those are the major ones but there are several other cities that have nodes in this project.  And the idea is to study genomes and diseases that affect humans in Africa.  And the U.S. National Institute of Health [NIH] is involved, they put money into it and so has the Wellcome Trust [U.K.].  So it's a good opportunity for us again.  It's another kind of network we're involved in and it's something that's interesting to me too.  So--
Story_ID: 26699
Speaker 1: Now you have some strong views on the politics of science I read.  So--
Speaker 2: Oh you have?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  [Laughter]
Speaker 2: [Laughter]
Speaker 1: So I have to ask you about what your views are on the politics of science in the current political environment?
Speaker 2: Well you know I don't know--you probably read a piece I wrote in the 'Baltimore Sun' [newspaper] years ago when I was in Baltimore [Maryland], about science and how minorities should be involved in science and so on and you know that's one of the, sort of something, one of the things that influenced me to--writing the piece actually turned me you know, into being more, to being more sort of political in a way.  I also worked here when, during the last, the first run for power by [President Barack] Obama.  While I was here we tried to organize students, scientists in the country who would be supportive.  There are some things on the web you've probably seen about science, minority scientists for Obama.  I spent spring break in--five, I guess it's probably five years ago now campaigning out in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  I went with my son [Garreth Dottin] and we pounded the streets trying to help out and of course in this last election I worked with him, for him as well.  But, so I do have strong views about making a more democratic society is what I think is important.  This is my country and that's the way I want to see it and so that's how I spent some of my time trying to advocate for those issues.  In this current administration I mean it's such a difficult problem because of the gridlock, you know to try to get anything done.  And science is being affected because with all these kinds of sequestrations or fiscal cliffs and all these things, it brings us so much uncertainty into the funding of science research that it affects the ability to produce and to work on grants which are very important.  That's how scientists make their, do their experiments.  It's life or death in a way.
Speaker 1: Have you been directly affected by the sequester?
Speaker 2: Well our grants for the Gene Center [Center for Study of Gene Structure and Function, Hunter College, New York] had already been funded so we're not sure if that's going to, whether we will be affected or not because there's always a possibility that they can cut the award even if it's already been made.  The next award that comes up could be cut by ten percent or something.  We don't know.  But you know it's a more, beyond what our needs are.  I think it's really import--the environmental issues for instance fracking and so on, it's (unclear) a tremendous impact you know whether or not to proceed, which I'm very kind of neutral about it cause I think that there, you know you need energy and--but you don't want to have a lot of contamination of water or use excessive use of water in fracking that might be, you'd use up all the freshwater available.  That's one of our major concerns.  So all of these are issues I think that require input from scientists. Evolution.  It's amazing that in this country people are still debating evolution.  It's stupid, you know and thinking that the earth is 5,000 years old.  It's just nonsensical.
Speaker 1: Do you think there's any such thing as really as creation science?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean it's a, it's just, an odd--something that people make up to you know to avoid talking about evolution.  I don't think there should be any conflicts with religion and this but you know some people mix them up in a way that's you know, nonsensical in my opinion.
Story_ID: 26700
Speaker 1: We were discussing creation science and globe, you know the--
Speaker 2: Global warming.
Speaker 1: --critics of global warming.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Think scientists disagree about--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's nonsense.  The, you know, scientists by nature debate issues and refine them as they go on.  But there's no question about you know that the climate is changing at a rate that far exceeds what it had been before.  And that much of that is, has to do with human activity.  You know the polar ice caps, the arctic, these kinds of meltings are tremendous in such a short time that anyone should be very concerned about whether those are going, how those--what impact that will have on human behavior.  We enjoy the fact that the spring, you know you might have 80 degrees as we had yesterday or something like that.  But if you start looking at that over a long time and you see that much of this has happened within the last twenty or fifty years and so on, those are things for deep concern and to say that they don't, it does not matter is just you know burying your head in the sand.  And similarly for evolution and it's ridiculous.  The earth is not 5,000 years old.  There's so much data and evidence and so on for that and it shouldn't conflict with anybody's religious beliefs.  Those things are two separate ways of looking at reality and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Let me ask you like this too, could you have a genetic research without a theory of evolution?
Speaker 2: It wouldn't make much sense.  It wouldn't make much sense.  I mean if you had to look at every, spontaneous creation for every one of these species or, I don't know how it would, that would work.  I mean there's a kind of uniformity, DNA and X gene expression and cancers are all kind of related in a way that could be more easily understood in that continuum.  It's not to say that scientists know everything, they don't.  But they have a, you know a set of principles that make sense and they work on that and argue about things, just part of the normal discourse.  And when people say that scientists disagree on something, scientists disagree on everything that they're doing, that's how they make progress.  But that's not the same thing as saying that it's not valid.  So I think it really sort of obstructs progress and reality when people avoid those issues.  You know people talk about you know space travel and all these other kinds of possibilities in the future, and if you're sort of buried in some really kind of world view that prohibits you from looking at evolution and life and even the possibility of life on other places, I mean you're sort of limiting your vision so much that it's really almost counterproductive.  I mean I don't think many enlightened people would follow those pathways.
Story_ID: 26701
Speaker 1: You had a role in the revamping of the Ph.D. program here [Department of Biological Sciences, Hunter College, New York], right in--?
Speaker 2: Relatively minor.  My focus since I've been here have been, has been more on getting the whole science program within the City University of New York [CUNY system] to become more recognized, to become more collaborative.  There are other people in Hunter [College] and City University like Jerry Guyden for instance who was at City College who have the similar responsibilities at City College as what I do here.  The individual programs like graduate programs and so on has been much more the role of people who are department chairs working in the biology department or chemistry department and so on.  And you know we've sort--I've tried of course to help in those ways but not to take a very important leadership role in the curriculum development which is a big thing right now and on those kinds of issues so it's relatively minor.  The college is going through, and the university, City University of New [York], university is going through a big transition right now with respect to how they're going to organize programs for students who are coming in, what the requirements should be, how much science an incoming student should know and what that student's experience should be when she comes in and after she has stayed here.  And so those kinds of issues are being hotly debated now at the college, but my own involvement in that is like any other faculty member.  I may vote on something but it's not very significant or outstanding I should say.  It doesn't differ from sort of mainstream things that are going on, but they are very important issues.  So my focus has been mainly on finding ways for the scientists who are here, minorities or non-minorities to collaborate with each other across departments, across colleges and with other universities in this area.  And of course the other projects which I'm involved in have more sort of a national focus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26702
Speaker 1: When you look at our community, I mean the African American community, what are some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: Well that's a very broad question but I mean I think that for me science is a critical, absolutely critical activity so we have to get people involved in that because it's going to affect everything that your--your life and death.  There are some studies now which in epigenetics which show that it's not just your DNA that codes for information that you inherit in a kind of a permanent way, but that your environment can change the way the DNA is going to be expressed and now that's called epigenetics.  So, and it's inherited so it, even if the DNA itself is not changed, there's no mutations in the DNA, things that have to do with the way it's methylated or altered may express its, may change it's expression in the next generation, perhaps not in all future generations.  So people who live for instance under stress now, there are papers that have come out which show that those people can affect their progeny by, in the way that some of their genes are going to be expressed even though there is no permanent alteration in the DNA of that gene.  So that means that you know you're living in Harlem [New York] which is where I lived for one year, and enjoyed living there and in a relatively affluent kind of situation, it's not like somebody who's living in you know public housing with a lot of stress from no income and all these other kinds of things, those people have all kinds of stress on them that may affect their offspring as well, okay?  And if this kind--if it turns out that these things can be passed on to the next generation without--biologically, then I think that's a very serious concern.  You need to understand what some of these things are and how they might be, how these traits may be passed on even if it's not a permanent passage that may go on for generations and generations.  The fact is that depending on where you live and what your situation is, your zip code even, the predictions for how you're going to be, your children and your children's children might be are affected.  And so it's important for minorities to know what that means.  Or as I said we're doing a symposium on stem cells next May, we want to know cord blood, people who have, should be giving, becoming involved, minorities should becoming involved in giving, storing their blood for treatment of cancers if they get it later on.  So if you, if at birth your blood, cord blood is stored in some way then you might find a match that might have your children or family members if they need, if they have multiple myelomas and they need to have a transplant of stem cells because the cord blood is rich in stem cells.  These kinds of things, if you're not participating in these research experiments and human research, if minorities are not becoming involved as volunteers in human research, that's going to affect how much information is going to be available for helping them.  If they're not involved in panels at the National Institute of Health [NIH] on deciding the priorities for which research, which kinds of experiments should be given priority, should we spend all the money in breast cancer or should we spend all the money on X, Y or Z?  There's always choices to be made and you want to have good representation for everybody at the table so that you know that these things are equitably distributed.  And that's how a good democracy works so I think those are important points and those are the things that require everybody's participation.  I don't think many people argue with that in principle, but implementation is where the rubber meets the road as they say.
Story_ID: 26703
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do over again or wish you hadn't done?
Speaker 2: Well yes, there are things--I wish I could spend more time on my research, individual research because it gives you a kind of satisfaction. Even if you know that it's ephemeral, somebody's going to come and find that same thing later on, it would be nice to be able to do more of that yourself.  I still feel that I, I've done things which have made a very significant impact and that's part of my legacy.  So in that sense I think that the yins and yangs.  Most of my sabbaticals I spent working in labs and so on but the last one I went, I went to Trinidad when people thought well you know he's just going to the beach or something and I worked a lot on the videoconferencing projects and we got people from the United Nations [U.N.] to talk to, from here or from their homes and wherever they were in the world, to talk to medical doctors in the tropics and show, give them advice on diseases like diabetes which is becoming a worldwide epidemic.  These non-communicable disease or hypertension which is killing people all over the world and will bankrupt some nations and so on, to prevent these things.  So these strategies that we have developed, help in promoting prevention, right, getting people to do more exercise and change their diets and all these things are very important.  And so those are some, we have people from the WHO [World Health Organization], who were talking to people in Trinidad by these strategies.  I think those were very important first starts and they have to be continued and developed and refined and so on.  And there were talks on dengue and other infectious diseases that are carried by mosquitoes which might affect the people in the tropics, and how--instructions and how the WHO and PAHO [Pan-American Health Organization] work.  We had representatives from them giving talks to people using these technologies.  I think that's, those are good contributions to make.  So--
Story_ID: 26704
Speaker 1: Now, once again when you look back over your career and everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think that most of it is going to be on the issues as we discussed with respect to the impact I've had here [Hunter College, New York], the amount of funding that I have attracted here to help on doing research far in excess of what anybody else in the college or the university had.  I'm probably the biggest amount of funding that's come through these--
Speaker 1: This is millions and billions (unclear) right, this is a--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I would say at least fifty [million dollars] to more than that, depending on how, what you count it with I would say because some, in the beginning even though I wrote many of the grants that were, that came to here so you know it could add up to a tremendous amount which has made an impact.  So that's part of my legacy I would say.  And collaborations with people, other minority institutions like this that are funded by the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and promoting those programs that are important.  So I think those are--I can live with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll step down soon from the leadership of this program but there are many other things that I'm doing now.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26705
Speaker 1: Now you got married in 1970 and we didn't discuss it, right?  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have two kids, one who is in college now, he's a senior.  He--and one who is my stepdaughter [Melissa Lecator] who's, she's doing, she graduated and she's now in a nursing program.  When I was divorced I had sole custody of my son [Garreth Dottin], which was a challenge to take care, follow all these professional things and still do science research.  I, my--this is where family comes in.  My cousin came here and she went to, I helped her to go to college and she helped me to take care of my kid and I'll show you a picture of, send you a picture of that.  And my kid you know, I went and, for instance on sabbatical to different countries and so on, he came with me.  In Oxford [England] he went to elementary school in Oxford even though he was still collaborating on the internet with people in his class here in New York.  And when we go to conferences in Europe he plays a, he played a lot of chess and I like chess so we'd sit at the back of the room in the conference, I'd be taking notes on what's going on and I would make a move and then he would ponder and so on and make his move because you don't have to talk much when you're playing chess.  And so he went to conferences with me and when it was raining we'd play chess at the back.  When it wasn't, he would walk outside with his soccer ball and the kids in the village would come out and play with him even though they spoke German and he spoke English.  And so you know I--we didn't talk much about those things but I feel good about the fact that you know being a, as a single parent it's really a challenge and you know I'm sure I made a lot of mistakes there but you know he seems okay and he's going to graduate this year and hopefully will make something of himself.  And the other one is well on her way doing the nursing program and so on so I feel good about them and so we'll see what happens with them.
Story_ID: 26706
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I--there are lots of different things in my, you know it's been a complicated pathway.  Some of it is a lot of fun, I didn't talk a lot about my interest in football.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And my passion there, I'll give you a picture of some of my--I'm a big Chelsea [English football/soccer league club] fan and I, I've been to Stamford Bridge [football stadium located on the border of Chelsea and Fulham, London] and I met the captain of England and the team and so on and sometimes I go there and watch games.  My son has been there with me but he's a fan for Manchester United [English football/soccer league club].
Speaker 1: Did Chelsea, I mean are there significant numbers of players from Trinidad playing for Chelsea?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is that the--?
Speaker 2: There, no, when I was, I, I, somehow it got sort of imprinted in a way with that team and then when I was in Oxford [England] on a sabbatical, I saw many more games then and really sort of got into it.  When my kid was, son [Garreth Dottin] was growing up in the village I live in, Irvington, New York, he played a lot of soccer and so I encouraged all the people, well let's go at Christmas time and look at some games over there.  And many of them went, and they go without me now and they're over there watching these games and so they got into that with different teams because in England it's, you know there's a lot of very good teams.  It's very exciting.  So that's one of my passions, I like that.  So it's not all work and seriousness is what I'm saying.  I like a lot of jazz.  I follow--I have friends around here, Harris and Don, who are jazz lovers and we go to concerts and so on out to some of these jazz places around.  New York has a lot going on.  And so those kinds of things I enjoy too.  So that's I think a part of my legacy that I would like to be remembered for.  And the other things that I think will endure I believe that people recognize that or will recognize, some, in some cases begrudgingly.  But I think some people will recognize what I have done here at Hunter [College, New York] and the impact that it's had on minorities in science, I think that the individual experiments and so on will sort of fade because science goes so rapidly that you know more and more people come up with brilliant ideas and you know everybody plays a small part in making these things happen.  That's important too.  So it's kind of a mixed bag and I you know many of the people I met in my scientific life are really very special people.  I've met people at the NIH [National Institutes of Health] like Sidney McNairy who organizes a lot of this enterprise and he just retired.  And a friend of mine, Adolphus Toliver who just died.  I went to his funeral about a week ago in Washington [District of Columbia].  He was a great sort of inspiration nationally to a lot of people, to push them into science and to do important work and he helped to guide me as well.  And so I think that you know those are parts of my legacy and things that I've benefitted from and contributed to that are quite important.  It's a mixed, and mostly mixed in terms of geography from Africa to Canada to all these places and a lot in Europe and so on but also in terms of how you influence people and network with them and make some changes.  I think on the whole it will all come out okay.  I like, I've been focusing on learning Spanish a lot and so for the last five years I've sort of improved my Spanish a lot and I go to a Spanish dinner once a week out where I live with a club and interact with people trying to learn more about the, learn the language.  I think it's very important for communication in Latin America and I hope to do a lot more traveling down there in, once I give up on this aspect.  It's a lot of good scientists there and there's a lot of interest and some of the tools that I now have expertise in on videoconferencing and all these things, on a scale that maybe they're far less expensive than some of the things that we've invented, costs a lot more to--lot less to do, then I think we can communicate then.  That's another avenue for me.  So I'm pretty satisfied that I've done something that my son would be proud of and my daughter [Melissa Lecator].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much (unclear).
Speaker 2: Great, thanks.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 26707
Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead and tell us about that photograph.
Speaker 2: Oh that's a jazz club called Reduta in Prague, the Czech Republic and that's one of the places I went to when I was working with people at, in Prague at Charles University.  My kids, years ago when they were much younger.  Here's Garreth [Dottin] my son and Melissa [Lecator].  We're walking in the woods behind where I live in Irvington [New York].  He was much, even younger then Garreth, and he's trying to drive a car.  Here's an interesting one.  This was in Trinidad when I was a teenager in high school doing, in my biology lab at St. Mary's College [Port of Spain].  As I mentioned I worked in, as a prospector way up in Noranda [mining] in Quebec and this was one of the Indian guides who lived in--that was my home, my summer home.  I lived in a tent with a plywood floor and a tent put onto the side so you could stand up in it.  And we spent the summer looking at copper and plotting maps of all the areas.  There were planes flying over measuring the magnetic field and all of this stuff.  That's a big project, it's very isolated, lot of black flies.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was going to say, the insects must be--
Speaker 2: And that's my son playing chess.  He won a lot of prizes for that and we as I mentioned, we played chess at the back of the conferences where when it was raining so that he would you know he would be occupied and I could follow what was going on in science.  There is my son learning to use a computer what, a few months old and Melissa my daughter.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry did you mention, okay Melissa and--yeah, you did mention--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Melissa and Garreth, right.
Speaker 1: Garreth, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the 1991, when the United States was playing against Trinidad in the World Cup qualifying and everyone in red is a Trinidad supporter.  That was in the stadium down there.
Speaker 1: You mean you were supporting Trinidad?
Speaker 2: I was supporting Trinidad.  We--they lost.  And there's Garreth, my son sitting in my office.  And this is a trip to Stamford Bridge [football stadium located on the border of Chelsea and Fulham, London] in a supporter, Chelsea [English football/soccer league club] Supporter's Club that I belong to and there, we went to--every year they go over on a trip.  A few years ago when [President Barack] Obama was running for office we were out in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] working for the week during the spring break and that's my son with his Obama thing--sign.  And there's Obama in the University of Pittsburgh giving his talk, presentation and we were there.  And this is Giorgio Mangiarotti [ph.], a scientist in Italy and I guess that's in Turin.  We did some--he's a fantastic guy.  And this is Melissa when she was much younger.  She had written something on the wall and I made her clean it up and that guilty look on her face is when she's trying to erase the mark on the wall.
Speaker 1: It wasn't an equation I take it.
Speaker 2: No.  And that's my office which I still have and you can see the jazz, that picture of Harlem the, that--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --of all those musicians that, who assembled to take that picture from (unclear).  It's a very famous picture.  And this is a meeting with the people who discuss, who study that amoeba and we were in Japan for that as you can tell from the way we are sitting and what we're, how we're dressed and that was a fantastic meeting.  Daphne Bloomberg is on my left in that picture and Pauline Shapp [ph.], these are two scientists.  That meeting was probably in the Netherlands and that's, I think I, that's the place where I announced something about signal transduction.  That, this is Michel Veran, another scientist, he worked at the Pasteur Institute [Paris, France].  I worked with him on sabbatical at the Pasteur Institute but we took that picture in California.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that must be about 1992 maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my dad who is now deceased and my sister who lives in Toronto [Canada].
Speaker 1: Okay, their names?
Speaker 2: William Chelston [Dottin] is my dad's name and Catherine [Dottin] is my sister's name.
Speaker 1: Just remember somebody's typing.
Speaker 2: And that's my cousin in orange sitting near the Christmas tree and with my, with Melissa my daughter.  And she's the cousin who helped me to take care of my son, Garreth, when I was, had to actually work.
Speaker 1: (Off-camera conversation)
Speaker 2: That's my sister in blue, my oldest sister and on her, on my, on the other side is her daughter, my niece.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: My sister is Pat, Patricia [Dottin] and my niece is Jillian Hobbin [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These are all the support systems that you need in order to succeed in anything you're doing.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I think that picture was taken in Prague because that's where I worked with some people in collaborating again on signaling and so on in these amoeba.  And these are some of the people in Prague that I worked with.  On the left, on the, on my right in the picture, the guy in the sort of red shirt is Frantichek Puta [ph.] and then there's a technician whose name I can't remember right now and then, and the man in the middle is Peter Folk, I worked with him a lot and I can't remember the name of the woman.  They're both technical people who worked with them in Prague.  I graduated from the University of Toronto where I topped the class and I got, that's my graduation picture.  Here are the kids, that's Melissa and Garreth was just looking at colleagues then and we were at American University [Washington, District of Columbia] which is where he is a student right now.
Speaker 1: Oh I see (unclear).
Speaker 2: I think we had, I thought he printed out another thing.
Speaker 1: It isn't a whole big (unclear) and you're on it--
Speaker 2: That's me there.  I guess I was, I'm usually the largest grant in the group, a couple of million or something for--and this was an article that comes out every year about the grantees and--
Speaker 1: It's a big thing, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'm usually the one who has--that's me at Stamford Bridge which is where the Chelsea team originates, our soccer team, football they call it. And there, the guy in the center, we are giving him a trophy, he is John Terry.  He's the captain of the team of Chelsea and he's also the captain of England, the England--he was then, he's no longer.  And--
Speaker 1: So he's famous to everybody around the world except (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the other people are all members of the Chelsea Supporters Group including me.  At that time they had [Albert] Einstein on the TV right above us you can see.  It's just a coincidence.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that just happened to be up there in that instant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's a guy that everybody in England knows.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah he's--and this is my, people in my lab working, doing research.  And that's, you've seen that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This actually is a trophy or some kind of a plaque from, I guess I won this from Morehouse University [Atlanta, Georgia] awarded that for my work on gene expression and also on my contributions to increasing minority scientists in the world.
