Story_ID: 458037
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And we start out by slating the interviews (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --and we ask some People magazine-ish questions.  So I want to have you state your name and spell it for us?  Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes I do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so including your middle name?  And I want you to give your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Lloyd H.--no I'm sorry.  My name is Lloyd Henry Dean [HistoryMaker Lloyd Dean], spelled L-L-O-Y-D, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Dean, D-E-A-N.  I was born in Montgomery, Alabama, and the date of birth is June 24th, 1950.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Can I have today's date and our location?
Speaker 1: Just the date, I don't need to repeat that question.  See I'm so used to doing videos and stuff where I repeat the question.
Speaker 2: I see, (laughter) no you don't have to repeat the question.  Today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is December 18th, 2015.  The place is San Francisco, California.
Speaker 2: Okay. And your occupation?
Speaker 1: My occupation is I am the president and chief executive officer for Dignity Health [San Francisco, California].
Story_ID: 458038
Speaker 1: And I wanna ask five People magazine-ish questions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --short answers. Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Meatloaf.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) that's good. Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Maui [Hawaii].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My only limitation is my imagination.
Speaker 1: Wow, see I'm just always so impressed.  We--oh I can't wait--one day--one day we're gonna do a whole thing around favorite phrase or saying.  And you have the color blue behind you, which I always think is magical.  Okay, so, anyway.
Story_ID: 458039
Speaker 1: I'd like to have you--let's start by talking about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's where we start.  So, I know you're the second oldest of nine children, but can you tell me your--can you tell me about your father and give his name and what you know about his, his background?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Floyd Alanda Dean, Sr. [Floyd Dean, Sr.].  My dad was born in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  His family migrated there from somewhere in the South and I don't know where, and my father never disclosed that.
Speaker 1: Do you know--how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father was a very, very bright man.  He was an educated man in the sense that he graduated from high school, and interestingly enough, you know in today's world, my father would've been one of those people that could've gone through college and probably never had to, to study.  But in terms of formal education, only through high school.
Speaker 1: And did he talk at all about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father talked about his childhood, but a lot of it to all of the nine kids, myself included, was kind of a mystery.  And the only thing that we learned was there was something that happened in his history that was so powerful and life-changing that he really never really wanted to go deep into it.
Speaker 1: And what--and what year was he born, do you know, do you remember?
Speaker 2: My father was born, I think, in 1933.
Story_ID: 458040
Speaker 1: And your mother, can you give her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was--maiden name was Susie Vera Trip [Susie Trip Dean] and my mo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) T-R-I-P-P [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And my mother was born in Panama City, Florida.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me what--where--did her family, did they have a history in Florida is that--do you know much about her side of the family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do know more about my--my mother's family history.  My mother's mother [Amanda Trip] was also from the South, from Panama City.  And my great-grandmother was from Montgomery, Alabama where I was born.  My mother's mother was--worked in almost kind of a slave environment in that she cleaned the house for one of the richest people in her community and actually my mother's mother did also.  So my mother grew up in a fairly typical environment of a lot of African Americans at that time period in the South.  Where the father worked either in the field or in some factory if they were lucky, and a lot of the females worked in homes doing cleaning and cooking, and those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: In service they would call it or--.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, in service (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were in service.
Story_ID: 458041
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My parents met, my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.] was in the [U.S.] Air Force and my mother [Susie Trip Dean], as I mentioned, ended up in Panama City [Florida].  And one day at some dance, my father showed up and my mother was there with her sister and some of her friends.  And as she says, she saw this handsome man in his Air Force--Air Force uniform and they kind of met, their eyes kind of met.  They went through the night for a while and then my mother got up to go to the bathroom and my father kind of stepped in front of her, and that was the beginning of their relationship.
Speaker 1: Oh that's wonderful.
Story_ID: 458042
Speaker 1: Can you give your siblings--I'm sorry, name and birth order?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm fortunate to, to be from a family of nine.  My parents [Susie Trip Dean and Floyd Dean, Sr.] had nine children.  My brother, who have passed, Floyd Alanda, Jr. [Floyd Dean, Jr.] was the oldest, I am the second to the oldest, Lloyd Henry Dean [HistoryMaker Lloyd Dean], I have a brother George Dean [ph.], Ronald Dean, Carlos Dean, Mark Dean and Wade Dean [ph.], and two sisters who came at the end, my older sister, she's--I'm older than she is, but my sister Juanita Marie Dean [Juanita Dean] and Angela Dean.  We like to say practice makes perfect, my mother got it right with the two at the end.
Speaker 1: That is a lot of boys at the beginning.
Speaker 2: Seven boys. Including myself (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter)  Wow, your mother had given up on any girls.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  But she kept trying.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) She kept trying, okay.
Story_ID: 458043
Speaker 1: So, talk about growing up in--now you said in--in Mont--
Speaker 2: I was born in Montgomery [Alabama] but the--I was two and a half when my parents [Susie Trip Dean and Floyd Dean, Sr.], like a lot of African Americans, migrated to where my grandparents had moved on my father's side to Michigan.  And African Americans were coming up to Michigan particularly Muskegon [Michigan] because there were factories there that made parts for the auto industry in Detroit [Michigan].  And so when my father got out of the [U.S. military] service, he wasn't sure what he was going to do so he followed his mother because they said that there were jobs up north.  And my whole community, the little community that I grew up in emerged out of African Americans coming from Mississippi, Alabama, from the South.
Speaker 1: How large was Muskegon?
Speaker 2: Well, Muskegon, itself, is probably ninety to one hundred thousand--
Story_ID: 458044
Speaker 1: Where I lived is, is out kind of in, we'd like to say in the sticks.  But it was like this little community maybe thirteen miles from what I'll call the City of Muskegon [Michigan].  And there were maybe three hundred people in my community.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of the community?
Speaker 1: It's called Twin Lakes [sic. Twin Lake, Michigan].  But there's two Twin Lakes, Blue Lake Township [Michigan].  And this was a small community of predominantly African Americans and I was bused about eight miles to school.
Speaker 2: So would you say it was rural or a small--I mean was it a rural or a small town?
Speaker 1: It was it, it--there was really no sense of town because there were no public buildings.  The only store that we ever had in my community my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.], when my brother passed away, opened.  So it really was just a community of dwelling where people lived.
Speaker 2: And can you describe, can you take yourself back there and describe the street, you know, that you lived on.  Can you do that for me?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I lived on a street called White Lake Drive.  And that sounds elegant, it sounds like it's on a lake, but it's not and it was a street of very, very small homes, very, very small home.  An example, there were nine--nine of us and we had nine kids and two adults, and we had a three-bedroom home.  These were like manufactured homes and it was a very poor community.
Speaker 2: Now, let's--I'd like you to, but how--were the neighbors in close vicinity?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah, even though it was out in the country, your neighbors were pretty close.  But it was in a wooded area.  I mean this section was never like a planned community, it's just kind of one house grew there.  Other people told people about it in the South, they came there.  And this one guy started building houses because there was this demand from African Americans in the--in the South.
Speaker 2: So were you as a family unit, were you pretty internal?  Would you--would your activities occur with just the nine of you or were you playing with other neighborhood kids (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a lot of the activities of my early life were with my brothers and sisters.  But also with my, my [paternal] grandmother lived like out the backdoor, because again, she moved up there.  And peop- kids in my community, but you know, not like in an urban environment.  So a lot of my time was spent with my--with my family.
Story_ID: 458045
Speaker 1: One other thing about that, I'd like you to tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up [in Michigan]?  If you can take yourself back there.
Speaker 2: The sights would be--that come into my mind are a wooded area, the smell of coal, because our homes were heated by coal and kerosene.  The sight was a lot of poverty in the definition today, but an example in my home, in the kitchen sink we had a hand pump that you primed.  We did not have running water.  So smells of, and I don't mean to be difficult in--or alarmist, but of cesspools because we didn't have, you know, flushing toilets.  You would pour water in it and that would flush it.  A smell of soap, Ivory soap to be specific, because we didn't have a lot.  And an example when we would take baths on Saturday, it was bath day.  And we had these metal tubs and we would heat the water on our kerosene stove and my brother would bathe and he'd get out, and then I'd get in, and we would do it three at a time, and so that smell kind of always stuck with me and I can always remember my mother [Susie Trip Dean] with a washboard, and I'm talking about a real washboard and the blue box of starch [Argo Gloss Laundry Starch], mixing the starch and the smell of that.  And then finally, the smell of beans, black-eyed peas, red beans, navy beans, grits, because food was a central part of kind of all we had.
Speaker 1: And then, that reminds me a lot of my growing up, to be quite honest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 458046
Speaker 1: You attended church, was it Mount Cavern- Mount Calvary Baptist Church [sic. Calvary Baptist Church, Muskegon, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Baptist Church, yeah.  Church was a central part of my life.  From the time that I can remember, one thing in every child in my family, but it was even probably in my community, you would go to church.  That was not an option and you became very active in the church.  You would either--you know, you would go to prayer services, you would go to Sunday school, you would go to--you'd be in the choir.  I played piano in the junior choir and then in the senior choir.  My mother [Susie Trip Dean] was in, you know, mission.  And church for me was a getaway.  Because we were very, very poor, my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.]--and I think a lot because of the environment and the pressure of nine kids, you know, alcohol played a big part in his life and there are a lot of bad things that come with that that I try not to re- not to remember.  But church and school was like a sanctuary for me.
Speaker 1: So it was--it was your escape then in some--?
Speaker 2: It was my escape, it was where I didn't have to be scared.  It was where I didn't have to worry about violence.  It was where I didn't have to or for a moment I could be a child, did not have to be an adult to try to run interference.  It was just a getaway and school was too.  And I think one of the reasons why I excelled in school was, I know, I didn't wanna go home.  So I got involved in activities.  I just did not want to go home (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 458047
Speaker 1: You said you were bused to school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what school did you attend (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Whitehall--Whitehall--it's called Whitehall school system [Whitehall District Schools, Whitehall, Michigan].  It was about eight, almost nine miles away.  It was a total contrast from where I lived.  I lived out in this poor community, a lot of people on welfare, including ourselves.  But I was bused to this middle class, upper middle class school.  You know, there were issues with that in that, you know, I didn't feel that I had the clothes or those kinds of things to, to compete.  But I ended up getting a good education.  Because even though my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.] drank, he was adamant about you'll do--you will go to school and you'll do good in school.  But I saw school and education as a way out of that environment.  So I became pretty self-motivated, plus his motivation, that's why education to this day is something that I value and cherish.
Speaker 1: Did your brothers, did they similarly react or they had different reactions to the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My brothers reacted in different ways.  I think on the education side that was standardized, it didn't matter who you were, you would--you had to go to school.  You had to get good grades, and as I mentioned you had to go to church.  I was the first, first person, however, from my community to go to college.  My older brother [Floyd Dean, Jr.] was the second and my brother George [George Dean (ph.)], was the third, my sister Angela [Angela Dean] was the fourth, and then some other kids from my community by that--after those many years had passed were going to college.  So, college wasn't encouraged, but I knew at an early age, because I, you know, I watched television and I was bused to school and I figured it out.  You know, if I wanna come back and help my parents or help my mother [Susie Trip Dean], I'm gonna have to do something and do something meaningful and the route to that or the highway to that was education.
Story_ID: 458048
Speaker 1: I had read that your father [Floyd Dean, Sr.] contracted black lung disease (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --And had emphysema.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which is-so it that during this period or is that later?
Speaker 2: Well, my father worked in the factory and this was a factory back in the day that made, you know, parts for engines and so they'd have to core out these, these pieces of steel and that went--there were--there were no masks so that went right into his lungs.  Early on, I think about the time I was ten, I knew that my father was coughing more than other adults or where I was bused, other kids' parents, but we didn't know it was black lung disease.  It's a progressive disease.  So, as I got older and as he continued to work and he smoked also, it just became more prominent and later in his adult life it significantly contributed to his death.
Story_ID: 458049
Speaker 1: And then I also read that you had, you know, just as a child, you didn't really visit the doctor until you were in junior high?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I never, you know, my parents [Susie Trip Dean and Floyd Dean, Sr.] were the doctors.  Because back in the day, you know, if I had a burn my [paternal] grandmother would put bacon on it or put butter on it, or put a rag on it.  You know, castor oil was the cure for every, every, everything.  We didn't have--my father didn't have work benefits and even though we were on ADC, you know, Aid to Dependent Children [Aid to Families with Dependent Children], with nine kids, it's just and transportation, like I didn't go to a dentist.  So my first real visit to a doctor was when I took a sports physical at school.  And my first real visit to a dentist was right before I got ready to go to college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] because I got an abscess because up until that point if you got an abscess your father would just pull your teeth or tooth or something like that.  And it seemed normal to me.  You know, as I got older in junior high school, I always wondered what is this kids getting a pass to go to the doctor to get shots, what is this, kids getting a pass to get out of school to go to a dentist.  So I got it then, you know, once I was a--old enough to comprehend it.  But you know, I survived and some of those old remedies might work as well as some of the things today.  But I avoid castor oil, even going down the aisles that it--that it's in now.
Speaker 1: Castor oil was some horrible stuff, but it works (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See and you know, with that lemon and a shot--a shot of lemon and that was it, right.
Speaker 1: Those were those old home rem- remedies.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But they got you--they got you through.
Story_ID: 458050
Speaker 1: What is school and who are you associating with and who are your teachers?
Speaker 2: You know, school was fascinating for me because I was--you know, even from an early age I shared with you that my parents [Susie Trip Dean and Floyd Dean, Sr.] required that you study.  But most of the boys in my neighborhood [in Blue Lake Township, Michigan] and, and, and a lot of the girls, education wasn't the cool thing to be doing.  So you know, when I got to school I wanted to be competitive and I wanted to be like everybody else in my class, because obviously a majority of my class was, was, was white, was not--you know, often I would be one of very few African Americans in my class.  So I studied because I wanted to be like the majority.  And I wanted to do well 'cause I wanted to get out of my community, come back and help my mother in particular, but my family.  So, school was mixed in that some of the kids in my community thought I was, you know, trying to be like the majority--
Speaker 1: The white kids?
Speaker 2: The white kids, when I was really just trying to, to study, to get out.  I wanted to learn and be exposed to things that the white kids had that I didn't have.  And so I--and I was raised in a family where, you know, people are people.  You know, I was in a very religious family and so I looked at it that way.  But a lot of my school years, I liked the education part, but the social part became difficult for me because I felt like I was pulled both ways, because I was good at school that seemed to be bad in my community.  If I wasn't good in school, that seemed to be bad at my school.  So, I got through it and it made me stronger, but it wasn't, you know, and I be--went on to become president of my--a lot of different things in my school and National Association of Student Councils and all that kind of stuff.  So, I just made a decision that what's the most important thing for me, to be liked or to do well in school to get a good education and then come back and help my family.  And--I mean there were nights I cried by myself because, you know, people thought I was trying to be something I wasn't.  But, I did what I thought was right.
Speaker 1: Did they ever use the term Oreo?
Speaker 2: Oh, Oreo, Uncle Tom, oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.  And you know, and it was crushing.  Because these were my--these were my, my, my, my friends.
Story_ID: 458051
Speaker 1: You know, God gave me this gift, we all have gifts, to have the fortitude to say Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Dean], you know, go forward, do what you think is right.  And my mother [Susie Trip Dean] always told me when I'd come home and complain about it.  You know, I didn't complain often 'cause I didn't want her to worry.  But the time I did she said, "You know, treat people with respect, treat people with dignity."  You know, they--she used to use this phrase, "They talked about Jesus Christ and he was hanging on the cross, so you know they're gonna talk about you.  But, you know, be who you are, study and you can't worry about what other people think, but treat people with respect.  And don't, you know, and don't let people define who you are--you are, you are who you are."
Speaker 2: And so was your mother a, a, a positive guide (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh my mother was--my mother was the angel of my life, everything to me.  I mean she was my heart, my soul, comforter, you know, my mother, my friend.  She was, she was everything.  And we're very close because I was the one boy in the family that, you know, when stuff would go on in my--with my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.], I would try to insert myself in the middle to have it--him directed at me to--so it wouldn't go to--
Speaker 2: To her.
Speaker 1: --to, to, to, to my mother.  So and you know, and I don't wanna make it sound like my father didn't teach me some good things, but he also taught me some things not to do and things that I didn't want to be.  But my mother was the greatest thing and had the most positive impact on me that a human could have on another human being.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.  So, you were, you were almost in many ways a mama's boy?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no, no not that, because my--I mean I have brothers that were closer--no I was very outgoing and very--in my family, there wasn't--affection wasn't shown a lot.  You know, my father, I can remember said I love you once, I think in my whole life.  But I think he loved me, but it just wasn't affection.  You know, I went through my entire life fearful of my father, because you know, he would, you know, corporate punishment [sic. corporal punishment] and back in those days, you know--
Speaker 2: Switch.
Speaker 1: I mean switches, belts, razor straps, his fist.  So, yeah my mother meant a lot--a lot to me.
Story_ID: 458052
Speaker 1: But you know, there's one thing I wanted to say about the school thing 'cause I think there was a very insightful question is that, you know, when you grow up like I did in a community like I did and back in those days when you were bused, you know, you were uncomfortable at, at home in the community or you were also uncomfortable at school.  Because there are people at, at the school that I was bused to that didn't believe we should ev- we should be going to that school.  And there were people, kids whose parents didn't want them associating with African Americans.  So, if you didn't have some internal strengths and some sense of direction you could perish in that kind of environment and a number of my friends did.  They either quit school or did other things that thank God I was able to say away from.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean the thing is--it's the split existence and the pressures from both.  That's why it was, you know, 'cause it's hard in a lot of cases.  And that's just you, kids are trying to find their own way anyway.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Story_ID: 458053
Speaker 1: Was there a teacher though that was helpful like, how did you even know--I mean I know you say education, but was there someone that nurtured you there. Was it a coach or was it--was there any adult or--? 'Cause you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, you know, that's--yeah, and I thought about that and I've been asked that question.  There were two teachers that--that--that stand out, you know.  One was a lady by the name of Miss Nelson [ph.] in fifth grade.  Because I think it was in fifth grade that I almost decided to give up.  And I asked myself with the pressures of school and that environment with the pressures of the home environment.  I mean I really thought about, you know, should I drink some poison, should I, you know, should I just figure out a way to, you know, take my own life because the pressures of both of them were getting too much.  And, and again, I was a good student and active, and you know, kind of outgoing in school and she saw that begin to change.  And, and she wanted to know what was going on in my life.  But I was raised in a family you don't talk about anything going on in your life.  You could be starving to death, but if somebody at school asks you--adult or somebody, I--I'm full, I don't need anything.  But she, she just knew and cared enough, and one day said, "I wanna see you at noon when all the other kids would go out."  She said, "I can tell that you're having a difficult time and I don't know what it is, but I see your behavior changing, you know, you're, you're going--," we would say becoming introvert, introverted-- "and you just look sad.  Is there anything you wanna talk about?"  And I said, "Everything's fine, everything's fine, everything's fine."  And she said, "I'm worried about you."  And I said, "Every--everything's fine."  And she said, "No, talk to me."  And I said, "You know, I just--I don't know what to do."  And she said, "What do you mean by you don't know what to do."  And I said, "I just don't know what to do.  You know, I just don't know if I can take it."  And she wanted me to explain what did that mean and I said, "I just, I just don't like getting up anymore."  And then she said, "But you have to get up, you have to get up for your--for yourself, you have to get up for your family, you have to get up and you can't give up, you just can't give up.  You have too much talent, you're too smart, people like you, and life is not gonna always be easy, but you just can't give up."  And nobody else had ever told me that.  'Cause nobody else could see it because I faked it. You know, I faked it. I didn't want anybody else to see it.
Speaker 1: So that was helpful then?
Speaker 2: Oh it was very helpful.  It--other than my mother [Susie Trip Dean], and you know, my [paternal] grandmother, you know, it showed me that somebody--
Speaker 1: Cared.
Speaker 2: --cared, and so that's one.  And then one teacher, I think I was in eighth grade, a civic teacher, Mr. James Harris [ph.].  Just had heard, you know, about some--stuff going on in my family, and pulled me in and said, "The essence is, I know it's not easy Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Dean], but you know, you just gotta be strong and muscle it through.  'Cause you're a very smart young man and you're gonna do great things and I know it's hard," but the equivalent of you gotta, you just gotta man up and get through it.  And there's nothing that anybody else can do to help you.  You gotta get through it yourself.  And that would be it.
Story_ID: 458054
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know, I didn't have mentors or no coach or you know, nobody in my family told me to go to college.  When--when I got ready to go to college my father [Floyd Dean, Sr.] was laying on the couch and I said after a week, two weeks after I graduated, I was gonna go to the community where the college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] was.  And I tapped him on the shoulder and I said, "Daddy I'm going."  He just rolled over and kind of said, "Where you going?"  I said, "I'm going to college."  And he said oh, and went back to sleep.  And my mother [Susie Trip Dean] gave me fifty dollars, walked into her bedroom and you know, back in the day, you know, women--African American women, she had this rag where she saved money and she gave me fifty dollars.  And I mean I felt bad even taking it because it was like, I mean I knew she needed it and I knew something wasn't gonna get paid, rent was gonna get paid, light bill wasn't getting paid.  I just said, I'm gonna do the best I can with it.
Speaker 2: You escaped, in some respect (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 458055
Speaker 1: How did you end up deciding on Western Michigan [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], that--that's the other thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I you know, it was interesting because I did well in school I could've gone to you know, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  And I went to Western really for the same reason, which was weird that a lot of kids go, is that number one, Kalamazoo, Michigan wasn't that far.  I mean it was hours, but--from my mother [Susie Trip Dean] and I wanted to be close in case something happened to be honest at my house or home.  So that was one reason, it was the closest major university to where we lived.  Secondly, one of my good friends, white friends at school just one day, you know, when everybody started talking about where they were gonna go to college, his name was Bob Funnel.  I said, "Where're you gonna go?"  He says, "Oh I'm gonna go to Western Michigan University."  And I said, "Well I'm going to Western Michigan University too."  Because I was just so happy to get a scholarship to go to college, and I wanted to kind of be close to--to home, that's why I went there.
Story_ID: 458056
Speaker 1: How was your time there?
Speaker 2: Oh, god you're asking me all the tough questions.  My time was fascinating from a learning and an eye-opening and eye-awakening experience, but I went to college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], I graduated from high school in 1968.  When I went to college it was 1968, Black Action Movement, still facsimiles of segregated dorms.  And when I went to college, signed up, that young man that I just told you was one of my friends that was going to college.  Remember I told you, I was the only one from my community going to college, you could request a roommate for your dor- in the same dorm.  So I requested that Bob [Bob Funnel] and I, we decided we were going to room together.  In 1968, that was not what African Americans did.  'Cause we had a lot of students from Detroit [Michigan].  You went to Henry Hall or you went to Sangren Hall, you went to where the black predominant black kids were in the dorm.  And I innocently said, I'm not gonna know anybody at college, I don't know anybody else who's going to college there.  So Bob's going, so we'll room together.  And one day I got a knock on my door from three African Americans saying, "You can't, you can't room with that white dude, you gotta--you know, you gotta come to our dorm."  And I said, "Why would I do that?"  And actually I didn't even know, I thought there was some--some other reason, I wasn't even thinking about race.  And I said, "I'm not--I wouldn't do that."  And they said, "You know, you got rooms over here, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, which is part of the movement.  You know, there's stuff going down on this campus."  And I said, "I'm not moving," I said, "I'm just here to try to get a good education."  So I became like the--known throughout the whole college as, you know, this African American that wants to be in the white dorm.  I didn't even know the dorm was white, I didn't know there were color of the dorms.  I didn't even know you had choices.  I didn't know that--I didn't know anything about the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] when I went to college.  I just went to college to try to do the best that I could.  But one of the things about me is I have a lot of fortitude and a lot of strength.  Growing up with my dad [Floyd Dean, Sr.] made you strong.  You know that thing about what didn't kill you makes you strong.  So, and I believed in the Bible and I believed in justice and I had principles.  My principle is if you treat me well, I will treat you well.  If you don't treat me well, I either gonna move away or I'm not gonna treat you well if you affront me.  But, I'm not gonna let you tell me how to live my life.  If, if I thought that was wrong, I would've moved, but I didn't.  You know, I, I--how much time when you're in a dorm do you spend in the dorm, you're, you're in classes.  And plus, I had to work.  So I rarely saw Bob.  And I told him that.  I said, "I'm not--I'm not moving," you know, after we got from the niceties.  They said, "Well you know, we're telling you, you need to move."  And I said, "I'm not moving."  And they said, "Well you know, you know you're gonna be ostracized on this campus."  I said, "You know, you gotta do what you gotta do, because if I let you start telling me where to live, next you'll tell me what else I can do, and I wouldn't do that."  So, I--so, you know, but that was my freshman year--
Story_ID: 458057
Speaker 1: My sophomore year, my junior, and my senior year was great.  You know, I was president of the student body at Western [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].  You know, I was very involved in all of the activities and those same students that came to my door, we became friends later.  They needed me to help them with classes and to get them into stuff around the college because I was very engaged.  But, the first few years weren't what I thought a college experience should be, and I could've made it easy on myself by just moving.  But, I'm very formidable about my beliefs.
Speaker 2: So you're saying three out of the four years wasn't--it what--did you say three (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I said two of the four--the first two years, my freshman and sophomore--
Speaker 2: Were not--
Speaker 1: --were not--were very difficult years because to me a freshman is be- being ostracized, you don't even know what you're dealing with.  And you know, it took me a while to even figure out why--you know, I mean I knew, you know, social stuff and I--and I went to all of the African American everything, but I just didn't feel like I would move.  Why can't I--I mean this is a guy [Bob Funnel] I went to high school with, why are you--and I, you know, I got the movement and everything.  But I just thought it was an extreme thing, you know.  I don't tell people who to pick their friends.  I mean I'm not gonna deny that he is my friend and so it got--it got tough, I mean I had to go home and ask my uncle if he would let me have his gun, 'cause people would come and threaten me.  People would walk around me at campus.  People would be pointing to me.  One day they set lighter fluid under my door and some of my stuff caught on fire.  But I still wasn't gonna move.  I mean that just made me for sure I wasn't gonna move.  And then this one night, I was walking from the student union, he told me, "You know, you're gonna get hurt bad if you don't move."  And I said, "Well, you know you can kill me, but I'm still not gonna move, you'll have to move me dead, but I'm not--I'm not gonna move because you told me to move."  And eventually they gave up and said--I remember this one dude that was vice president of something of Black Action Movement came to me.  He said, "You know, I've never seen anybody like you, I've never seen anybody like you.  I just don't understand why, you know, you must--you must really believe in whatever it is you believe in.  You know, it doesn't work for me, but I do respect you."  And from that moment on I, I don't know, I guess the word got out and people, you know, I was always friendly.  I never stopped talking to people.  I never stopped going to the meetings, you know, people pointing at me, but it was all right.
Story_ID: 458058
Speaker 1: You major in sociology, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how large is Western Michigan [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] when you were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About thirty thousand now.  When I--yeah when I was there about probably twenty-one thousand.
Speaker 1: So it's large, so you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no it's a large university.
Speaker 1: That was quite a jump to go--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah from a--
Speaker 1: --from the teeny little town [Twin Lake, Michigan].
Speaker 2: --little town to there.
Speaker 1: To that size, it's huge.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I'd never even seen black olives.  I mean when I first got to college I went into the cafeteria and I thought these were grapes and took a handful and they were black olives.  You know, 'cause I grew up with nine kids, you know and on welfare on and off, so.  It was an experience.  But it was--but you know what I don't--
Speaker 1: It was a growth experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't regret, I mean I regret some of the things that I went through in my early childhood and in my--and in college, but I don't regret my life at all.  I mean I've been blessed and I think I've done pretty well.  And so--and I don't--I never look back, I'm a forward-looking person.  Never look back.
Story_ID: 458059
Speaker 1: So when you graduate--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You graduate in 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-two [1972] from undergrad [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].
Speaker 1: And then you go directly in to get your master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: No, no--well I actually did.  I started on my master's classes but I couldn't take a lot of classes because I, I worked three jobs.  I started working at a law firm as a paralegal assistant (unclear) because I thought I wanted to be a lawyer.  And then I also worked at the school cleaning bathrooms because I, I did anything I could to make money (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you were support--were you supporting yourself?  Did you get a free ride?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I--no I had scholarships, but I was using--excuse me NDEA [National Defense Education Act of 1958] loan people, using some of the money to send home to help my mother [Susie Trip Dean] out and then I would work to re-supplement that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Well there are a lot of de- I mean there are a lot of demands at that time (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, and I wanted to, you know, I, I wanted for my younger brothers and sisters to not go through what I went through.  So you know, I would take money home.  I would make sure that they had a big Christmas and all of that kind of stuff, even when I was in college.
Speaker 1: Aren't there--so when you graduate, wait--that's what I'm saying, the program, the mas- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh in the master's program, yeah.  I was in the master's program for--I completed all the course work for--except for a couple classes like in the normal time.  But, I worked as much as I could, so I think I formally completed my master's like in '76 [1976] or something like that because I needed to complete the classes.  So whatever date they gave you, that's the date.  But it wasn't because I, you know, was just taking small amount of classes forever.  I just started working and I go--and oh then I started teaching also.  I started teaching in the Kalamazoo Public Schools.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a great experience too (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 458060
Speaker 1: Now is that--you met your--your wife [Suzanne Dean], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my wife, when I was--when I was in college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], I--one of the jobs that I had when I became a junior was working at, it's called Lakeside Boys and Girls Residence [Kalamazoo, Michigan].  It's a home for emotionally disturbed kids on this kind of private lake.  Kind of a very expensive place where families could send their kids, you know, for the summer and for treatment and stuff.  And I worked in the older boys, thirteen to sixteen cottage and my wife worked in the older girls.  And there was this big wa- sidewalk in between and one day after I had been there a couple weeks I saw this lady walking down the sidewalk and each of your cottages have den mothers and I said to the den mother, "I have no idea who that lady is, but I'm gonna marry her someday."  And it was the first time I'd ever seen her.  First time I'd ever seen her.  And, and we never talked except down at the lake, 'cause you have to take your kids down there for different activities and the older kids went at the same time.  And that's how I met her.  And then she started helping me out when I was running for student government, student body president (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh so you ran for--
Story_ID: 458061
Speaker 1: Oh you did run for student body president (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, oh I was--
Speaker 1: So you were acti- so talk about your activities?
Speaker 2: Oh I was very active in college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].  I mean I was--
Speaker 1: Even, even--so wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Even working I was still very--
Speaker 1: But wh- okay but this is the whole thing 'cause, you didn't say this, but I mean BAM came which is the Black Action Movement, and they called you Un- Uncle Tom, all white lover (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yep, all that stuff.
Speaker 1: But then--
Speaker 2: But that doesn't stop me from being in student activities and with a job.  Because I just, you know, I wanted, I always wanted to be involved and I always thought that you can't change things on the outside, you gotta get involved.  And you know, that's my philosophy today.  And that's what I tell--you know, I do a lot of speaking at, you know, in master's [degree] classes and M.B.A. classes.  And I tell them, you gotta get involved.  You gotta get prepared, but you also have to be in- in- involved.  And opportunities aren't gonna come to you.  You have to often kick the door down and make opportunities.  So, yeah I still, I mean I wasn't a (unclear), I mean I didn't--I didn't just go away because people were picking at me.  I mean I, yeah ran for student body president.  I was on the chair--president of the student activity councils that brought all of the entertainment to the college.  I brought Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner, and you know, no I was very active in college while all of this was going on.  I wasn't gonna let it define me.  I wasn't gonna go and hide.  If somebody's gonna hurt you or talk about you, they're gonna talk about you whether you're in your room or whether you're out trying to do something good.
Speaker 1: And, and what so--student body president that was in your junior year or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, junior, junior, junior year.  Yeah, but I was--I was involved in--
Story_ID: 458062
Speaker 1: Were you involved also with radio or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have very good research yeah.  So let's see in my senior year [at Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] while I was working on my master's [degree] I--
Speaker 1: Worked as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked as a--I did the morning news on an AB--ABC affiliate.  I got up and did that at five o'clock in the morning and then I'd drive to Battle Creek, Michigan do the news and then--and that was back in the day when you had an AP [Associated Press] and UPI [United Press International] machine, you pulled your own news out, you write your news, you time it, you went on the air live on TV.  Then I'd get done, get back in my car drive to school and teach school.  And I did that for about, I don't know six months, nine months, and it just got so treacherous.  I mean it was just--it was just treacherous, the drive and then the snow and stuff.  And yeah, I've always worked a lot and did a lot of--I tried to do a lot of different things with my life.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're--so when you graduate, what do--what do you do at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, when I first graduate--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I have you working as a news--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was like a part time thing, that was a part time thing.  So I, when I graduated I started teaching.  Teaching in the Kalamazoo Public Schools, I did that for like six, seven years, different grades.
Speaker 1: Oh you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Then I moved from there while I was working on my master's, met a guy by the name of Dr. Gene Booker [Gene S. Booker] and because I was involved in student government, I met one of the heirs to the Upjohn Pharmaceutical Company's executives who got to know me from all of my student activities 'cause a lot of times I would present at the college board different things going on on campus.  And one day he [Lawrence C. Hoff] told me that, he said, "You know, I wanna learn more about you," and he told me all about--and he said, "You know, ever star- ever thought about doing anything other than teaching?"  Because he said, "You know, I've observed you," and then there was this class that I ended up--one of my majors is communicative arts and sciences, so, you know, communication and speaking and that kind of thing.  One of my experiences was, I was a TA [teaching assistant] to a professor who really let me teach the class.  It was a class for (unclear) individuals about how do you deal with press conference, and how do you put together presentations, how to do public speaking, you know, slides all that kind of stuff.  And so they kind of got to know me and they said, "Hey, you ever thought about working for the Upjohn Pharmaceutical Company."  And I said, "No I love teaching," and I was making like twenty-one thousand dollars for--where I came from I was like, rich.  But then he said, "I'm not coming back to your class unless you come out to the Upjohn Company."  So I did and this was like something I've seen on TV, you know, huge glass buildings, and corporate offices and they took me out to the hangar, corporate jets.  Took me up to meet wi- they said, "We're go- I would like you to stay for lunch."  A pri- you know, I'd never been you know in a corporate private executive lunch suite.  Because this was when the pharmaceutical companies made so much money they didn't even know what to do with it.  And, and they had the top officers of the company join me for lunch.
Story_ID: 458063
Speaker 1: Now was that the person who you were talking about, was that Lawrence Hoff [Lawrence C. Hoff] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, very good, Larry Hoff, Larry Hoff.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Lar- so what did he see in you, that's what I, I mean, I didn't quite understand how?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Larry, Larry--
Speaker 1: So he saw you where?
Speaker 2: Oh he heard me--he her--he saw me present.  The Upjohn family kind of dominated Kalamazoo [Michigan], because they were the largest employer.  So, because I was active in college [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], there were Upjohn executives on the various boards and committees, and they were on anything that was important in Kalamazoo.  And because I was so active in the university, a lot of times I'd be called to talk about what's going on at the university, or what are students thinking, you know, what are some of their challenges.  How can the Upjohn Company [Upjohn Pharmaceutical Company] be better partners with the university from a student perspective, because I, you know, was one of the top student government people.  And also, because of the six hundred class, a lot--there were Upjohn executives that I would be teaching them how to do public speaking and how to deal with press conferences and that kind of thing.  And one day, Larry was at some meeting and he said, "I've heard about you, I wanna talk to you, I've seen you at these meetings," and he said, "I want you to come out and have lunch with me."  And so I did.  And I was so blown away and at the end of the lunch they said, "We'd like you to come and work for us."  And I said, "Oh no, no, no, no.  I love what I'm doing and having a lot of fun teaching and I like it."  And they said, "How much do you make?"  And I said, "Twenty-one thousand dollars," and they said, "Well what if we offered you thirty thousand dollars?"  And I said, "Oh no, you--," I meant to say no you don't have to do that and they said, "Well what about forty thousand dollars."  And I said, "No it's not about the money."  They said, "What about sixty thousand dollars?"  And I said, "Well I'm gonna need to think about that (laughter)," 'cause I knew--I knew twenty-one times three gets you pretty close to sixty-three--gets you to sixty-three thousand dollars.  And I said, "I--you know, it's not about the money.  I just, you know, I love what I do and you know, I just, you know, this is a whole new thing and I appreciate that you have the confidence in me."  And so I went back and I talked to one of my professors, two--Chuck Warfield [Charles Warfield], Dr. Warfield who's African American professor, and I talked to Dr. Gene Booker [Gene S. Booker] who was the head of the business department 'cause I took classes in the business department for my master's [degree].  And both of them looked at me and they said like, "Are you a fool, you should've took it at thirty, let alone at sixty."  And they said, "You get your butt out there tomorrow and you tell them yes.  Do you know how many thousands of people in--around the United States wanna work for the Upjohn Company?  Do you know how difficult it is to get in?  Do you know how--this is one of the top pharmaceutical companies, excuse me, in, in, in, in, in the world right now.  Are you like--is something wrong with you?"  And so I did and became the youngest executive vice president to ever receive the Upjohn Award of Excellence [W.E. Upjohn Award] in the history of the company.  It was a nonfamily member for operations, for you know, you know growing the company, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  So, and that's how I got into healthcare, and then I was there fourteen years.  I got recruited to, what is now Advocate Health Care system, a smaller healthcare system, kind of like Dignity Health [San Francisco, California] and was about to become the president there and CEO.  And got this call about this company called Catholic Healthcare West [Dignity Health].  But I was--had been reading about it because they were in the national news about one of the top companies in United States having problems.
