Story_ID: 97971
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start out by slating the interview, and I'd like to have you state your name and spell it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Alison J. Davis.  That's A-double L-I-S-O-N, middle initial J, last name Davis, D-A-V as in Victor,-I-S.
Speaker 1: And you have your real middle name in here.
Speaker 2: And my real middle name is Jeanne--don't know why, but it's J-E-A-N-N-E.  And I think my mother thought she was from France or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: And can we have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born April 7th, 1953.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 13th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And our interview location?
Speaker 2: Our interview location is 4 Times Square, New York, New York.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the director of communications for the Jackie Robinson Foundation.
Speaker 1: But would you call yourself a producer or a media---(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I would--yes, yeah, and I'd kind of rather use that anyhow (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am, I would consider myself still a journalist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97972
Speaker 1: Okay. We ask five "People" magazine-ish questions, short answers--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can I have your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food would be lobster.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year would be summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color would be, oh, royal blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying--sorry, favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Favorite place of vac--to vacation, probably Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My children will tell you that my favorite phrase is "Success is your best revenge".
Story_ID: 97973
Speaker 1: Okay, so we want to start out by asking you about your family background.  Can we start with your mother?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And can you give her name and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Doris Elizabeth Nelson.  She was first generation American.  Her parents were from Jamaica.  She grew up in Harlem [New York], and she was a registered nurse.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about growing up in--did she grow up here or did she grow--
Speaker 2: [No audible response, nodding yes.]
Speaker 1: Okay, she grew up in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: In Harlem.  Okay, can you share some stories of her growing up?
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother was the youngest of three children.  She had two older brothers.  She was, I would suspect very pampered by her father, less so by her mother.  She tells the story of being kind of overweight and somewhat of a loner because of that.  She wasn't very popular, and I think that sort of lasted throughout her lifetime of feeling a tad bit insecure.  My mother was extraordinarily bright, and, in fact, went to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And I remember her saying that, you know, she, you know, lived a little bit the manner born.  I mean when she was growing up, her parents provided her during the Depression with writing lessons and tennis lessons in Harlem.  And so when it was time to go to college in 1936, she got into Virginia State and wasn't used to the Jim Crow laws, didn't know about the Jim Crow laws, and, in fact, found herself on a train heading to Virginia State and getting off the train when they went over the Mason Dixon Line and then having to get into the "For Coloreds Only" car, something she was not used to at all and lasted in Virginia State for about two years.  I think she floundered a little bit and decided that she was gonna come home, came home and determined--and her parents kind of pushed her into the medical field.  And she went to the Lincoln School for Nurses at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx [New York City, New York] here.  The, as I understand it, it was the original, the first school for African American RN's.  And she was the Class of '44 [1944].  And then, frankly, met my father [Walter Davis] very late in her life, late meaning in her early thirties.  And back then, it was pretty late.  And together, they had a lot of friends in common because both of them were from Sugar Hill in Harlem.  And they got together and had a family.  I don't wanna say that my mother's early life was boring in any way, but my mother never talked about that.  I learned so much about her life after her death than I knew during her death.  And at the last stages of her life, I learned.  I learned that her cousin, Eulalie Lewars had married Claude McKay, the Harlem Renaissance writer, and lived with them for a while.  This is the man that my mother called, oh, that dark-skinned ne'er-do-writer.  And I was like, Mom, Claude McKay, now, what are you talking about?  And, but she had stories, you know, and stories, and I didn't learn this until she was in her late seventies, early eighties.  She talked about Harlem of that era, you know.  The first time she ever got a chance to stay up all night was when Joe Louis won the world title, and how Harlem came out in the streets, and how important that was, didn't quite, you know, I mean I got my mother's childhood in--and my mother's life in drips and drabs, to be very honest with you.
Speaker 1: So she didn't really talk a lot about it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you know, but you made a statement that I'd like to explore a little bit.  You said that her, her father, I think adored her, but her mother, you know, there was like a (unclear).  Why was that?  Was it because she was overweight?  I wasn't sure what the story behind that was?
Speaker 2: I think it was Jamaican culture.  I think that my grandmother was petite and beautiful and my, her only daughter was not.  I also think that West Indian women, and this is a gross generalization, but I think most of my West Indian friends would say this.  West Indian women really embrace their sons and don't do that way, don't do that for their daughters.  I have a lot of friends who are second, and first and second generation West Indian (laughter)--American, I'm sorry, and they tell the same story.  It's, and I think it's probably something that my mother and I had as well.  My mother was Lord & Taylor, B. Altman's, and I was K-Mart.  And I think that she wanted something similar to her.  And I think that she got that from her mom as well.  And I know that she and her mom knocked heads, just as she and I knocked heads.
Story_ID: 97974
Speaker 1: So, do you know how far back is there knowledge of the history of your family history on your mother's side, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Interestingly enough, I just got back my DNA from National Geographic.  So I know the migration patterns of that side of my family which was Sub-Sahara Africa through to Germany to the U.K. and then through Asia, and then, believe it or not, through the Caribbean.  I also know that thank goodness for the internet because I've seen my grandmother and my great grandparents and my great, great grandparents' christening, baptismal online.  And so I know--and through Facebook, the family name is a, is an original name.  The family name is Lewars, L-E-W-A-R-S.  And so I've met other Lewars, and I've gotten tremendous history of the four and five-times grandparents, and it was, frankly, on my mother's side, it was Scotland in terms of the white side.  I've wanted to find out what the African side was, and that was Sub-Sahara.
Speaker 1: So your mother's family migrated here in the early 1900s?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the early 1900s, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I saw the ship's manifest, and my grandmother took her children back to Jamaica when my mother was three, and they lasted there about a year.  And then my grandfather worked on the Fall River Lines.  He worked on the boats.  So he would come home every three, four weeks, and as my mother said, lay his paycheck on the table and then play with his kids and then go back on the boats.  So my mother was, so my grandmother was, well, let me take these kids back to my family 'cause I think she needed sort of that.  And she went back to her family, stayed for six months and then came back in.
Story_ID: 97975
Speaker 1: Now, your father, his name and what you know about his growing up, and you know, year of birth too?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Walter Gerald Davis.  He was born November 26, 1920.  His mother and father had just come from St. Kitts.  My father was born and raised in Harlem--I'm sorry.  He was raised in Harlem [New York City, New York].  I'm not sure when they moved up to Harlem.  They, he never--I think he actually was born in the Hell's Kitchen area where the West Indians lived initially when they came to this country and then moved.  My father was an interesting person.  He, he was the middle child.  He had a younger brother and an older sister.  And his father was not a warm man at all.  His mother was extremely warm and extremely nurturing.  His dad wasn't.  His dad came to this country having been the (unclear) matter born in St. Kitts.  He, his father came from substantial wealth in St. Kitts, but there was always the biggest, the bigger fish.  And so he came to this country thinking he was going to be the bigger fish in the bigger pond, and he had a trucking company in Harlem.  And I don't think it--and I'm sorry, I--he had gotten a young woman pregnant in St. Kitts who was beneath his class.  So I think his family put him on a slow boat to Florida, and then he migrated here where he had family.  And then they sent for my grandmother who had also been, she was the niece of a pharmacist.  I think her parents had died when she was young.  I believe she was an only child.  And so they married and had children, my grandparents did.  I never knew my grandmother.  I only knew her to be a gentle, phenomenally nurturing woman.  I did know my grandfather and sort of knew him to be sort of cold (laughter).  I also think there was something with skin color as well.  My grandfather was extremely fair.  And my mother was dark, and my brother, my older brother was also dark.  And I think when my grandfather saw his grandchild and looked at him like, oh, my goodness, he's dark, my mother was done.  My mother was like, okay, that's it (laughter).  I don't ever wanna see this guy again.  This is my first born.  I love him, and, you know.  So my father wasn't, I mean he visited his father.  But he never really had the kind of relationship.  My father quit school after his, quit high school, apparently, after his parents divorced or separated.  I don't know if they ever legally divorced.  And it really did tear their family apart.  My father then went into World War II and took care of his mother and took care of his brother as well.  His sister had left to leave, she left and married somebody who, you know, and had her own issues and troubles.  But my father and his younger brother went into the War, father to Europe, my Uncle John to the Philippines.  My Uncle John came back addicted to heroin and having gotten hurt over there.  And my father took care of him until he met my mother and then decided that he was going to, Number One, go back to school and get his high school diploma and Number Two, go to college as well under the GI Bill.  And he went to college under the GI Bill.  He went to Columbia University [New York City, New York] and was a skycap for eighteen years and--at LaGuardia Airport, at the same time, he was going to Columbia.  And he graduated from Columbia in 1955.  And we were, two of us were already born.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were two years old at that point, right?  You're born--
Speaker 2: No, yeah, I was just about three, three years--
Speaker 1: Three years old. Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: --when he was at Columbia, yes.
Story_ID: 97976
Speaker 1: So, now, how did your parents meet?  Do you know that story?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  My parents met at a bar, and it was, you know, in those days, you know, they were really sort of classy little, you know, it wasn't, it was a classy little bar called LeMar Cherie(ph.).  And some, you know, somebody introduced them.  And they met, and I think my father [Walter Davis] saw in my mother [Doris Nelson] someone who was a good partner, that would push him.  And I think my mother saw in my father someone who could be pushed for excellence, to excellence.
Speaker 1: So how many kids, siblings then?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers.  My older brother, Walter, Jr., is two years older than I am.  And my younger brother, Philip, is five years younger than I am.
Story_ID: 97977
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory was, actually being hospitalized.  My mother [Doris Nelson] worked at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.  And she noticed a tumor or a lump in my neck when I was two or three--two maybe.  And she got the best doctors, and they determined that I had, that it was a tuberculin node and that I needed to have surgery right away, which I did.  And they also removed lymph nodes.  And I remember that so vividly because (laughter), I remember the room.  And the room was the Wizard of Oz, had all these Wizard of Oz figures.  And I think the movie had just come out maybe and I just remember, you know, being scared, obviously, and my parents staying with me throughout the night, but being in a strange place, being in some, being somewhat uncomfortable and certainly not knowing what was going on, and then having to go through therapy for a long time, and then having to see a doctor for a long time as well and not--you know, but I don't, I can't piece all that stuff together because, again, my parents never told me, you know, the extent of my illness because they thought that it would restrict me if I knew that I had been ill and that I had been operated on at such a young age.  So I certainly remember that.  I also remember going to Radio City every single year to see the Christmas Show.  And I remember so vividly my brother and I dressed up in these, you know, the leggings and the hat and the whole bit and my mother and all the other mothers following, seeing Cary Grant coming down--we're waiting in a line.  It's freezing, and Cary Grant's going up Sixth Avenue, and all the mothers left their kids (laughter) and followed Cary Grant up the street.  I remember that because my brother was put in charge of me.  And my brother said, my mother said, just take care of her.  And, so when she was out of earshot or eyeshot, my brother kind of pushed me into the street a little bit and then pulled me back and said, you tell mom I saved your life.  So by the time my mother came back, I was crying.  And my mother said, what happened?  And my brother who was a fast talker said, she ran into the street, and I got hit on the legs.  I remember that vividly, and I will never let my brother forget that he traumatized me as a four-year old.  And then I remember moving.  We moved from the projects to a house in Teaneck, New Jersey.  And I remember going to kindergarten, leaving my kindergarten class in October in Harlem and going to virtually an all-white kindergarten in Teaneck, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back to the tuberculode, you mentioned?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was, what is that, tuberculode.
Speaker 2: No, tuberculosis.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was tuberculosis.
Speaker 2: Tuberculosis.  It was a tuberculin--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But you found the tumor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --node--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Node.
Speaker 2: --node, that my mother saw.
Speaker 1: So that was the beginning.  If you had not gotten that taken care of it, it would have gone full fledge?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have, yeah, I would have--it would have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --it would have been an ugly sight.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: So they, so I was checked up until, I mean I was going back and forth to doctors until I was almost sixteen, not knowing why I was seeing these doctors (laughter).
Speaker 1: But it's good they caught it then.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my--and my mother, you know, as I said, was a registered nurse.  So she, you know, she saw something unusual and, in fact, it was very, very rare for someone my age to have this, this tuberculin node and the doctor who my--finally have died, was a specialist.  And I think he wrote it up somewhere.  They think that, you know, my mother may have brought the germ home from the hospital because I--it wasn't like I went anywhere, you know.  I wasn't out in the streets or anything.  I didn't take public transportation.  I didn't, you know, so she just could have been a carrier.
Speaker 1: Wow, you would feel guilty too about that, a little baby.
Speaker 2: I know.
Story_ID: 97978
Speaker 1: Now, what--when you moved, you're saying you were age five.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's about 1958, right?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And so what are you, what is the cause for the move?  Do you know that?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean we lived in the Colonial Projects, right across the street from the old polar grounds.  And it was, you know, a wonderful place, but we had a two-bedroom apartment.  So I shared a room with my brother.  And my mother [Doris Nelson] was pregnant, you know, with my younger brother.  So my father [Walter Davis] hit the numbers for $3,000 and went and said, let's put a down payment on a house, which they did.  And they bought a house in Teaneck [New Jersey] for $21,000.  And at that point, and then my father got a job in Chicago [Illinois], and he moved to Chicago and came home every three weeks.  And my mom stayed in Teaneck with us.  And then my dad got a job in the early '60s [1960s] in Washington.
Speaker 1: So--oh, in Washington.  So he never came, he didn't come back?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't come back.  But he was coming--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) He was (unclear) coming back--
Speaker 2: --he was commuting back and forth.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, do you know what his job in Chicago was?
Speaker 2: Sure, he was, when he was working at the, as a skycap, he got active in the labor movement and was vice president of his local and then became, when he graduated from college, from Columbia [University, New York City, New York], he became the International Vice President of the Transport Workers Union in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So he had a significant role there?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I bet he knew someone named [Reverend] Addie Wyatt [HM] who was big in the unions in Chicago and had a position there.  They would have, I'm sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm sure they would have known each other, yes.
Speaker 1: --they crossed paths.
Story_ID: 97979
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so tell me what life was like in Teaneck [New Jersey] then, and if you could, you know, the address that you lived at and if you could also tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Okay, when we moved to Teaneck, New Jersey, it was a town that was considered a model town.  It was, we were the first African Americans, or actually the second African Americans on our side of town.  It was a tad--even though the schools were integrated, the actual living spaces were pretty segregated.  We, I lived at 71 Intervale Road in Teaneck, and the house--we thought it was the biggest house you've ever seen.  And I go past that house now, and I was like, I remember it being so much bigger.  It was five doors down from my school, my elementary school.  And the, you know, in terms of the sights and the sounds, it was a very close-knit community.  Many of my friends, their parents were pretty well known.  They were jazz musicians who had moved their families from New York to Teaneck, while they gigged in New York.  I lived around the corner from Roosevelt Brown, who was a Giant, New York Giant.  I lived, went to school with Allison and Nat Adderley, Jr.  I also went to school with some offspring of some thugs, some big thugs (laughter).  I remember I lived literally five houses up from Thad Jones' kids, you know, Thad being a very, very famous jazz musician.  We, in terms of black, middle class and where we lived was the, sort of the epitome of that.  We lived amongst educators.  We lived with, you know, we lived amongst people--Joe Garland, who wrote "In the Mood" was a good friend of the family's.  As I said, the schools were very integrated, and initially weren't.  We were among the only African Americans, and I take a look at my fourth grade picture, of all those little postage stamps.  And it was primarily, it was four blacks in twenty--in a class of twenty.  So we had, you know, we mixed very well with the Jewish community of which there were the majority.  But we lived in a very stable African American community.  I later learned that the real estate agents steered people to this community, and, in fact, there had been all kinds of actions under way to try and bring fair housing to Teaneck.  In fact, I just talked to David Stern, the commissioner of baseball, who was from Teaneck, and who actually spent a good amount of his young life as part of this fair housing action to make sure that the town would more fully integrated, didn't know that until last week.  But I share that to say that there were some incredibly enlightened, both African Americans and white folks who were in Teaneck who really wanted to see this as a model town.
Story_ID: 97980
Speaker 1: I was also a part of the first sixth grade school because as the, we started to matriculate through elementary school, we discovered that the schools now were becoming a little bit more segregated than--so we segregated, there was a, segregated elementary schools.  And we'd all meet up in junior high school.  And we didn't know each other.  So they decided to bus all the black kids (laughter) to the various white schools in town and then bring all of the sixth graders to one central sixth grade school.  And that's been written about, you know, because it was an inter--it was a voluntary busing program that was so very successful back then.  And so I was part of that sixth grade.
Speaker 2: So describe it?  So the busing, how was the busing?
Speaker 1: The busing, so they took the black kids from my side of town from kindergarten through fifth grade, and they dispersed them to the various elementary schools in town of which, at that time there were seven.  And then they took the sixth grade, they took the school which was my home school and made it into a central sixth grade school and bused all the whites to that sixth grade school (laughter).  So we all went to the sixth grade together so it eased the, what could have been a tense environment when we all got to middle--seventh grade, junior high school because that's when things can get a little nasty with kids.  And so, and everybody's feeling their oats.  And so they decided to get us all familiar with each other in sixth grade.
Story_ID: 97981
Speaker 1: You went, is that--you went to Brian Elementary School?
Speaker 2: I went to Bryant School [Teaneck, New Jersey], William McCullum Bryant School, elementary, which, from K through sixth.  And I'm one of those rarities because the sixth grade school started my first year, I mean my last year at the school.  And it was the first class of sixth graders.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have, were you a good student?  Did you have any, you know, favorite teachers there or--
Speaker 2: I was a very good student.  I was also a tomboy.  So, I played football, I played basketball, I played softball, baseball.  I had two brothers, and my older brother was a very good athlete, and I was very competitive.  And so, you know, my--so the girls didn't particularly care for me.  And I didn't particularly care for them either because I thought them to be too sissified, too girly, and I wasn't.  And so, you know, there were times, to be very honest with you, where, you know, we didn't, they didn't talk about sexuality.  But I would suspect that there were some questions (laughter) about my sexuality, given the fact that I loved sports so much.  And I was good at it, and I was coordinated.  And there was no Title IX then.  So, you know, I had to play with the boys.  And I played with the boys when I could in the schoolyard.  But I, you know, I was also very, I think political and strategic back then too.  I got involved in Student Council, from very early on.  I mean as soon as they would let us on the Student--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You would have been--Student Council would have been in junior high.
Speaker 2: No, elementary school.  We had a Student Council in elementary school.  And it was, you know, and, it's where I learned Robert's Rules of Order, and found that, how empowering it was to know Robert's Rules of Order.  And that happened probably in the third or fourth grade.  As for a favorite teacher, my favorite teachers was actually a teacher, Ms. Nostas, N-O-S-T-A-S.  And the reason why I remember her so well is because I contacted her about six, seven years ago, and we're talking on the phone.  She had married and so we're talking on the phone.  And she's saying, I remember you, I remember you.  And I'm thinking, no you don't, Lady.  And you're crazy, and I'm a little nervous and maybe I should never have done this.  Come to find out, she only had four classes in her career, and then she became a guidance counselor.  So she did remember me, and she sent me my picture from fourth grade.  And she put it in a little frame, and she said, can I have your address?  And at first I thought, oh, my goodness.  But she sent me the, my picture, and she was, by far, the best teacher I ever had.  She recognized my competitiveness, and she focused me in, in being competitive, not just in athletics, but in the classroom.  And it wasn't unhealthy in terms of how she focused me.  She wanted me to do my best, and she encouraged me to be out there and to not let my, you know, my being a female stop me from competing with these boys athletic--I mean academically.  And a lot of girls at that time were, they didn't want to show the boys up or they didn't wanna--and she was like "go for it".  And I did.  And I think when I--I'm in touch with two of the boys (laughter) now.  And we all admitted that it was the best grades we ever got when we were, head-to-head, competing against each other for good grades and competing against each other in that fourth grade class.  One is actually an attorney now, a general counsel in Detroit [Michigan].  And the other one is a nurse, I mean, and could have been anything he wanted to do and is one of the most, you know, he's just an incredibly good at what he does.  And he chose to go into the nursing profession.
Speaker 1: So did you, why did you contact her?  You said you wanted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I contacted her because I was doing an interview at a school for a project I was working on.  And I saw this name, Miss, Mrs. Nostas.  And I asked this woman, I said, do you have any, did you have a relative who once taught in the schools.  And she said, yeah, my sister-in-law.  And then I said, well, you know--Elizabeth Nostas.  I said, well, she was my fourth grade teacher at Bryant.  And she said, yes.  And she said, well, what's your name?  And I gave her my name, and I said, you know, if she ever, you know, here's my number.  I would love to hear from her.  She probably has no idea who I am, and doesn't remember.  Well, she called me the day after that, and she said, of course, I remember you.  And I--that's when I got a little nervous, and then that's, you know, how she sent me my picture.
Story_ID: 97982
Speaker 1: So did you have a good--you had a good relationship with your brothers then?
Speaker 2: Great relationship with my brothers, and then, you know, we had the, you know, my older brother liked to hit us in the arm, and, you know, was very playful and that.  I have, my younger brother--you know, five years is a big difference.  And so I was gone when he was twelve, thirteen.  He was pretty much an only child.  My older brother went to Columbia [University, New York City, New York].  I was at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  I could not ask for two better siblings, and could not have asked for two better siblings growing up.  They are the most amazing men in my life.
Story_ID: 97983
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what were--do you have some stories to share of times with the family or at home or, you know, whether it's around holidays?  Do you have any of those?
Speaker 2: You know, yes.  I mean I think about our family around the holidays particularly.  You know, Christmas was spent with my grandmother and my grandfather and my cousins in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] as was Thanksgiving.  When my grandfather died and my grandmother gave up her brownstone in Brooklyn and moved closer to an uncle, you know, things kind of shifted.  And, of course, when my parents moved, things very much shifted to just my mother [Doris Nelson] who wasn't the greatest cook in the world, doing the holidays.  But I remember, my goodness, my dad [Walter Davis], you know, putting together bicycles and he was not very handy at all (laughter).  I remember, you know, a, you know, trees, a tree full of, you know, with gifts under it.  I remember, you know, my parents doing the best they could to keep Santa Claus alive for as long as they could.  You know, I have to stay that, you know, I remember incredibly warm and, and wonderful holidays.
Story_ID: 97984
Speaker 1: And I, you know, and parents who were amazingly attached to their children in ways that, you know, failure was not an option for us, you know.  Not going to college wasn't an option for us.  Not, you know, not doing well was not an option for us.  We had no, there were no choices when it came to that.  And we followed suit.  We did what we had to do to keep everybody calm and to make sure--you know, your parents always want you to do better than they did.  My dad [Walter Davis] and mother [Doris Nelson] were really hard acts to follow.  I mean my dad was so much a part of the Civil Rights Movement, things that we didn't know, things that we're learning now.  And so, you know, he was always gone and he, but he was always home on Saturday mor--you know, he'd drive back on Friday, not telling us anything that he did during the course of the week.  You know, and he would, you know, my mother didn't drive.  So he would, you know, get us to, you know, my brother to baseball, me to the library or to cello practice.  I play the cello.  He would make sure that, you know, there was food in the house, and then he'd leave Monday morning.  And my mother usually worked two days a week.  And that was sort of to get her out of the house and to get--so she could see her friends.  So she worked per diem work at Columbia Presbyterian.  And we, you know, you know, we weren't latch-key--my grandmother took care of us on Monday nights.  And then she'd go back home, and then after that, an aunt took care of us when we were little.  But we were always loved by family members, and we always had everything we wanted.  And I, you know, I wish I could remember something.  I mean if we were dysfunctional because, you know, I think maybe culturally, you know, of what was expected of us, you know.  Remember, we were immigrants.  So, you know, we didn't have the moniker of slavery or Southern, you know, we might--we were, my grandparents came through Ellis Island.
Story_ID: 97985
Speaker 1: So that's, so that's an interesting thing.  And that's--I wanted to ask you this just because with the Caribbean.  What was passed down in terms of either sayings or approaches to life or your position or even statements about African Americans who were not of Caribbean ancestry?  What is the messaging going on in the--
Speaker 2: Well, the messaging is very similar to, I think, they used to call West Indians, the Black Jews.  You know, they, West Indians, you know, owned, you know, many of the bodegas, the used stores.  They, you know, they the first group of Africans, of African descent to be able to move into communities.  So once the Irish left, the West Indians moved in.  And the after that, in terms of just, you know, migration, then the American blacks moved in.  I mean I'll tell you, there is a pecking order.  There was a pecking order, you know.  My, were my grandparents, my maternal grandparents thrilled about my mother [Doris Nelson] marrying a small island man?  Probably not, you know, but would it have been worse had they married, had either one of them married an African American girl from the South?  Yeah, I think it would have been.  I think that there were some cultural nuances that, you know, they understood, you know, what was expected.  And what was expected was, you know, you came to this country to excel.  You did not come to this country to, you know, get caught up in drugs or get caught up in what they perceived African--you know, African Americans getting caught up in.  You know, you were to get educated.  You were to go as far as you could with education.  And that, and they passed that down to us.  I probably didn't get the message as--you know, I mean I graduated from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in three and a half years.  My older brother went to Columbia [University, New York City, New York], got his degree, undergraduate degree from Columbia and his master's degree from Harvard [University, Cambrdige, Massachusetts].  My younger brother got his undergraduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got his MBA from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  You know, so, you know, we didn't, as I said, failure was not an option.  And excelling, not excelling was not an option, and that's clearly what came from my, both sides of my Caribbean background.
Story_ID: 97986
Speaker 1: And what about also, 'cause what, I'm sorry.  What you just described is talked about a lot in our interviews, you know, and actually, now, in society.  You know, they're just--and, some of these schools, they're looking for what they call non-slave ancestry blacks.  But what about the food?  Was it--I know you said your mother wasn't a good cook, but was it peas and rice, I mean what are, what is the food that we're eating?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well, we are eating codfish and ackee.  We are eating peas and rice, which I still cook for my family, not sure that they eat it, but I cook it, you know.  And not kidney beans, pigeon peas and coconut milk or coconut water.  So, and thyme.  I always thought that my grandmother would say, we're having fried chicken, and what it was, was stewed chicken.  I, when I first had fried chicken, I didn't know what it was.  And I was pretty old.  I mean I was--old meaning I was a teenager, maybe, you know, in junior high, and I'm eating this crunchy thing, and I'm going what the heck is this?  And, you know, they said, well, it's fried chicken.  And I said, no, this is not fried chicken because my grandmother cooked, stewed the chicken in a frying pan.  And she said that was fried chicken, and it was--you know, you know what stewed chicken is.  And it's, you know, with peppers and, you know, I can still taste that now.  But what else did we have?  We, I think we had probably chow chow, which is like a, it's, I guess it's--it's tasteless, but it's like a squash.  We had, what other kinds of foods?  Oh, every Christmas, my Aunt Ida or somebody in the family who lived in Jamaica would send us a fruitcake.  Now, these were black cakes that had 150 proof rum, and they did not taste like your traditional fruitcake.  It was like a pudding kind of cake, and it would be in a tin, and then the--but it would be wrapped in wax paper.  And they'd put it on a slow boat in November to get there at Christmas.  And by the time it got to us, that rum had done it's, it was a fantastic cake.  My mother would take the cake tin and she'd give us a little sliver, and, of course, it was very, it went down very nicely.  And I remember at five, my mother would put it on the top of the refrigerator.  And I liked it so much, I would take little slivers.  And I'd keep taking slivers until when I was five, she found me in the backyard cussing at a tree.  I was drunk.  I was drunk.  And so, she came out 'cause she saw me cussing at a tree, and she wondered what was going on.  She came, she kind of grabbed me, and then took one whiff of me when I was in, I was--I had rum, I reeked of rum.  And then I threw up on her.  But (laughter) I was sick, and that was my first drunk, my first high.  And it was off this rum cake that they had sent from Jamaica every year.  So then my mother figured out when I was six another place to hide it.  And she didn't offer another sliver until I was probably close to seventh or eighth grade.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute (laughter).
Speaker 2: So that was something that was an annual, the cake was the--the rum cake was annual.
Story_ID: 97987
Speaker 1: So you, you have a lot of interests in sports.  You are competitive.  How else would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I can be condescending.  My brothers tell me that.  I hope that I am moving away from that and not being quite as condescending.  I would say that I'm a lifelong learner, and I would also say most of all, right now, I'm probably a geek.  I love technology, and for someone my age, I'm, you know, I'm a member of an organization called The Links.  And they laugh at me all the time because, you know, they are not as technologically astute as they should be, yet they laugh at me for being so technologically astute at my age.  So I'm fascinated with technology.  I code websites.  I shoot, edit digitally, convert, you know, you know, I'm just technologically geeky.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you drawn to math or science?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You weren't.  So what, when you look at yourself now, what do you see back in yourself back then that would have led you to think you would become a geek?
Speaker 2: I think that I was always interested in knowing how things worked.  And then I also was pretty good at taking short cuts.  I always thought that there was a better way to do things, and that's good and that's bad.  So, for example, I do a lot in photo shop.  And I notice the difference between the way I deal with photo shop and the way my husband [Robert G. Wright] deals with Photoshop.  He is precise, pixel by pixel.  He'll make changes.  Me, on the other hand, it's like, you know, fast and dirty.  I'm, you know--and what the technology has taught me is that you can be fast and dirty, technologically, and if the software doesn't like how fast and dirty you are, it will reject you.  And if it likes you, how fast and dirty you are, it will accept you.  And so I found that it, I could--I didn't have to rely on so many people to get the final product done.  So I could shoot and interview and edit, and upload, and also research very easily using the technological knowledge that I had.
Story_ID: 97988
Speaker 1: Now, do you think that, and I wanted to take you--so you went to Bryant Elementary--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but then you move?
Speaker 2: I went to seventh grade for half the year, and then my father [Davis Walter] was appointed by [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson to start the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission [EEOC].  And so he had Senate confirmation and he, they all went--the FBI went through our neighborhood.  And my mom [Doris Nelson], in 1966, decided it was time that we all moved together.  My brother was in ninth grade and had pretty much lived without a full-time dad.  And my mother felt very strongly that she wanted to make sure that we had a full-time dad, that he wasn't just a weekend dad.  I found out just recently, frankly, that there was another part of that story.  And I sort of have to thank you guys for that.  My father in the '63 [1963], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], '64 [1964] was labor's person, I mean labor, organized labor had been getting very involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  My father was very, very good friends with Bayard Rustin.  And Bayard, you know--George Meany, who my dad worked for at the time, decided that he was not going to embrace the March on Washington because John F. Kennedy had asked him not to.  And so my father was kind of conflicted because of, you know, his good friend Bayard Rustin and, of course, he worked for the AFL-CIO.  And he decided to take part as a private citizen and I started to learn a little bit more about, you know, my father's Civil Rights activities when I learned more about the March on Washington.  I was very young and my father didn't take us.  His fellow was is that we'd get in the way, and I'm sure he was absolutely right.  So my dad, through labor, provided money to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Dr.], and apparently, I found out that he was in Selma [Alabama], had gone to Selma with Walter Reuther and Tom Donahue, who later became the President of the AFL-CIO, and I talked to Tom Donahue recently, who shared a picture of my father and King, and told this story.  And the story was that my, they'd come to Montgomery [Alabama], and they were on their way to Selma.  They got to Selma.  They were in the church with King, and as they were leaving the church, they were told that there had been a murder or a killing, Ku Klux Klan, of a Civil Rights worker and to be very careful traveling with my father.  And Walter Reuther and Tom Donahue put my father in the back seat and covered his body from Selma to Montgomery to keep him safe.  And they--and I share this story only because my father came home, as he always did on Friday nights and we woke him as we always did on Saturday.  And he took us to Carvelle's (ph.) or wherever we wanted to go on Saturday, never, ever saying what his life was like during the course of that week.  My mother [Doris Nelson] knew the danger he was in, week after week, and needed her family, who was in New York, as support.  And at the time, there were no--where we ended up living in Silver Spring [Maryland], they had just passed a fair housing law in Silver Spring where we ended up living.  And my mother did not wanna live in D.C. and have absolutely no support at all and where the schools were bad.  So she kept us in Teaneck [New Jersey] until things sort of settled down.  And by '66 [1966], things had pretty much settled down.  But from '61 [1961] to '65 [1965], my father was in the midst of this Civil Rights struggle, and he was threatened and he was in Selma, and he was at the marches, and he was doing all that.  And my mother, obviously, was not the bravest woman in the world, but she knew--and we didn't.  And now I'm seeing pictures and hearing the stories from these folks and I share that with you only to say that it wasn't until my mother had the wherewithal, the guts and, to move down to Maryland that we actually made the move.
Story_ID: 97989
Speaker 1: So that, so you-- you're saying you did not know of your father [Walter Davis]'s activity while you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We did not know how involved he was in the Civil Rights Movement. My father was the assistant director in the Civil Rights Department in the AFL-CIO.  And in '66 [1966], he was tapped to--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So this is a huge job at that time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, and there're not, and this is--now, which administration?  This is the John, is it John, the President?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, initially, it was the [President F.] Kennedy Administration, and--
Speaker 1: And then he passed away, right.  He got killed.  So what is--
Speaker 2: Which by the way--can I just share this one short little story.  So my father, while a skycap at LaGuardia Airport, carried Kennedy's bags off of the flight.  At those times, there were not through flights.  So you'd stop in New York, and then you'd hop to Boston [Massachusetts], you know, or the through flights were very difficult to get on, even a senator.  So he was Senator Kennedy at the time, and he would pull my--my father would pull him off the plane and put him in the bar, and then pull 'em back on. For a few years, he would say, Walter, stay in school, Walter stay in school.  And my father would say, "Yes, Senator Kennedy, I definite will.  Fast forward to 1963, October, and there's some minor labor legislation that's being signed.  And my father's invited to go to the White House with some labor leaders and with George Meany.  Kennedy is there.  He does what he has to do.  He then looks at my father, looks at George Meany and he says to my father, "Sir, can you stay?"  And my father said, sure, and George Meany was like, he doesn't know why his underling is being asked by the President to stay?  And he goes, George, I'm fine.  And so they all leave, and he sits back, and he says to my dad, "So, Walter, you stayed in school."  And my father said, "Mr. President, you remembered."  And he said, "yes, I did.  You got me out of a lot of jams for a long time."  They talked a little while.  They then sent, he then sent my dad a telegram, and my dad gave me this telegram, and I don't remember what it said.  I don't remember anything about it other than the fact that I had the telegram, and I have--can't tell you where the telegram is, except at a point, I was taking stuff and putting them in my dad's books in his library.  So it's in a book, and my brother has thousands of books.  And one days, we're gonna go through all of those books--'cause I used those books as a filing, I didn't have any file folders so I would throw things in the books, pictures, letters, things.  But I actually told that story when they celebrated the anniversary of Kennedy's death, the 50th anniversary of his death, and was shocked at my response on Facebook because everybody was like, "Girl, you better find that (laughter) telegram".  And I asked my brother, and he says, you expect me to look through all these books?  I'm--ultimately, he will.  But I say all that to say that, my dad told that story, and then that story was repeated by, at his funeral actually.
Story_ID: 97990
Speaker 1: So talk about life then with your father [Walter Davis].  So you remembered the confirmation?
Speaker 2: I remember the FBI in the neighborhood.  I recall--'cause people thought that my dad had done something wrong.  And I was in seventh grade then, sixth going into seventh grade.  So we knew what was going on, and mom [Doris Nelson] explained what was happening and what Senate confirmation was, and, but, you know, our neighbors were all--
Speaker 1: Atwitter.
Speaker 2: Atwitter (laughter), asking us, you know, what's going on, and, you know.  So we moved to Maryland in midyear which, you know, had devastating effects on my older brother [Walter Davis] who was in ninth grade at the time, not so much for me.  But, you know, we moved into a totally white neighborhood.  Our neighbors who were friendly towards us were accused of buying our house for us.  And they were ostracized for a while.  And I had never really been called the "N" word before, but we were.  And we ended up, you know, going to a--I went to the junior high school.  My brother, because of the great schools that he had gone to in Teaneck [New Jersey], ended up going to the high school.  They sort of skipped him.  And I say sort of because, you know, he was taking courses in Teaneck that they didn't offer until high school.  So they had him sort, they didn't skip him totally, but they skipped him for some kind of courses which were, which was pretty unusual back then.  But he had the hardest time adjusting.  My younger brother [Philip Davis] was in second grade, so he, it was easy for him to adjust.  Me, I, you know, I could adjust almost anywhere.  I know I was, it was hard, a little hard for me to understand other African Americans there because many of them, the few that were in my class were actually offspring of sharecroppers.  At that time, when we lived in Montgomery County, Maryland, Gaithersburg was nothing but farmland.  Parts of White Oak, where we lived was old sharecroppers' homes, I mean dilapidated homes.  A lot of my, you know, a lot of my friends at that time, I mean they lived below the poverty level in Montgomery County.  And so, you know, those were the people, who, they had never seen anything like me before ever.  I mean I was sort of New York and, you know, I wore sort of, you know, New York kind of clothes, and I had my hair done.  And it wasn't like that, you know.  These were people, and many of them, you know, would have--would be pregnant by fifteen and would leave school.  And then a few of them, interestingly enough, would be amazing people like Avis Collins, who later became the wife of Eugene Robinson and is now Avis Robinson.  And she and I were in eighth--seventh grade together.  And she, ultimately, her parents moved her out of the school system, and they went to a different school.  And then we have become, you know, we knew each other well back then and sort of lost touch and have been reunited.
Speaker 1: So really, this was a hard transition to have?
Speaker 2: Very hard transition.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did your brother, what effect did that have on him?
Speaker 2: He just went into a shell.  And, you know, to be very honest with you, he was always shy, but he didn't have a lot of friends.  And the other thing was, he was incredibly bright, you know.  So his friends were actually the teachers who were so enamored with his intellect that they befriended him.
Story_ID: 97991
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, so your father [Walter Doris], so are you seeing your father from afar, and how's your mother [Doris Nelson] handling it 'cause it's one thing to be around family in New York, which she had that strong support.  It's another to be, you know, in a suburban, you know, white suburban neighborhood.  I mean that sounds more white than any black support.  And, you know, she has three kids and the kids are having a hard time making the transition, how is she handling all of that too?
Speaker 2: We went back and forth to New York a lot.  So there are some things my mother refused to do.  She refused to shop in the [Washington] D.C. area.  So since my father was used to traveling back and forth up the turnpike, it was nothing for my mother to say, okay, let's get in the car.  I'm going shopping.  Okay, where?  New York.  So (laughter) we were coming back and forth from New York, probably once a month for a while.  More so for her than it was for us, but, you know, our friends were wondering after a while did we really move because we were coming back and forth.  At the same time, you know, my mother got us involved in Jack and Jill [of America].  So we knew and met other middle-class African Americans.  And then my father and--my parents, believe it or not, went to the White House under Nixon [President Richard M. Nixon].  They went to State dinners.  So, you know, there was something for--my mother didn't drive, but there was something for my mother to get involved with in a societal way.  I mean she went to lunch, she went to lunches at, with Pat Nixon.  They went to one or two State dinners with Richard Nixon, being the only African Americans, I think then as well.  And then she got involved with Planned Parenthood, and she volunteered there.  So she found ways to kind of get out of the house and at the same time, I don't think that anybody wanted, yeah, I--you know, she knew that my brother was painfully shy.  I'm not quite sure it's something she kind of wanted to handle anyhow.  I mean I think that, you know, I'm not sure.  I think that there was maybe a little sense of guilt for not having my dad in, you know, day-to-day in his life.
Story_ID: 97992
Speaker 1: And I'll tell you, it's a funny story.  While my dad [Walter Davis] was coming back and forth, my brother, older brother [Walter Davis] was an amazing athlete, couldn't run 'cause he was always kind of stocky.  But when he hit the ball, it would be hit out of the park.  And I'll never forget my father coming home and never seeing my brother play Little League ball.  And it was one of those, you know, it was the, it was out of the movies.  I mean we all went to the ballpark, my dad drove.  It was the World Series, if you will.  And my dad had never seen my brother play.  And I would always travel with my brother--I don't think my mom [Doris Nelson] had ever seen my brother play.  And I would take, I would ride my bike to the playground, to the ball field with him, and I would be the one that saw every single game.  And my brother, so I knew what the reaction was every single time my brother got up.  There were whispers.  Okay, Butch is up, Butch is up--we called him Butch.  And so my father was there.  My father is sitting there, and it's time for my brother to get up.  And my father had this habit, when he was nervous, of chewing the inside of his cheek.  And I just remembered that he, he's chewing away as my brother's coming up.  He's chewing, chewing, chewing, and then my brother swings and misses.  And my father put his head down a little bit, and then another ball comes in, he swings and misses.  And my father, you know, didn't, you know, didn't know.  He looks like he has a good swing, but I don't know, you know.  And then the next thing comes up, and he hits it way out of the park.  And he used to run with his thumbs up.  And everybody screamed.  And they're hitting me, not knowing who this guy is (laughter), "Awe, your brother did well".  And then, and my father is like, wait--and my father, the tears started coming down his face, you know.  I mean they didn't have, you know, they didn't have--it's not that they didn't have a relationship, but they weren't close because they didn't know each other, you know, until later.  And they did become close, but he, at that point, had seen something in this kid that he just didn't know, he didn't know.  And so it was, you know, and I'm looking at him.  I'd never seen my father, you know, get teary-eyed over anything.  And so I'm like, I don't know what to do, you know, except cheer and, you know, and we did.  And they won, and it was just an amazing, it was an amazing time for both of them, I think.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were in high school, was your brother in high school at that time?
Speaker 1: No, when he did the baseball, we were in, I was in elementary school.
Speaker 2: You were in elementary, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was probably--no, I was probably fourth grade, and he was probably sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is back then--
Speaker 1: Little League.  This is Little League.
Speaker 2: --oh, this is Little League, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Little League.
Story_ID: 97993
Speaker 1: So you're (unclear), so you--the other thing, going forward back to Maryland, when you were talking about your parents going to the State dinners with dinner, you grimaced a little bit, and I was wondering why.  Is it because it was [President Richard] Nixon?
Speaker 2: I think to a certain extent it was.  I think that we discovered that I think he--my dad was on the hit list, you know, Nixon's 200 Hit List [Nixon's Enemies List] , I believe or some list that, you know, where he felt that Labor was the enemy, and but my parents went.  I remember the State dinner was the President of Tunisia.  And they thought my, he thought my parents were Tunisian.  So he thought they were from the Embassy, and I don't think he understood why, how they got on the list (laughter) after they, but, you know, it was interesting.  He, I think that, you know, I think that he was not--my parents weren't fans of Nixon, and I don't think Nixon was terribly--was a fan of my dad's.  But I think the invitation came because he was, you know, a high-ranking African American who had left government.  He went back to the AFL-CIO and then was the director of education.
Speaker 1: For the AFL-CIO?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 97994
Speaker 1: Okay, so in all of this, is union, politics and the issues of union and political leaders, are these being discussed at all at home?
Speaker 2: Every day.  And, you know, the more political we would become, my brother and I, the more he would, you know, shut us down by saying, you're silly.  I just talked to him yesterday on the Hill, and that's not what happened.  So we were, you know, sort of shouting out, and I always knew I wanted to be a journalist so I was always reading the newspaper and always trying to get as many voices as I could.  And my father [Walter Davis] was always shutting down those voices by saying, I talked to the guy yesterday.  And you kind of believed him because he was always on the Hill or he was, you know, always at meetings or at conferences where he had these relationships.  And here we are thinking we knew so much.  But we did, he did talk about politics at home.  We were, as we got into high school, our political ideologies became much more radical, my brother and I.  And, of course, the more radical we became, the more conservative he became.
Speaker 1: Radical about what?  Are you talking about Black Power radical or--
Speaker 2: Yes, Black Power, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother introduced me to (unclear) someone, I--(unclear), and I became enamored with the Panther Party, probably in my junior, senior year in high school.
Speaker 1: So who did you follow on the Panther Party?
Speaker 2: Well, Eldridge Cleaver was somebody I, you know, and, of course, I think every young woman, every young girl my age loved Huey [P.] Newton.  I mean, I'm not gonna, you know, he was, you know, and then Bobby Seale I later met in college.  And then I got involved in the Panther Party in my freshman and sophomore year in Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 97995
Speaker 1: Oh, you did, okay.  So I have one other question about your father [Walter Davis].  Do you remember what issue that he was most elated about or something, some success of the unions and what he was most troubled about?  Do you remember--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, he was so involved in the black trade unionist movement, and I think he believed to a certain degree that it was going slower than he had hoped.  But I also think that the thing that was most disappointing to him, until the day he died, was the fact that unions had become more conservative, I think, to a certain extent.  I think that he was concerned about whether or not unions would last, that all the work and sacrifices that were made would, would the union movement grow or would it not.  And I think that he would have been, had he lived, devastated.
Speaker 1: Well, he was--his concerns were right then.
Story_ID: 97996
Speaker 1: So when you, so you went to Springbrook High School [Silver Spring, Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And what is, is this mainly a high--a white high school still?
Speaker 2: It was, not anymore.  It was a public white high school.  And it had a number of African Americans in it when I started, but what they did was they built another high school within two miles away and where--two to three miles away, where, in the area where all the black kids went, lived, I'm sorry.  And so those of us who were--they changed, they had a--they built it.  They established another district and that district was where most of the African Americans lived.  So I was one of seven African Americans in my graduating class of 640.
Speaker 1: Now, you were active on the school, high school paper?
Speaker 2: I was, "Blue Print".  I was active on the "Blue Print".  I was a features editor, and wrote, you know, all the time.  I mean that was my passion.
Speaker 1: So you knew early what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I knew very early.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I knew very, very early that I wanted to be a journalist.
Story_ID: 97997
Speaker 1: So your brother, he had gone, you said he went to--
Speaker 2: Columbia [University, New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Columbia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was his interests?  What was he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Political, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: His interest was political science.  My brother, though, first went to--he didn't, he, for whatever reason, he was always late to the name.  And he didn't apply to college until he was pushed.  I mean he wanted to go to college, he knew he had to go to college, but for whatever reason, he was, he took the SATs and the PSATs and got this incredibly high score, and all these colleges were writing him.  And the only college he wanted to go to was Columbia.  And so he was put on the waiting list at Columbia, and my parents scrambled, got him into Butler University, out in [Indianapolis] Indiana, and then he stayed there for a year and then immediately transferred without any problem into Columbia.  So, you know, he's--and my brother's still the same way now, never married, four cats, and works for Health and Human Services as a budget--I mean never had any real desire to--you ask him who he works for, he says, I work for the people of the United States of America.
Speaker 1: So your father [Walter Davis], I bet that wasn't, he wasn't happy about that, you know, that he would--'cause your father was aggressive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Even though you say that your mother [Doris Nelson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother pushed him in that aggressiveness, yes (laughter).  And my father gave my mother tremendous credit for that, you know.  He would always say that, you know, had it not been for your mother, I don't know where I would be.  But, but my mother saw, my mother had one foot up all of our butts.  I mean, you know, she had, except with my older brother, for whatever reason, I mean she didn't know about, you know--she expected him to know about his college applications (laughter), you know, and she would get on him.  But, you know, my brother was, was, you know, sort of persnickety as he still is.  And so he, he did things on his own time.
Story_ID: 97998
Speaker 1: So when you're going, what--how do you decide Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: Did you know about its journalism program at that time?
Speaker 2: I did, I did, and I decided to go to Boston for all the wrong reasons.  I went to Boston because I saw "Love Story", and I wanted to fall in love on the Charles River and the only I could do that is if I was in Boston.  So I, my father knew the president of Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I kind of realized I didn't want to work that hard.  My board scores weren't all that high.  And so my parents realized--well, I got, I didn't get into the School of Communications at all.  I got into another, a college in Boston called the School of Basic--the College of Basic Studies.  It was the best decision I ever made in my life.  It was a two-year program within the University.  And it was there to help motivated students like me, students who either had relatively okay board scores, but high grades or students who had high board scores and low grades.  But whatever it was, they needed the motivation.  They needed the kind of nurturing.  They needed direction.  And I said, well, I know I'm better than what they think I am, and I went to the College of Basic Studies and it kicked my behind, just as it kicked everybody else's behind.  But it made us incredible, incredible lifelong learners.  And so we matriculated into the, as our, juniors we matriculated into whatever schools that we were designed to go into.  And I was a, and I went into the School of Public Communications, which is now the College of Com, communications.  And I was over motivated, and that's why I graduated in college in three and a half years.  So it's like two years at the College of Basic Studies in a year and a half.  And I remember the dean saying at the College of Communications, saying I can't stand you--they called it CBS, CBS students because you come to us and you have every expectation that we're gonna move at the same pace you're ready to move.  And so a lot of my friends that had come from CBS, we all graduated a semester early because we were ready now to go.  We were ready to learn.
Story_ID: 97999
Speaker 1: Now, was there an internship focus at the (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [No audible response] [Shaking head, no.]
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 2: No, there was no--the internships, I think, came probably in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: We did not have to do an internship.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, what are you doing after you graduate?  Do you--or is there anything else about your college experience that you thought significant?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  My, you know, I was, I am still in love with Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  They have been kind enough to award me three times as the distinguished alumnus, alumna, and one from the entire University.  And I received a distinguished alumna from the College of Basic Studies, the two-year program and also from the School of Communications.  And part of it was I was so very much involved in the school.  I was on the student government my freshman and sophomore years.  I was chosen to cover Gerald Ford when he was president.  I was chosen to cover for something called the Daily Free Press, the first year of court-ordered busing and ended up getting hit with a rock (laughter) on that first day in South Boston and ended up with a little blurb in the New York Times.  I was exposed to so much while in school, not internships, and my first job came as a producer for WBZ Television.  I was, a month after my 22nd birthday.  I, because they, the school also gave me a lot of chutzpah and a lot of guts to go after jobs that were historically for people with more experience.  But I could write, and hence, the, I got my first job through the University who said, look, you know what?  There's a job, this guy, he came from this University who's hiring.  Go for it.  And I went for it, and I got the job.
Speaker 1: So you're saying the CBS [College of Basic Studies] program did all that for you?
Speaker 2: I would say that CBS and the School of Communications, but BU [Boston University] did that for me.
Speaker 1: But where do you find that you're a good writer?  Where does that--is that from high school or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--yes, I believe I was a good, I think I was a good writer in elementary school.  I had great teachers all through school that helped me find a voice.  And I still believe that my voice is a little--distinctive.  I wouldn't say that, you know, I wouldn't, I love to write and I don't think I'm a creative writer in terms of, you know, I don't--but I'm a good non-fiction writer, I think.  And I think that started as early as elementary school.
Story_ID: 98000
Speaker 1: So when you, now, you also said that in college you--did you say you joined the Black Panther Party?
Speaker 2: Yes, in my sophomore year, but I, you know, I joined that party to work in the breakfast program [Free Breakfast for Children].
Speaker 1: 'Cause a lot of people, you know, that breakfast program, people everybody says that that was, I mean who knows about it, says it was a wonderful thing and really more defined the Panthers than their rhetoric, you know, what people know as their rhetoric part.
Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely, and, you know, we woke up at 5:00 in the morning.  Somebody took us, you know, we rode.  We went to an apartment in Bromley-Heath Projects, and I remember, you talked about the--you know, we were talking about the sights and the sounds, bacon (laughter).  And I don't eat, you know, I eat chicken and fish.  I don't eat red meat or pork and I gotta tell yah, the smell of bacon on my clothes.  And then we cooked that bacon for those kids in the recreation center before they went to school.  And I, you know, and I did that three days a week and then went to class.
Speaker 1: So how long were you active in the Panther Party?
Speaker 2: Just through college.  I mean I think I, probably my junior year I had--well, my sophomore year maybe because then I found the Nation of Islam and decided that that's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to, you know, follow the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.  And I came to Chicago [Illinois] actually, and that was an interesting experience because I remember coming home, and my parents meeting me at the plane, at Washington National Airport.  And I remember so vividly I had my, a head wrap on, I had a long dress on, long dress on and I may have greeted them by saying as-salamu alaykum, but I remember they just put their heads down and they just (laughter) didn't know.  And I, you know, I was on form at the time to become Allison IV X.  And I kind of realized just how male-oriented it was and decided that it wasn't for me.
Speaker 1: How did you realize that because it is very male-oriented and--
Speaker 2: Well, when a couple of us were, you know, asked to, you know, to cook the meals and, you know, while the men made big decisions, I'm like, this is not me.  And I said, good-bye.
Speaker 1: And your parents said hallelujah.
Speaker 2: And my parents said, hallelujah (laughter).
Story_ID: 98475
Speaker 1: You were in, how long did you skirt around the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: I think probably close to a year.  I went to mosque and close to a year.  And then I, you know, it was very complicated to get on form and do all the rest of the stuff you had to do.  And then as I said, you know, this male domination just, I said, goodbye.
Speaker 1: But when you talk about get on "form", can you tell me what that means?
Speaker 2: Basically, you know, it's--for lack of a better term, you know, there was an application process.  You just didn't all of a sudden say, okay, Nation of Islam, you know, Elijah Muhammad, here I am.  You had to, you know, there was a whole process.  And as I remember, that's what they called it, you know.  You had to get on form and then they, you were given an "X".  You just couldn't call yourself, you know, Allison X.  You were given an "X" by the mosque who then, you would receive that from the Chicago [Illinois] folks.  So to get on form, you had to, you had to be able to, you know, sort of understand the doctrine, you know, embrace the doctrine and have people attest to the fact that you were doing all of those things.
Speaker 1: You know, I--this is much later, but I, you know, went to hear him speak once, and I was just, I could not believe the orderliness of everything.  And I really said, they need to have, take over every, any city.  They're just like ten times better than anything I--I mean everybody scrubbed up and looking--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and it was just very orderly, and anyway, that was--
Speaker 2: And you're from Chicago?
Speaker 1: I'm from Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, but I, you know, I've never, you know, this was a presentation outside of the mosque when he--I forgot what it was.
Story_ID: 98476
Speaker 1: Now, I, so you got this job at WBZ.  Can you talk about that, you know, 'cause you said you got it a month after, you said graduation?
Speaker 2: No, my 22nd birthday.  I had to, my parents wanted me to march, and I had gotten the job.  Let me just double back.  I never told my parents that I was graduating early.  I never said anything.  So I came home for Christmas in December of 1974, and my parents and I got into some political fight again.  And I should have learned to keep my mouth shut.  And my father [Walter Davis] said, sometimes I think you are just too dumb to send to school 'cause he got aggravated with me because I'm, you know, I'm combative, and I'm competitive, and I thought I knew it all.  And so I said, well, don't send me to school.  And my father said, well, you're just, you have one more semester left.  And I said, I'm not going back to school.  And then there were tears.  My mother [Doris Nelson] was upset, you know, and we've always wanted our children to graduate from college, and, you know.  And I knew that within that week I was going to get my diploma sent to me 'cause they told us that they would send our diploma.  So, of course, I could have been the nice kid, but I didn't.  I didn't say a word.  So, you know, I let them think that I wasn't going back.  And they were thinking they could convince me to go back.  And so I got the degree in the mailbox, opened it up, threw it on the table and said, I graduated.  And my parents saw this, my mom saw it.  She says, you're lying.  And I said, read it.  And she read it.  She called my father and she said, you can't believe what this girl did.  And I, so then when they got their wits about them and said, well, congratulations.  How did this happen, 'cause I didn't come home during the summers.  So I did take two courses in the summer, and then they waived two courses.  So I said, well, I took out a loan, how stupid was that?  And I said, I said, but I'm thinking about going to grad school.  And my parents said, well, before you do that, you have to march because your uncle's coming, and your grandmother is coming, and oh.  And so I actually got a job in March or April at WBZ, and had to ask for the day off to don a cap and gown, and I went behind the stage, gave 'em my degree, marched--they gave me my degree back, and then we took our pictures, and I gave back the cap and gown and done, said goodbye to them.  I said, I gotta go to work tomorrow (laughter), sorry (laughter).
Story_ID: 98477
Speaker 1: So you--how was that, because this is, WBZ was, it had been--oh, yeah, okay.  Did you work with Gail Harris or was she the anchor there at that time?
Speaker 2: She was the--yeah, my gosh, Gail Harris.  Wait--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Gail Harris was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay, this is the white Gail, yes.
Speaker 1: This is a white Gail Harris.
Speaker 2: Yes, I worked with Gail Harris.  Absolutely, and, but she came, I think in '76 [1976], '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked initially with Pat Mitchell--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And I worked with Jack Williams who was still there or who was still there.  And I was producer for a show called "First For News".  It was a news show that they had at 5:30.  And I didn't know much about, I didn't anything about television.  I'd only taken one television course.  I was, my degree is in journalism, magazine writing.  So I literally stayed at NBC seventeen hours a day to figure out what the heck is going on here.  And I got the job because that one broadcast course that I took was writing for television and radio and I had to write quickly.  So I literally was able to, until--you would fail the course if you didn't, if you weren't able to write a five-minute newscast in seven minutes.  So I was used to writing very quickly and accurately.  And that's what I did, and they gave me the job based on that.  And they said, you'll learn the other stuff later.  And I did.  I learned the other stuff.
Speaker 1: And you worked there how long then?
Speaker 2: I was there, initially, I was there for four years.  So that would have been '75 [1975] to '78 [1978], three years.  What happened was, I did a story based on an observation and I lived in the neighborhood in Brighton, a neighborhood in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I noticed that every night the cops were going into a liquor store around the corner from where I lived.  And they'd come out, but there were five of them.  And I was like, you know, what's going on?  And so I convinced the station to give me a camera crew and we got a truck, and we shot these cops going in and out of the liquor store.  And then we followed them to a parking lot behind a school, less than a mile away.  And we had a night scope, and we shot them drinking.  And this happened night after night after night.  They were tipping up some kind of bottle or beer or some liquor bottle, and we shot them, and we had a story.  And it turned the city around.  They, they ended up, I mean--so we bring the story to the Chief of Police of Boston.  He ends up firing or changing the whole, you know--
Speaker 1: Police department?
Speaker 2: --Police department in that area, you know, transferring everybody out, putting people on suspension.  It was a big story, so big that the other station covered, the other station gave us credit and said, you know, two of the other--two stations gave us credit, did the story and said, you know, as Channel Four reported.  So at that point, my news director said, you like this investigative reporting stuff?  And I said, yeah, I do like to dig a little bit.  And they said, well, we're starting something called the "I-Team".  And we'd like you to be a part of it.  So the final years, two years of my career at WBZ, I was on the I-Team, and we did some incredibly good stories.  And then I was asked to leave--I mean I was asked to go, to transfer to our sister station [KDKA] and start the I-Team in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Wow, that's pretty heavy for a young little, a young little thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean that, usually you're just still trying to figure a way around.
Story_ID: 98478
Speaker 1: Well, I told you I'm competitive and I was gutsy, and, you know, when I saw a story, you know, I--and I had this incredible--this wonderful news director who, I'll never forget, he said to me--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Bill Aber, and I know he at one point, you know, wanted to mentor me.  But his concern was that people would see us as a couple.  And so he did not want me to be, to have that moniker.  He did not want me to, you know, so his mentoring would be in his office.  He said, you know, normally, you know, but I was--he was very concerned that I would be seen as his whatever.  And so, you know, he was an amazing mentor to me.  And amazing in the sense that he let me, he encouraged me to find the story.  He didn't, you know, as long as I was accurate, as long as I, you know, and I had proof, he always encouraged me to go after finding the story.  And I was always able to do that.
Speaker 2: So how many other African Americans were working at WBZ at that time 'cause you mentioned Pat Mitchell.  And she went on to become head of PBS at some, you know--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at some point, right?
Speaker 1: African Americans, there was a guy who was actually from Chicago, Maurice Lewis, was a weekend anchor.  There were three reporters, Sarah-Ann Shaw, [Charles] Charlie Austin and Walt Saunders.  There were no--I was the only African American producer, writer/producer.
Story_ID: 98479
Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide that you liked producing at that point?  I mean were you--is this what your goal was  or it's just, I didn't know TV and then I found myself in this role, and I took to producing.  Is that the story?
Speaker 2: No, I, you know, I did not want to be out front.  I never wanted to be out front.  I ascribed, even back then, to the Bayard Rustin school of being a strategist.  My dad [Walter Davis] was like that too.  I mean people never knew what my dad did, and the influence that he had, you know.  And I liked that.  I liked the fact that, you know, you know--I just thought that if you stuck your neck out too far, you can get it chopped off.  And so I liked the fact that I could be behind the scenes, and at the same time, have some influence over what was seen.  I thought that there was more power and more influence as a producer, as a writer-producer than it was on air.
Speaker 1: Now, I mean and this is still at the time when journalists were journalists.  I'm not sure, had they become readers 'cause at some point then you have the readers come on.
Speaker 2: I think (unclear) when we're lucky.  But, you know, these, our anchor people didn't have to go out and do stories.  They didn't.  You know, they would, you know, if--most of the anchor folks, and even now, you know, if you did the 6:00 and 11:00, you came in at 3:00.  And you started writing the show for 6:00, you know, and rewriting the show for 6:00.  And then between 6:00, between 7:00 and 11:00, you went out to dinner and there was a night side reporter.  And maybe you would get back in time, but for the most part, you had to be ready to write the 11:00 [o'clock].  So most of these guys were, in fact, you know, they were readers unless you could get them, you know, at another time, maybe to come in a little earlier to actually do a story.  But there just wasn't, simply just wasn't enough time.
Speaker 1: But they're paid so much.
Speaker 2: They're paid so much.  You're absolutely right.  They're paid so much, and they're paid, you know, some of them are very deserving of that because, you know, I've seen some bad anchor people, you know, who did not--you can tell when someone doesn't understand the story, you know.  They don't know where, you know, Afghanistan is.  They don't, you can tell.  You can see it when they are just reading.  But you also know when somebody really understands what they're talking about.
Story_ID: 98480
Speaker 1: Now, around this time, I also see that--let's see, you joined in 19--you joined WBZ in 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: --seventy five [1975].  Now, what about this, what about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] and you serving the role as parliamentarian?  Is that in 1975?
Speaker 2: It is.  So I'm in, we have a small group of media workers in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I'm a part of that, but not, you know, not a big part of that.  And it was just fledging.  And in December of 1975, December 15th, I guess, I'm in Washington [D.C.] and at home, visiting with my parents.  Number one, because I would have to work Christmas in Boston.  And you kind of forget that news happens at Christmas, (laughter) on Christmas day and Thanksgiving.  I was the low person on the totem pole.  So I was gonna be, I was gonna be in Boston in Christmas.  So I'm there a week before or ten days before, and a friend of mine, Bonnie Nance (ph.) from Chicago [Illinois], she is in Washington working as a, the PR person for U.S. News and World Report.  And she's there with a woman named Jeanie Thornton, and she says that the black elected officials are meeting.  And there's a party.  Why don't you come into the city?  And I said, yeah, what the hay?  I'm not doing anything.  So I asked to borrow a car, and I get there at about 4:00, you know, 'cause we're all gonna meet for drinks, and then we're gonna go to this black elected officials event, and I don't remember if it was the Shore Room, the Sheridan, it starts with a--so I get there.  And both of the ladies are there, Jeanie and Bonnie.  And they said, oh, by the way, there's this meeting that they've asked a lot of black journalists to come to.  You have a couple, an hour or so?  And I said, I don't want to go to a meeting, but, you know, fine.  So I get to the conference room where this meeting is held, not knowing anybody but Bonnie and Jeanie.  And Chuck Stone [HM] who was at the Philadelphia Bulletin [Philadelphia Daily News] at the time is chairing this meeting.  And so I'm sitting there, and I'm somewhat looking like the sullen teenager because I'm all anxious to get to the party.  And I'm sitting there and finally, they're voting on things, and they are messing up Robert's Rules of Order.  And I said, "Mr. Chairman", and I said, "point of order".  Now, Chuck is smart.  He knew what "point of order" was, but nobody else knew.  And he said, "your point?"  And I gave whatever point it was, and he looks at me and he says, "and what's your name?"  And I said--"and your affiliation?"  I said, "my name is Allison Davis, and I'm at WBZ Television in Boston."  And he said, "well, Ms. Davis"--no, I said, "and so and what is this we're doing here?"  And he said, "we're starting an organization."  And I said, "what's the name of this organization?"  And he said, "everybody, what's the name?  Are we gonna call ourselves the National Association of Black Journalists?"  And everybody said, "yeah, yeah, yeah."  And then I said, "okay."  And he looks over, he looks over to me, and he goes, "and by the way, Ms. Davis, you are our parliamentarian."  And I said, "of what again?"  (Laughter) And he said, "the National Association of Black Journalists."  And from there, I became the parliamentarian.  I wrote the original constitution.  And I am now rewriting the constitution for consideration this year.
Story_ID: 98481
Speaker 1: That's an amazing story.  Now, who are the original members?  Do you--'cause we've interviewed so many people, and I've seen so many faces.  You know, I've heard, well, Vernon Jarrett [HM]--
Speaker 2: Vernon Jarrett.
Speaker 1: --very important.  Was Paul Brock [HM]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was, oh, let me see.  There's a journalist out of, out of Chicago [Illinois], Frances Ward [HM]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There were forty-four in that room that signed that sheet.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: I was the first parliamentarian, and then later became the vice president, and was so very, you know, close and loved, and he called me his daughter, Vernon Jarrett.  That was a, he was an amazing, amazing person.  Anyway, so, yeah, and Paul Brock was a founding member and then became the first executive director of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].
Speaker 1: I mean it's amazing to see the founders--you were young though.
Speaker 2: I was, I thought I was the youngest founder.  Sam Ford [HM] is five months younger than I am.  And I have claimed, and told everybody I am the youngest founder of NABJ until I find out, two years ago that Sam.  And then Sandra Long [Weaver, HM], I think was the next.  She's a little older, a little less than a year older than I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I think we just did Sam Ford.  But the other thing is, I mean just the growth of the organization.  There, I mean all the founders have to be amazed, whether they're happy or not, I mean it's huge.
Speaker 2: It's huge, and I have to tell you that, you know, our first convention was pool side at a Howard Johnson in Houston [Texas].  It was Mel Johnson.  We would make sure we had most of our conferences in Washington, D.C.  I left, I mean I wasn't quite as active when I was having children.  And I came, oh, maybe in the early '90s [1990s] to a conference in New York.  And I remember DeWayne Wickham [HM] saying to me, can you believe what you birthed?  And I said, very tearfully, I said, you know, but I sort of, you know, left that baby for a while to be raised by someone else.  So I can't, I can--and I can't believe that it has grown like this.  I mean it's amazing to me.
Speaker 1: It's amazing.  I mean it's huge.
Speaker 2: It's huge, you know, it's still going through its growing pains as it, we--begins its fortieth year.
Speaker 1: Well, also when you think about it, the media also went through a cataclysmic change--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in the last decade too.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, and when even the concept of journalism was even, you know, was sort of on the--not the concept, but what was journalism going to be?
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right.  And we're struggling with that now as we write this constitution.  We're very much struggling with what is a journalist?
Story_ID: 98482
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite Chuck Stone [HM] story?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean my favorite, you know, Chuck Stone story, I think was, Chuck was a mad writer, memo writer.  And I just remember, you know, we didn't have e-mail then.  So on a weekly basis, I was getting notes from Chuck about almost everything.  I mean he would write notes to everybody, almost about every--and I found most of those notes, and I'm scanning them now.  I'm a hoarder.  I mean I guess I could be on one of those shows.  I mean my house is not that messy, but I do hoard stuff, and I've found the envelopes, and I've been carrying them around.  And I have this huge envelope with just a stack of the early NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] stuff.  And, and I was always amazed how he managed to keep everybody together, you know, not on conference calls, not on email, not with a website, but good, old-fashioned typewritten notes that he would send to people and make sure that everybody knew, you know, what next steps were.  We weren't meeting very often.  Remember, we're spread around the country.  But he just managed to, to make sure that we were, we were a cohesive group, starting a national organization.
Story_ID: 98483
Speaker 1: Can you talk about what the vision was for the organization?
Speaker 2: The vision initially for NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] was not really as an advocacy role as much as it is now.  It was a networking opportunity.  It was for us to share our stories in these predominantly white newsrooms.  It very quickly turned more advocacy, but a lot of folks were concerned about biting the hands that feed us.  And so we have arguments about this now because I definitely know from my notes, and I've looked at my notes, and I've looked at the minutes from those days, that there was tremendous disagreement about how much of an advocacy role we should take.  And so initially, we were an organization that, were a support organization for each other because, you know, there may be one or two people at various newsrooms, and we just needed to know what was happening outside of our own, our own newsroom communities.  And we needed to share the information, and we needed to figure out for ourselves how we were going to grow this organization.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the other thing is, people don't realize, it's really late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] that people are even going into these, you know, it's the riots, and the--they're just being picked up, journalism degree or not, you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and being put on the air or put in, you know, newsrooms. And--
Story_ID: 98484
Speaker 1: And so I want to about Vernon Jarrett [HM] too because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, you talked about him as a mentor.  And I was just wondering if you could, you know, share a story about him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean Vernon, you know, because I was so young, and I was.  I mean I look at this now, and I'm thinking, what were they thinking (laughter) to be so, to embrace me so much and what was I thinking that I could compete in this environment?  But Vernon treated me like a grown-up.  And at the same time, protected me from people who didn't think I was a grown-up.  And I always appreciated that, you know.  I would see Vernon, and, you know, Vernon was the fatherly type.  You know, he'd, you know, give me the hug and the kiss, and, you know, treat me like a daughter and at the same time, give me work that was substantive and that was important and that made a difference in the future of this organization.  I guess for a lack of a better term, he gave me a legacy.
Story_ID: 99679
Speaker 1: Okay, so anyway, you, so let's talk about going to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  So did you get hired in as a reporter?
Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and why do you leave?
Speaker 2: I left, I left, I worked for Group W [Westinghouse Broadcasting], and I had the opportunity to be on the air and then ultimately start the I-Team in Pittsburgh.  And I thought, well, I have no children.  And I thought it would be just a great, you know--I was with the person [Robert Wright] that I ultimately married.  And we just wanted a different adventure.  And so we decided to move to Pittsburgh together.  And--
Speaker 1: So, talk about your boyfriend, soon-to-be husband, then became husband.  Can you give me some--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, my, I met my husband at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  My husband was a conscientious objector during the Vietnam War so he was five years older than I was.  And so he got to be BU after doing a CO [conscientious objector alternative service], and--in Newark [New Jersey].  And I knew his brother.  His brother was actually a year older than me and went to BU.  And then he came, and went to BU.  And I kind of saw him, and he looked different than the other students.  And I, at that time, in my final, in my final semester, I got a job working at BU as a counselor for minority students.  They had never had that before, and they said, you seem to--I was going into counseling, and she said, well, you know what?  Try this, and so I was a counselor, and he was one of my students.  And I sort of looked at him, and I said, boy, (laughter) you're kinda cute (laughter).  But, you know, and we started to date, and I told the school, I said, you know what?  I'm gonna have to not deal with him.  And they were fine.  It was the college, and so we dated.  He was, as I said, five years older than I was.  And it, talk about small world.  So my mother [Doris Nelson]--I had been engaged to a guy or pre-engaged, I guess that's what they call it.  And, with a microscopic diamond, and we broke up.  And we, and I ended up meeting my husband, my future husband.  And my mom asked me, have you met anybody after--'cause she knew I went with this guy through high school, and my mom said, did you meet, have you met anybody?  And I said, interestingly enough, I met a guy.  His name is Robert Wright.  And so my mother said, ah, my goodness.  She said, isn't that a coincidence.  She said my, I was so in love with this guy at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] named Bruce Wright.  And she said, he's now a big judge in New York.  They called him "turn-em-loose Bruce".  And he wrote a book called "Black Robes--"White Robes--no, "Black Robes, White Something" ["Black Robes, White Justice].  I don't know.  Anyway, he was a pretty well--he's been, he's a well-known judge.  And so I said, well, that's interesting I said, 'cause Rob's brother, his name is Bruce.  So my mother says, well, there's no way that it's the same Bruce because this Bruce--I said, this Bruce is my age.  And I said, so we went out, and I said, let me just ask you a question, Rob.  I said, is there any other Bruce's in your family.  He said, ah, my Uncle Bruce.  I said, he wouldn't happen to be a judge?  Yeah, he's a judge in New York.  I said he wouldn't happen to--'cause my mother says, he had a sister.  I says, he wouldn't happen to have a sister named Juanita.  And he goes, yeah, yeah, that's my Aunt Juanita.  How do you know all of this?  And I was like, oh, no, you know.  And so when my mom first met him, they, the family, they all resemble each other.  My mom just stared at him.  And when we finally got married, we got married after going together six years, and we got married in my parents' backyard.  And Bruce, the judge, called my mom.  And they used to call her Nelson, and said, "Nelson, I can't believe this, that we're related by", and my mother, I thought would faint.  After all of these years, 1936, and they, you know, they had not seen each other since 1937.  And here they are, they're--his nephew.
Story_ID: 99680
Speaker 1: And so he sent his boys down, his--who we are now very, very close to, his son, my husband [Robert Wright]'s first cousin is--I married the black Kennedys basically.  My husband's cousin, Donald Payne, the--and Donald Payne, Jr., his other cousin, they're Thigpens.  And the family is all in public service.  His, there're two judges.  There are two state assemblymen in New York.  One state assemblyman in Jersey.  They're all, you know--we had a family reunion, and it was like the, it was like New Jersey and New York politics.
Speaker 2: So you're saying the Thigpens, Wrights and the--wait Thig--
Speaker 1: Thigpens and the Wrights.
Speaker 2: Wrights and wait there's--and Paynes are all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And the Paynes are all related.  They're all descendants of the same--well, the Wrights, my husband's grandmother is a Thigpen.  So the Wrights come in.  I mean they're not really, you know--this was a, by, you know, the father--the grandfather was a Wright.  But my, they're all Thigpens.  And it's an amazing family of men and women who were in service to this country in politics.
Speaker 2: So your husband, Robert Wright--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --so what was his major and what'd he do because, you know, or his interests, because you spoke of him as a conscientious objector.
Speaker 1: He was a conscientious objector in the Vietnam War.  His interest was, at that time, Jimi Hendricks (laughter), but he is, he's a really phenomenal editor.  And he had his own video company.  And then in 2004, he took very ill.  So his major was actually communications as well at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  And he took ill, and it took him about three, four years to get about 80 percent.  And, you know, he's back to doing editing.  So this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So back then, when you're working at WBZ, where is he working?  And then, then you go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], where is he working?
Speaker 1: Well, he, when--he's still in school 'cause remember, he's behind me.  And then when we moved to Pittsburgh, he decides to get what was then called a first-class license, engineering license.  And he gets a job at KDKA.
Speaker 2: So you're both at KDKA?
Speaker 1: So we're both at KDKA.  He's 3:00 to midnight, and I'm regular.  So he stayed at KDKA after, even after I left for New York.
Speaker 2: So, did, was that happening much in the industry, you know.  I know that happens in academia where two people, you know, married people work in the same place.  Is that, was that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Doesn't happen, no.  I don't think that--I think it just--we, first of all, he was working at KDKA before we married.  And then we got married, and he stayed at KDKA.  And then I got a job at W--at NBC.  So I left (laughter).  So we weren't together long at KDKA.
Story_ID: 99681
Speaker 1: Okay, so, who is--now, at KDKA, was there Patrice King Brown?  Was she there?
Speaker 2: She was absolutely there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't work with her.  She had her own show.  And I, you know, we knew each other, but I was there with Bill Burns, Patti Burns, you know, Ray Tannehill--
Speaker 1: Was there Ron Klink or--
Speaker 2: Ron Klink who's a Congressman now or was a Congressman.
Speaker 1: And then Ron Olson was--
Speaker 2: And Ron Olson, yeah, he was a reporter like me.  Most of those guys, you know, because I went on the I-Team, about a year after being at KDKA, and I partnered with a guy named Charles Bosworth.  And Charles Bosworth and I were the I-Team.  He was the investigative reporter, an incredible guy.  We worked very closely together, so closely together that Charles' son Seth is my godson.  And he moved to New Orleans [Louisiana], and my son was just with them this weekend in New Orleans.  So we have, you know, we became family.
Speaker 1: So you worked there, what?  Three years?  Is it--
Speaker 2: I had a three-year contract, and I chose, and there was a big story that Charles and I worked on.  It was, they fixed the lottery and it was triple sixes [666], and the guy who was, that gave out the, did the numbers when the numbers, you know, we have--when they did at 7:00 o'clock at the news.  And then they drew the numbers, weighted the balls.  And we showed that they weighted the balls, and that the lottery was fixed.  And it was a nationwide story.  And I got tapped by NBC as a result.
Speaker 1: So how did you find that story?  I know how you found the story of the policemen drinking in Brighton [Boston, Massachusetts].  But how do you find--
Speaker 2: Actually, Charlie found that, Charlie heard from one of his contacts that this is a possibility.  And we just both worked the story of the triple sixes [666], and I did--
Speaker 1: How did you work this story though?  I understood how you worked the other story with the cameras, but how did you--
Speaker 2: It was--I did the bulk of the research, and I can't remember the gentleman's name, except it was Nick something.  And I found out that this gentleman had ties and, in, and I believe it was--and I don't wanna say it was organized crime as we know it in terms of Italian.  But he, but it was organized enough.  I believe he was a Greek gentleman and there was a plot to weight down these balls so there would be triple sixes [666] that came up.  And he, we were able to put two and two together and were able to determine that he was in charge of this plot to make sure that the balls came up triple sixes.  And then when, and, you know, and we just had collaboration from people who were part of the plot.
Speaker 1: How long did that take, that story take to research and bring to--
Speaker 2: I would say close to six months, if I remember correctly.
Speaker 1: Was that common with stories like or, I mean or is that on the long side?
Speaker 2: No, you know, what was interesting was, it was, in four to six months, it wasn't difficult, you know.  We worked on a couple of stories at a time.
Story_ID: 99682
Speaker 1: But one of the great things about investigative reporting, particularly at this time, is that you had time to develop the story, which meant, I spent a lot of time on the phone with lawyers because Westinghouse Broadcasting [Group W] made sure that they double, tripled and quadruple checked everything you did.  It was the stories like the police story, the police drinking on the job, and then I did a follow-up story to that on, of what I--it was called "Fat Cops".  And that also in Boston [Massachusetts] had a big, big thing in terms of, you know, we determined that so many of the police officers throughout the city could not chase down anybody given their incredible weight.  And so we did a lot of, we did a story on that.  And that ended up getting a lot of play as well.  But in terms of this, I mean there were other stories we were working on simultaneously.  And then when one obviously started to take traction, then we were, we went on it.
Story_ID: 99683
Speaker 1: So, now, when you got picked by NBC News, you're saying your husband [Richard Wright] stays back at KDKA?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, but this is, is this, at this point in time, this is a big deal, right?  Or was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: To go to the network?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it's,--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --it's huge.
Speaker 2: It's huge, and I was, and they had no African American--well, they had a farm system at NBC, and, you know, you started as a secretary, and then you became a researcher, and if you went to production side, you became a PA.  And then you became, you know, a writer and a producer.  And so I was brought in at age twenty-eight, you know, in a totally different manner.  So there were some people who had come up and did the ladder system and were not very happy about me being there.  I was the second African American producer ever to work at, for a show, and that was "Nightly News" with John Chancellor.  And so there was, you know, a little bit of, you know, ugliness behind that.  But for the most part, it was an awesome experience because I was chosen to be on a, what's called "special segment".  So I wasn't just out there doing the grunt, crazy, running work.  I was able to sell stories to my boss at NBC, and then travel around the country and sometimes the world, doing those stories.  I did a, I had (laughter), they called it a--they still call it a boondoggle, but it was a great story that ran five minutes on "Nightly News" on Jamaica.  I went to Jamaica with Linda Ellerbee, and we did a story that, with--we normally only got two minutes on "Nightly News".  We got five minutes to tell the story after [Michael] Manley left and [Edward] Seaga was there and how the country had changed.
Speaker 1: So you've said that you were the second [African American].  Who was the first?
Speaker 2: I want to say--there were two gentlemen.  And one was, I believe, Paul Buckman (ph.).  I really, I mean I can't recall.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  So the thing that I wanna, this is 1981.  You're twenty-eight.  This, where are in the world of evening news?  Is this--because you have, you're working for John Chancellor, right?
Speaker 2: [No audible response] [Nodding head, yes].
Speaker 1: And then there, is there--wait, is David Brokaw, is he, David--is Brokaw--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Tom Brokaw.
Speaker 1: Tom, Tom, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Tom Brokaw (laughter).
Speaker 2: Tom Brokaw is still on the "Today Show".
Speaker 1: "Today Show".  What about, Walter Cronkite is--
Speaker 2: Opposite us on Channel--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on CBS.  And Peter Jennings, I believe--well, no, it could--may have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Peter Jennings came in--let's see.  I think what I read was that, this is 1983.  So this is two years later.
Speaker 2: It could have been Harry K. Smith and, and it could have been that threesome, but maybe not.  I was thinking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Because they said Brokaw became sole anchor of "Nightly News" and then Pete Jennings became sole anchor of "World News Tonight".
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that's in, that's two years after you get there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so remember that it was Barbara Walters, Harry K. Smith and Max Robinson.  They're three of them who are together then.  And Max was in Chicago [Illinois].  So, yes, they could have been, they could have been--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --there in '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And then, then the sole anchors, you know, there were sole anchors because, remember, I think Chancellor was with Mudd, Roger Mudd.  For whatever reason they had this duo.  So then Roger, Roger Mudd was in Washington and John Chancellor was in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they went back to the solo anchor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you work in that position how long?  You worked there for--
Speaker 2: I was there, at "Nightly News", gee, I must have been there till, since--till 19--
Speaker 1: I think you, I have you there till '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983], maybe-
Speaker 1: 'Cause--
Story_ID: 99684
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know.  Was "Monitor" part of "Nightly News" with the--
Speaker 2: No, "Monitor" and "First Camera" were, predated "Dateline".  So I wanted to go into long-form, and you know, one of the interesting-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, why did you wanna go into long form?
Speaker 2: Because I needed more time to tell stories, and there were always more to a story than I was allowed to tell on "Nightly News".  And so I was sort of fascinated with longer stories.  So I thought that that would, you know, interest me and hold my interest for a while.  And I was in a situation back then, to be very honest with you, where there were so few African Americans.  Every executive producer wanted to have an African American on staff, felt it necessary.  And so they would just kind of move me around.  I was just the, you know, some people would say I was the pawn.  I would hope that I was the queen, but (laughter), but I was just being moved around from show to show.
Speaker 1: I see.  So was "Monitor", was that what Lloyd Dobyns was--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: He was the host of that.
Speaker 2: He was the host of "Monitor", yes.
Speaker 1: But that didn't go too well, right?  That sort of didn't do well in the ratings--
Speaker 2: Yes, that magazine show didn't do very well, and then "First Camera" was, did equally as bad.  I mean there were some good stories out there, but, you know, we were never going to be "60 Minutes".  We were never going to be "20/20".
Story_ID: 99685
Speaker 1: So when you then, so when, next comes the "Today Show", right?
Speaker 2: Next came, no, next came "Summer Sunday"--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: "Summer Sunday", I missed that.
Speaker 2: Andrea Mitchell, and--this was a summer show, with Linda Ellerbee and Andrea Mitchell.  I was Linda Ellerbee's producer.  She remains one of my dear friends even to this day.  And so I went with Linda to do this summer show, where we traveled around the country for the summer.  And what, you know, while there are, there's been a lot written about "Summer Sunday" because it was an interesting time, very short story.  There was a woman, we took, we did a segment on immigration.  And we were in Washington [D.C.], and I was, I found a young woman from China who was an illegal, an undocumented teen.  Her name Hu-na (ph.).  And I wasn't sure that she could speak English.  And so we covered her face, and we did everything to cover her identity.  And they started talking to her, and she was "Yah, No, Hee," and it still--if you read any of the books about journalism, the Huona story comes up all the time.  It was an amazingly embarrassing day for me.  But it was, it was--anyway, that was "Summer Sunday".  And it was Linda Ellerbee and Andrea Mitchell, and we traveled that summer.  And part of it was, you now, they wanted to try it out.  They wanted to have, you know, different people, you know, as producers to come in and, you know, and Linda and I were a little bit of a team, so, and Andrea and I became a team as well.  So we just went out and did it.
Speaker 1: So what was the focus though?  I mean what was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I think what it basically was, it was an experiment, if you will, to try to--the "Summer Sunday" from a technological basis, it was the first show to be done entirely on a remote.  And I think that what they wanted to do was ultimately do more "Today Show" remotes.  And so I went to the "Today Show" after that show, and then we started to do, you know, Today in Africa, "Today in Ireland, Today--you know, on the Orient Express, but "Summer Sunday" was the show that got us moving in that live remote realm.
Speaker 1: So did you, so what are you learning, I mean because at this point, you've done short form, long form, and then news magazine forms--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And live.
Speaker 1: And live.  Well, wait, live is what?
Speaker 2: "Summer Sunday", that was "Summer Sunday" before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was all--
Speaker 2: It was all live.
Speaker 1: It was all live?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, then live, oh, and that's why you talked about the embarrassing moment, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, live and on remote.
Speaker 1: And on remote, okay.
Story_ID: 99686
Speaker 1: So, what are you learning about those types of things, and what are the size of the crews at this point because we're talking about really the golden days of television where there were a lot of budgets?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: You know, what I learned about television in those days, really prepared me for what I know now about the internet.  I learned, you know, how to tell stories in various ways for various shows.  I learned, you know, I learned how to produce on the fly.  I learned how to tell stories where I had a lot of research that I had to pare down and cull from.  And then I learned live, and, you know, it was--even now, I use so much of what I learned back then in what I do now in terms of telling stories in this new digital realm.  So, in my mind, you know, that whole period was a period for me that, you know, taught me so much about how you distribute content.  How do you get that content to, to the viewer, you know, and the various ways in which you do it, and the various ways you tell stories.  I mean it just was an amazing learning experience for me.  And the nice part is, is that so many of the opportunities that I've had, there have been no books, there have been no models.  We've had to make it up as we go along, and that, to me, was great 'cause there was no, there was nothing telling me that this is the way it should be.  I bristle at people who feel that there's no other way.
Story_ID: 99687
Speaker 1: So when you, so how many people were on a team though?  That's what I'm wondering and how were you sort of divided and were there--you know, 'cause sometimes you're paired, you were paired you said, with Linda Ellerbee--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and Andrea Mitchell.  So are your lead times different with live, you know, with--you know, were the lead times any different?  You know, you had talked before, an I-Team of six-month, you know, lead times for a story--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, the lead times were much different.  You had so few times.  I mean you would literally, you know--we would spend Monday through Wednesday working on stories, researching stories, maybe Wednesday through Friday shooting the stories, editing those stories and then Saturday and Sunday, we're on location.  So it was a seven-day a week job for "Summer Sunday", and it, in terms of the number of people, I mean we traveled with thirty-five, forty people, you know.  So you had, you know, the executive producer, two senior producers and senior producers were working on the shows, the next shows.  We had probably six or seven producers 'cause you had to fill an hour.  You had, you know, a crew of, you know, three camera people, two audio people, lighting, you know, you just had--we traveled big.  But you said something very, very, it's true.  I mean that was the heyday.  There was money, and so, you know, we were able to--and we spent that money.
Story_ID: 98030
Speaker 1: So let's talk about being--so how does, how do you transition into the "Today Show"?
Speaker 2: Well, the executive producer of the "Today Show" was also the executive producer of "Summer Sunday".  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, who is that?
Speaker 2: Steven, Steve Friedman.  And he said to me, "Would you be interested-"because I'm without a show now.  And he said, "Would you be interested in coming on the 'Today Show?"  And I thought, wow, yeah, that would be fun.  And so I ended up going from "Summer Sunday" to working with him, working for him on the "Today Show".  And so he and I--and at that time, Bryant Gumbel was the host as, and it's (unclear) co-hosted by Jane Pauley.  And they had, I wanna say that I think I was the first African American producer they've ever had.  And that was in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Well, that was--I have you going there in 1984.
Speaker 2: Okay, the mid-'80s [1980s], okay.  I'm just--I'm thinking in terms of children, so yes.
Speaker 1: All right, now, yeah, so I have you going there in 1984.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: But this, we have to also provide cont-- 'cause this show is immensely popular.  And they are immensely popular as a team.  I mean--
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right.  The show was immensely popular.  They, Bryant and Katie [Couric], absolutely, I mean--
Speaker 1: Bryant and Jane.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I'm gonna start, Bryant and Jane--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --absolutely adored each other.  It was an incredible history that I was going to be a part of.  And I was over the top.  But I also saw that, you know, there was so much that needed to be, you know--as it relates to race, you know, I was a little concerned that there, that Bryant was fighting that battle alone.  And I will say, he did fight the battle.  There were a lot of things that we were able to do then that--for example, we both decided that we were not going to do stories on Black History Month because we felt very strongly that Black History was every month.  And we were, so we made sure that there were stories that were of importance to African Americans.  And African Americans are big, daytime television viewers, and frankly, I am proud of the stories we put on the air.  I mean nobody had ever heard of [HM] Lani Guinier.  Nobody had heard of [HM] Dennis [Paul] Kimbro, Dr. Kimbro.  Nobody had heard of [HM] Bebe Moore Campbell.  So we made sure that the books that we profiled on the show were not just white books.  We did that before Oprah [Winfrey].  And so I am, and will always be, incredibly proud of what we accomplished on that show and how we set a tone that was inclusive and fair.
Story_ID: 98031
Speaker 1: What was the schedule for that show [the "Today Show"] too?  I mean you talked about this, how are--'cause you're, it's a daily show.  And so what is the schedule, you know, how are things being teased up, what become regular items?  I mean that time of thing.  What are your--what are even the viewers, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Well, schedule wise, I mean, you know, the show began at 7:00 a.m.  So there was a very active overnight crew.  I would get my assignments or develop my own assignments in the morning, and initially, I did a fair amount of traveling for the show in '84 [1984], '85 [1985], part of '85 [1985].  And then I got pregnant with my first child.  And I got pregnant because and stayed, I mean I was delighted to be pregnant on the "Today Show" because Jane [Pauley] was pregnant.  And, you know, television wasn't a place where you could be a working mother until Jane did it.  And so I asked to change my schedule, and I became what's called the set writer/producer.  And so I'd get a car to pick me up at 5:00 in the morning, and I would write the show.  Sometimes I was, I would rewrite the show, and sometimes I was a minute to two minutes behind when they had to say it.  I could write quickly.  And so if the show would change, sometimes I would come to work at 5:00.  And the entire show would change from the night before.  And that happened pretty frequently.  There would be news that would break, and so I would have to literally rewrite the entire show from 5:00, you know, from when we knew where we were going, you know.  And I was, and that's what the set writer did.  And you had to be able to think pretty quickly on your feet, and you had to be able to write quickly and accurately, and you had to, you know--you're in the green room with the guest so you're really trying to make sure that the information is correct.  So I'm literally writing, writing, writing, writing up until the moment they're saying it.  And someone took my blood pressure one time, just as a joke while I was in a particularly pressurized environment.  And the doctor, it was a doctor who was gonna be on the show, and somebody says "take her blood pressure", 'cause I'm literally--and so he took my blood pressure, and he said, "I think you're dead."  For some reason, I was never rattled.  I was never rattled.  So I would write the show from home at 4:30, you know.  You'd have the tease in the morning, you know, and it would "Today, Thursday, April whatever".  I would write that whole tease.  So somebody would let me know, would tell me.  And this was '85' [1985].  They would say, you know, the lead story is "X".  I would get the information.  I would write the opening of the show.  I would send that to Bryant [Gumbel] and Jane.  The car would pick me up.  I would get in the car from [New] Jersey, get to New York [New York City, New York].  I'd walk in, looking like I had just rolled out of bed.  They would iron my clothes (laughter) so I wouldn't look so bad.  They would do my hair.  They'd throw some makeup on me, and then I would finish writing the show.  And that happened for twelve years (laughter).  I'm still on the same schedule.  But what was interesting and, then I'd be, but I'd be home at 1:00.  So I could pick up my child [Tyler Wright] from the babysitter, and then I'd spend time with him when he was particularly small.  And then, but, you know, and I was, but I was still, I was writing everywhere.  I was writing in the park with him, you know, so--I was, I mean I was literally always doing stories.  Part of it was I had something to prove, and that was that you could be a working mother and do more work than anybody else, which was kind of stupid.  But I did it.  And part of it was that I loved the show, and I loved what I was doing.
Story_ID: 98032
Speaker 1: And then I had a second child [Cooper Wright] (laughter), and I literally worked with both children up until I had them.  In fact, I would go on maternity leave two days after I had them.  So one child, I was sitting at work [the "Today Show"] in the green room, 1986, and Bryant [Gumbel] came in and said, "When are you due?"  And I said, "I was due two weeks ago."  "You have to get out of here," he said.  I said, I'm not going anywhere.  I'm fine, you know.  This is a first child.  Don't you worry."  And then all of a sudden, I felt something.  And I said, "Oh, no."  So then I, I just left.  I quietly left, and I went home.  I laid down.  I had the baby that night.  And he was nine pounds, four ounces, three ounces.  So I had a big baby that night.  Second time, I cut it far too close.  I was, I was in the green room, and I wasn't due to have him until a week later.  And so, you know, I felt something while I was typing, and one of the--somebody said, you know, "Are you okay?"  And I said, "Gee, I think this is it.  Let me just finish up a couple of things, and I'm heading out."  And so I took a ferry at this point home, and I, the ferry bus was there, and he saw me every day.  And he said, "Are you okay?"  And I said, "I think this is it."  And he says, "I'm not stopping for another passenger."  So the bus driver took me to the ferry.  My husband [Robert G. Wright] was on the other side 'cause I had a doctor's appointment.  And so he said, "Why are you walking like that?"  And I said, "Ooh, baby, dropped to knees."  And I had the baby that day (laughter).  So I kind of did this twice to, you know.
Story_ID: 98033
Speaker 1: And the "Today Show", you know, I mean you couldn't have picked a better group of people.  You know, I mean, and I can certainly talk about stories and I'm very proud of the stories that I did.  And I wrote the "Today in Africa," shows and, but--
Speaker 2: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can.  Bryant [Gumbel] wanted to go to Africa, and this was going to be a very difficult place for us to go.
Speaker 2: Because of the infrastructure, right?
Speaker 1: Because of the infrastructure and because it's hard to do business there.  And initially, we thought about Kenya, and then I got pregnant, and we ended up deciding on Zimbabwe.  And so I was out of the mix for a while, and my child was maybe four months old, and I said to him and all of them, I said, "See ya, I'm heading to Zimbabwe" (laughter).  And I left for a while.
Speaker 2: How long is a while?
Speaker 1: About three weeks, four weeks.  I was, you know, they were fine.  And we did an amazing show there.  I mean, you know, we, I, I wrote--oh, let me just first say that I had, when I was pregnant, when I was about five months pregnant, we were in Cuba.  And I wrote those shows.  And I was always the last one to go in.  And they would have someone pick me up at wherever we were.  They'd give me a short tour of, you know, the country or the city, and then they'd put me in a room, and I would write the shows.  And they'd let me out to have a nice meal, and then I'd go back in the room (laughter), and I'd write the shows.  So I had a, you know--and then I would be the first one out because I'd have to write the shows back in the states.  So I had, you know, wonderful experience in Cuba where, initially when I was pregnant, and I interviewed JoAnne Chesimard [Assata Shakur].  I found her and somebody that I had idolized as a college student and wore the "Free JoAnne" shirts.  I met her in Cuba and couldn't convince her to go on the air, but spent some time with her and got in a little bit of trouble with my colleagues who realized that the person who was sitting next to me at my work station was Assata Skakur, JoAnne Chesimard, the most wanted woman in America.  But besides that, they were cool.  Then, so we had a great time in Cuba.  And then after my son was born [1992], my second son [Cooper Wright] was born, we had an amazing time in Harare and Victoria Falls, and just saw, you know, I mean I had a little bit more time to see it because of the time difference.  We were, the shows were taped because we would have been going and doing the shows in the complete darkness.  But it was an amazing opportunity to see and write and study a culture that I really didn't know much about and to do stories in Harare and to do stories in Victoria Falls and to be that close to Zaire and to, you know, to see the majestic beauty of--and I was also able to go to school there and my son was in second grade.  My oldest son [Tyler Wright] was in first or second grade then, and I bought some drawings from my son's school to give to a school in Harare or Victoria Falls.  And they sent back drawings for the school.  So I was able to mix a little bit of, you know, of personal with professional, so.
Story_ID: 98034
Speaker 1: And the stories we [the "Today Show"] did there [Harare, Zimbabwe] were amazing.  The problem was that we told a story that many Americans did not wanna see, and that was, a country that was vital and, and a country where, you know, most Americans know Africa as, with starving children and these children were not starving and the city was vibrant and the people were amazingly curious about us, but extraordinarily bright.  It was nothing that Americans imagined, and I don't think Americans were receptive to the Africa we showed, felt that it was too upbeat and not the truth.
Speaker 2: Is that the viewers who told you that?
Speaker 1: The viewers, yes.
Speaker 2: The viewers who told you that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think to a certain extent, you know, I think that our management wanted to see down-trodden stories.  And we were convinced that that didn't have to be, that there were so many incredible stories.  I look at my Shona art, you know.  You know, and the most compelling story, obviously that we did was Bryant Gumbel's Isle de Goree [Dakar, Senegal] story where Bryant cried.  I mean, you know, where he was so emotionally involved in that story.  It was painful for him.  But I think people wanted to see the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You're talking about the slaves, the slave (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, the slave.
Speaker 2: The slave, the slave. Well, see, and around that time people, I mean slaves--well, people are becoming aware, you know, they're going back to Africa.  They're seeing "Roots" has come out, you know, and then there's, you know--
Story_ID: 98035
Speaker 1: But my question is also what about the politics of news reporting and was there, was--did politics enter much into things?  And we're talking about news management. 'Cause remember, you said I wanted to go into news management.  Where, this is before the GE [General Electric] takeover of news, right, of like CBS--I know you're NBC.  But, you know, people always talk about the GE where they, you know--I don't wanna say they got rid of the newsroom, but they, you know, they were making decisions for different reasons.  But you're not, this is not the period we're talking about--
Speaker 2: It is the period, and, in fact, the--
Speaker 1: It is?
Speaker 2: --GE, 'cause, you know, it's starting to be the period toward the--
Speaker 1: The end of the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: --end of the '80s [1980s].  And remember, I mean GE was looking for the bottom line.  They weren't looking to necessarily influence news.  They wanted news to be profitable.  And guess what?  They made news profitable.  They did do that.  But that was their, their issue.  In fact, I was--when, you know, I was lucky--or unlucky.  I spent, I had dinner with [John Francis] Jack Welch.  And he asked me the same question.  He says, "So what did you think," he said, "when we bought NBC?"  And I said, "Well, I thought, what does a light bulb company know about running a television station?"  And he giggled and laughed and, you know, he said, "Good answer, good answer."  But, you know, I still never got it, you know.  I, you know, but they wanted news to be profitable.  News had been a cash, had been, you know, bleeding television, and they wanted it to be profitable.  I didn't necessarily, you know, I mean I didn't think that GE was as bad, frankly.  Remember, right before that we were owned by RCA, you know.  So it's not like, you know, we were owned by the Washington Post and the New York Times.  I mean, you know, it--but the politics, you know.
Story_ID: 98036
Speaker 1: When you don't have news managers of color keeping check on what's being delivered, then you're going to have someone else's sensibilities that are not necessarily accurate.  So, for example, you know, some of the things that I was involved in was, we [the "Today Show"] decided or at least the news division at one point asked me on a committee to talk about the, how we cover certain stories.  And, you know, I'll never forget there was a story of Saudi Arabia when we were in Kuwait [Gulf War], and there was a story about what are we doing there?  And it was, Katie Couric did the story and Jeff Zucker was the producer at the time.  And, and so they interviewed every soldier they could find, and they were all white.  Well, we know that twenty-nine percent of the soldiers over there were black.  So I'm trying to figure out why--so they had a, maybe and eight second shot of black soldiers playing basketball.  That's all they did.  So they had, they had maybe a half a dozen white soldiers and women saying what we're doing, you know, answering the question what we're doing over there.  And then they had a cut-away of black soldiers playing basketball, and then they went back to the white soldiers.  And I thought that was unconscionable, you know.  And I said to Katie Couric at the time, "Why didn't you interview any black soldiers?"  And she said, "Well, we would have to go the extra mile because they weren't located where she, where her cameras were."  And I said, without skipping a beat, "No, you'd have to do your job."  Now, I'm sure, you know, I got in big trouble for that somewhere.  I don't think I did, but the bottom line is, is that we wanted to make sure the African Americans who were there, we wanted to make sure that we're not talking about an extra mile.  We're talking about being more inclusive.  And I fought for that at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting], and I fought for that years later, the same fight, at NBC News.
Speaker 2: I see, so I wanna go back a little bit.  Thanks for that. I wanna go back to [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's run for the presidency.  Was there any behind-the-scenes, you know, this type of thing about approach, comments, you know, 'cause I mean he got in trouble with "Hymietown", I mean, you know, was there any of, you know, those things that sort of came up about how to approach the story or how not to approach the story or, you know, any difference between the 1984 and '88 [1988]?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I don't think that there were any differences in terms of how to approach the story.  What was blaring is how little the newsrooms knew about the black community.  So you had to start there.  You had to start by teaching, you know--I mean they knew little about the black church.  They knew little about the black community.  They knew little about black coll--politics.  They just knew so little.  And so they were, right--they were reporting based on, you know, no knowledge.  And that's where, you know, we had so much teaching to do.  And I am not sure that's changed so much, but we had a lot of teaching to do.
Story_ID: 98037
Speaker 1: Okay. And so, was that you and Bryant Gumbel?  I mean who's doing the teaching and then, the question is he becomes known as, you know, a pompous, you know, pompous, inconsiderate.  There's the 1989 memo, you know, that incident.  So what is, what are sort of the dynamics, you know, because at some--I mean he's very popular in this, and really, Jane Pauley preceded him, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But their chemistry, they worked well as a team.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But was-- when did the cracks come in the scene with their relationship?  Was it when they were trying to get--weren't they trying, they were trying to get rid of, I mean they--was it because she was older or she had had her babies?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No, I think that, you know, you've asked a lot of questions there?  And I think I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --no, no, no.  But I'm gonna try to, I think I can provide some context to this.  You know, Bryant Gumbel is a genius at what he does.  He is arguably the best interviewer that television has ever seen.  He is the most well-prepared interviewer that you can ever imagine.  I did not have the same kind of experiences with Bryant as some people did.  Bryant expected excellence from the people who were surrounding him because he gave excellence.  And he did not have any tolerance for foolishness or people short changing him or embarrassing him by short changing him, by not providing the information.  Famous story.  I am the segment producer for Ike Turner, right after the movie came out ["What's Love Got to Do with It" in 1993] with, you know.  So we were nervous because Ike was a little flakey.  So we had somebody accompany him from L.A. [Los Angeles, California], hide him in a hotel room so GMA [Good Morning America] wouldn't get him, 'cause he wouldn't know who he was going with, you know, somebody would come to the door, and Ike would show up.  And then the whole idea was, he was gonna, you know, so then the interview.  So I had done so much research on this and one of the things that I had discovered was he had been arrested twice.  That's what my research gave--said.  So I did this whole briefing paper, arrested twice on cocaine charges and blah, blah, and Bryant is now doing the interview.  And Bryant says, "So, Ike," you know, after Ike has confirmed that he beat the crap out of Tina repeatedly, he then says, Bryant asked him, "So, Ike, you've been arrested twice on cocaine".  And Bryant--and Ike says, wait a minute, wait a minute.  Now, I'm about to throw up now 'cause I've indicted this guy on live TV.  He goes, "where'd you get that from?  I've been arrested six times on cocaine (unclear)."  Well, at that point, Bryant is cracking up.  I'm like, my brow, I mean I'm like, you know, thinking, oh, thank you, Lord.  And, but that's show nervous he would make you, if you make that kind of mistake, my behind's not on the line.  His behind is on the line.  And, and it was that time that I said, I'm gonna double check and triple check before I put anybody who is on the air in that position.
Story_ID: 98038
Speaker 1: Now, the question of whether or not he was pompous, you know, again, I think that once there was an article that was written about Bryant [Gumbel] where there was some discussion about the fact that his mother said, "I'm sorry I ever had him" or something like that, when, in fact, that's not what she said, but this article took a lot out of context and made him a target.  And the fact is, is that I, I guess I saw a different Bryant when we were, the "Today Show" was in Australia.  My oldest son [Tyler Wright] was nine months old, and my husband [Robert G. Wright] brought him over 'cause I was gonna be gone for a month.  My husband took a leave of absence, and Bryant had just come in.  My husband and baby were there.  We were at the pool because we were not gonna start the live shows until the following, I guess maybe four or five days.  And Bryant was tired and he was grouchy, and my little one was cruising.  He wasn't walking, but he was holding onto things.  And Bryant said something to somebody, and I was like, you know, don't let it--he'd better not look at my kid, you know, 'cause my kid was the only kid there.  And he said--I said, "He'd better not look at my kid crazy 'cause I'll knock him into next week."  I said something that, (unclear).  And he saw my son, and he went over to him, and I was really gonna be the mother bear and beat the crap out of him had he not picked up my son, and he just held him.  And he found such calmness from my kid.  And my kid didn't like to be held--he was nine months old.  So he wasn't gonna be held by somebody he didn't know.  But Bryant calmed him, and I realized that day--I know this sounds weird, but as a mother, that I loved this guy.  And he's been, I probably have not been as good a friend to him as he's been to me.  But he will always be in my life, and to very honest with you, I, I'm sorry that people mistake competency and excellence for something else because he is excellent at what he does.
Speaker 2: I appreciate that.
Speaker 1: Anyway.
Story_ID: 98039
Speaker 1: Yes, in 1988, 1989--1988, we got a new computer system at NBC.  And the new computer system was a closed, was supposed to be a closed system.  And for whatever reason, when this new computer system was put online, it allowed anybody to get into each other's files.  And that's what happened.  [Excuse me] Bryant [Gumbel] had written a note, the famous memo to be seen by one eye, one person [Marty Ryan].  And, unfortunately, someone allowed for all of our private files to be opened.  And the only reason why I know was because I was fiddling around at home and got into somebody else's file and realized that I'm not supposed to.  I mean I immediately didn't look at anything, but, you know, when they switched the system what's called "Basis" to another system--they bought into another news computer system.  And you kept all of your files as your files.  And he had written this to be seen by one other person.  And the files were, you know--and it was nothing unusual about any anchor saying what they felt at the time.  But it was never somebody, you know, opened up the files for everyone to see.  And somebody leaked it.
Speaker 2: I see.  So talk about the backlash that happened because he talked about Willard Scott and Gene Shallit, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  And I mean the backlash, it was, it was awful.  It was awful.  I mean it was a hard time for all of us who were committed to the show and who worked very hard on the show.  There were a lot of hurt feelings, and it was, obviously, very difficult for Bryant because the people that were attacked in that memo were popular.
Speaker 2: But they were also part of the, you know--
Speaker 1: Part of the family.
Speaker 2: --of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, part of the "Today Show" family and popular.
Speaker 2: But was that, but was that-- his comment surprising?  Were other people saying the same things he said in that memo too?  I mean--
Speaker 1: I think that, yes, I mean producers were upset a little bit because when Willard went over his time allotment, it took out of the segments that we worked hard on.  And so that was the, I believe there was a comment about holding the show hostage.  You know, when anybody went over, it meant that there was less time for the segments that needed time.  And so I think that we, even though we all adored Gene and we adored Willard, it was hard for us to give up our own hard work on a day-to-day basis.  And I think that Bryant probably expressed what many producers felt.  But I mean, we didn't have that cache, we couldn't express it.
Speaker 2: Did anyone come to his defense?  I mean, but you're behind the scenes anyway, but--
Speaker 1: I think we all came to his defense, and, you know, he still has great relationships with all the producers from back then, you know.  They were very, I didn't know of anybody--maybe one person that I knew had an active dislike for him.  But everybody loved Bryant.
Story_ID: 98040
Speaker 1: So this, you know, this really, this is, afterwards, the show is going down for a variety of reasons.  So how does the Deborah Norville come into the mix and how aware of people of what is planned or--I mean just talk to me about--
Speaker 2: You know, I mean Deborah came on.  She was well liked.  But you have to remember, that show was very, very difficult to do.  You know, you had to be a jack-of-all trades and a master of some, you know, because of the various segments in that show.  You had to know a lot, and you know what?  If you didn't do your homework, it showed, it showed.  And so, you know, as I said, producers were as much involved with the undoing of some of the talent on that show because the producers were like, "Wait, you know, I'm expected to, you know, these segments are--they're terrible.  They're not coming out the way we planned for them to come out.  What's going on?"  I mean you had to rely on these anchors to tell the story.  And sometimes they'd miss the story because they didn't do their homework.  So if you put together, you know, you did your pre-interviews, you put together the questions.  You gave them all that stuff, and then they didn't look at it, and then they tried to wing it the next day, well, you'd be upset.  And I think, you know, unfortunately, you know, that happened with some of our well-known anchor people.
Speaker 1: Now, who are you speaking of?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm talking a little bit about Deborah Norville.  I think that she was, I mean she's certainly grown into her role now.  But I'm not sure she was ready for that role in that, you know, and what needed to happen in that role.
Speaker 1: Who found her and put her in that position?  Who was the management, what management decisions did--
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I do know that she was very well liked in, by, remember, she was a news reader first before she got in that position.  And she came from either Chicago [Illinois] or Atlanta [Georgia], but maybe Atlanta.  You know, people liked the way she looked.  They didn't much listen to what she was saying, and that was a real problem, I think.  And I don't know.  I don't remember, frankly, who was in that position.  I'm not sure if it was Michael Gartner.  It might have been Michael Gartner who was in that position, who was the president at that time.
Speaker 1: But was Jane Pauley, was she getting tired or--
Speaker 2: I think Jane, I don't think Jane was getting tired.  I just think that, you know, they've got, you know, they do a fair amount of research.  And, you know, the worst demographic that you can have is an older demographic.  So, you know, you want the 18 to 49, and I think that they were losing that demographic.
Speaker 1: But really, they ended up with Deborah Norville just going, I mean things started to sink over a period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know what?  The other thing is, what's so important on those morning shows is chemistry.  And people can sense when there's no chemistry.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, as you know, it happened with Ann Curry and Matt Lauer.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And the show has suffered since then.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then now, Katie Couric then comes after, right [in 1991]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you're still there, right?
Speaker 1: I am still there (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I am still there (laughter).  Katie was, you know, an interesting person.  I mean I think that she tried hard.  I think that there was no chemistry between her and Bryant [Gumbel], again.  I think Katie grew into her job, but it took a while.  There were a fair amount of insecurities with a lot of the women in those jobs, but Katie had certainly those insecurities.  I think that, you know, she, she was a little difficult to work for.  I didn't work for her, but she went through quite a few assistants.  And I think that came from insecurities.  I, you know, I haven't--I've seen her once in the last maybe six years.  I didn't have much of a relationship with her at all.
Story_ID: 98041
Speaker 1: So at this point in time during the Deborah Norville and Katie Couric [at the "Today Show"], who are you primarily working with and how has your role changed?  Were you still the--
Speaker 2: I was still the set writer, a job that I chose to stay at.  But at the same time, I'm looking at the digital realm, and I'm looking at ways to be more entrepreneurial--intrapreneurial, not entrepreneurial, intrapreneurial.  And I developed a relationship with "Scholastic Magazine" and started working with our archives department to create news videotapes for elementary school and junior high school students through "Scholastic Magazine".  And at the same time, I was working at the "Today Show".  So I developed this program called the "NBC Scholastic News Videos" [sic, "Scholastic-NBC News Video"], and the, made for NBC News, half a million dollars and then received, for the first time, stock and a bonus, which was unheard of kind of for a producer to do that.  But I always found ways and thankfully, I had bosses who believed in me and believed in, that I had ideas and that I could make money for them and I did.
Speaker 1: Who was the boss who green-lighted that, at this point?
Speaker 2: [William] Bill Wheatley.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Bill Wheatley was my, was the vice president, and he and I are, still remain friends.  And he green lighted that, and he answered directly to the president of NBC News.
Story_ID: 98042
Speaker 1: Now, this is the time, and I wanna go into MSNBC 'cause I mean you think of MSNBC now, you know, versus then because this, I think--first, it's CNBC.  Then there's MSNBC.  Am I wrong about that, 'cause the cable news at this point, you have Group W [Westinghouse Broadcasting], and then Group W goes into cable.  And then there's a point where you're starting to see more--am I wrong about--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: There's a financial news network.  But you start to see more cable channels, you know, starting to proliferate.  How they're gonna market differentiate, you know, has not been proven.  So can you speak to how this opportunity--am I wrong?  If you wanna challenge me on that, please do.
Speaker 2: No, and you know what?  You may be right because I get a little sketchy on this.  What happened was I started to sort of as I said, this intrapreneurial spirit.  And one of the things that I did was, I convinced NBC News to start seeking out other partners.  And we looked at AOL. We looked at AT&T, had a--and this all was in the digital realm.  This had nothing to do with cable.  And then we had Microsoft.  And Microsoft wanted to do a, they don't even, think they called it a "dot.com" at that point.  But Microsoft was very interested in partnering with NBC and using our archival assets for the various things that they wanted to do, Encarta, which was their encyclopedia, and, you know, and so we brought them in to talk about the digital realm.  And when the talks started to kind of accelerate, the business development people came in and said, "Well, you know, can we do both?  Can we do a cable station and can we do online?"  And so it all started to gel at that point, and so they brought in Mark Harrington to do the cable.  And he was the vice president at CBS.  And then they initially had me formulating what this online would look like.  Problem was, is that they wanted to establish a joint venture, and I was too entrenched in NBC and not entrenched enough in the Microsoft side.  So they decided to bring in--and I actually interviewed, to bring in a managing editor of MSNBC.com, a guy named Merrill Brown who would not be on either side, who would be a joint venture person.  And I remained at NBC until I left and was an executive producer with MSNBC.com handling the shows' entry into the digital world.  So the "Today Show", "Nightly" ["NBC Nightly News"], "Dateline" ["Dateline NBC"], I hired that staff, and then we began to do the--to create an online presence for the shows.  Buy even before that, we created something called "NBC Supernet" which is what we've been talking about with this gentleman, Bert Medley, but NBC Supernet was our first entry into the online realm before MSNBC.com.
Story_ID: 98043
Speaker 1: So this is what you, what-- it references the beginning of cyberjournalism, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about what that was and what the issues were, and, I mean from concept to even beginning?
Speaker 2: Sure, let--you know, I first started getting involved in digital, in the digital technology when I would buy computers or I bought a computer, and it came with a CD with video on it.  And I thought this was the most amazing thing in the world that not only could I see or read about World War II, but I could also see, you know, and I was wondering, where are they getting this video?  Well, come to find out, they were getting it from NBC, CBS and ABC.  So I said, "Oh, my goodness."  So we've got these incredible assets, and convinced them to start taking a look at this digital world and they said I could, you know, "Here's a small budget.  And you can, we'll give you some office space, and you can begin to explore this."  And we hired four people, five people.  And I led this team, and that was in 19--it had to be '98' [1998].  And I'll tell you why, because the New York Times did this article about me and, you know, going into this journalists, this new world of journalism.  And so it must have been 1997 we started, and 1998 is when they did the article [sic, 1995].  But the bottom line is, is that we, again, there was no script.  There was no model.  We just made it up as we went along, and we did original journalism on the internet.  And we got, we snuck in, and we got GE's [General Electric] servers space, so, you know, 'cause you couldn't just go and get a server, you know.  You couldn't buy it without somebody knowing it.  So we called somebody at GE and, of course, all these industrial companies had been on the internet for a few years.  And so we were able to get on their servers and, and get, use their URL's and get them to establish--'cause we didn't have a great IT department that understood what was happening in terms of this.  And so we went out and did this and we covered, I think one of the--I can't remember which, maybe it was the Iowa Caucuses, was the first ones that we sent a group of cyberjournalists to and nobody knew what the heck that was or what we were doing out there.  But we had the little equipment, and we sent back stories, and it was, it was a brave new world.  And then, as a result of that, Microsoft saw what we could do and then bought into the joint partnership.
Speaker 1: Oh, they bought in as a partner?
Speaker 2: They bought in as a partner--
Speaker 1: What were they bringing to the table?
Speaker 2: Technology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Technology.
Speaker 1: Now, you--so you're saying this was under William Wheatley, Bill--
Speaker 2: Under Bill Wheat--William Wheatley, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then I had read that Time Warner had a Pathfinders (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Pathfinder, exactly.
Speaker 1: And that ABC and CBS were trying, but they didn't do (unclear).
Speaker 2: They didn't do anything.  And CBS was the latest to the game, was last to the game.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98044
Speaker 1: So, but a lot of, I think I had read that 220 million was actually invested [in NBC Supernet].  What I read was--do you know the name [Thomas] Tom Rogers?  Does that sound familiar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tom was that development group I talked, I just talked about--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Tom Rogers and [Martin] Marty Yudkovitz, Yudkovitz.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were the two, and Tom Rogers, obviously, he's with TiVo now.  But he was one of the people that, and I got in a tad bit of trouble because when the New York Times interviewed me [1995], and it was the front page of their business page, and it was a huge article.  And I almost, I mean I literally got, my stomach got upset 'cause I'd never, I didn't know what to expect.  The, those, the Tom Rogers of the world, I mean those guys were so angry and felt very strongly that it should have been the development team being interviewed and not this little black child, black female being interviewed.  And they were not very kind, but they got over it thankfully, but they were, they thought that that was too important of a, you know, the first page of the business, the first page of the--business page of the New York Times was not, was clearly something that should have been their domain, and clearly not mine.  So it was a little uncomfortable with them for a while, but we came first.  We showed that it could be done, and then the development team came and did the deals.
Story_ID: 98045
Speaker 1: So what was the perception of what it would be?  Is it what it's become?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  It was a liberal voice, number one.  But the thought was, initially, that it would be much more of a hybrid of the digital and the cable.  And, of course, that didn't happen.  And then there was, they were appealing to younger people.  And, of course, younger people during the course of the day are at work.  So it was, they had a panel, a lot of panels, panel of experts that were young and hip because they were trying to have that sort of digital young and hip.  And so it's now something totally different from what it was.  It, you know, and if you remember, they had, they did, they took a lot from the archives, so they had--Jane Pauley did a show called "Then and Now."  So they had a, it was a lot of, you know, it was a lot different than it is now.
Speaker 1: Do you like the direction it's gone in now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, interesting enough, I'm an MSNBC watcher.  And part of it is, I don't see much, I mean I love Rachel Maddow.  I, you know, there's so many of the shows.  I mean Andrea Mitchell, I love watching her.  I think there's a tremendous amount of repetition.  You know, the show with Toure [Neblett] in the evening, in the late afternoon.  I mean, You know, but I am a watcher.  I'm not a, I'm not a--when I get home, I don't watch, but I--we have a place at work that we can watch.  So we do.
Speaker 1: So when you--now, I--was the first show with Jodi Applegate, is that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was, so can you talk about the making of that show and--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I was on the dot.com side.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were on the dot.com side--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, so, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, I got you.
Speaker 2: --I mean I was part of the, you know, the construction of the facility and had something to do with the actual logo, but to be very honest with you, the television side, we were busy, you know, launching the news site at the same time.  So that was our focus.
Story_ID: 98046
Speaker 1: So how do you go from NBC, which is your--I mean you've been at NBC, God, by this time for--
Speaker 2: Twenty years, maybe, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, God, to CBS.
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry.  I was at NBC for over thirty years.
Speaker 1: I mean NBC.
Speaker 2: Okay, so for CBS.  I went with Bryant [1997].  Bryant Gumbel got a show, if you remember, he had a magazine show ["Public Eye with Bryant Gumbel"].  And then he also got a production company.  And he said to me, would you like to run my production company?  And I felt, well, this is a great challenge.  And, yes.  I was always, and still am, always about challenges, always about being able to wake up in the morning and be excited about going to work.  That's a very important thing to me.  And I was excited about having this blank, this board with nothing on it that I could create.  So we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're talking about Dunbar, is that--
Speaker 2: That was Dunbar Productions with CBS.  So I was a CBS employee, but working with Dunbar Productions.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there--now, this, at this point in time, there's tre--you're starting to see a lot of change in media.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean a lot of change.  In fact, I remember, I may, think it's even earlier than this.  And people predicted this for a long time that there were not gonna be three networks.  It was gonna be one or I'd start hearing those kinds of discussions, even before, you know, this time period.  So what are you, what are you wanting to do with the production company?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to create new and different programming, and we did.  We created some stuff for the Discovery channels, and then I did a 21-week, 26-week series called "The Reading Club", something that just came out of my head.  When talking to my friends, everybody was in a reading club, and I thought, well, "Gee, what would this look like on television?"  And we made a, we had a--we worked with Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to pull that off.  And we did it with Carol Martin, who was here at CBS and then we did it--she got a job at FOX [News], and then we went with [HM] Renee Poussaint, who I met.  And we did, we did weeks with her, and the show aired in Canada and all around the country.  And it was just something that, you know, was just an idea that, you know, I thought could work, and it did.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the idea just a little bit, just to explain what it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, "The Reading Club" was a talk show about books.  And it was particularly--each week we would take a look at one book that was by an African American author.  And we would have a group of women who knew each other, and chances are they were in their own reading clubs, read the book and talk about it, but talk about it in ways of how it affected their lives.  And we had such incredibly rich discussions.  And it was a half hour, no commercial 'cause it was on PBS.  And it was just a wonderful way to talk about books, and to get people interested in books.  We didn't interview the authors.  We didn't have anything but lively discussion about the book each week, and we did, as I said, twenty-six books.
Speaker 1: And then you also, around this time--did you do the "Science of Sport" and--
Speaker 2: That was on the Discovery Channel.  We did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was, and "Starting Over"?
Speaker 2: And "Starting Over", I--
Speaker 1: I thought for the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: "Starting Over", I was just a consultant on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was when I was with CBS.  They also used me to consult on the Howard Stern Show, the Gayle King Show, when Gail was having her shows and just to take a look and see whether or not we could fix them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, so where are you at this point in your life though?  Your kids are at, 'cause I'm talking about the mid-2000s, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, around 2000--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you also got involved with the National Visionary Leadership Project?
Speaker 2: Leadership Project.
Speaker 1: And that would have been--
Speaker 2: That was actually, as a board member initially, when it first started.  So that was probably in the late '90s [1990s] [sic, 2001].  And then as, and then I, I guess it was 2002, maybe, the company that I was working for at CBS, which was the subsidiary, I-Mark got--purchased--no, King World, I'm sorry, got purchased by Paramount.  And so, and then Bryant [Gumbel] was leaving.  And then we, and so I took a, I guess it was a golden parachute.  And I said, I didn't wanna, I was finished with television.
Story_ID: 98047
Speaker 1: However, right before that in 2001, I was going down to Trinity Church on Wall Street [New York City, New York], and to--I was active in the Episcopal Church, and I wrote for an Episcopal Diocesan newspaper in Newark [New Jersey].  And so I was going to Wall Street.  And Trinity Wall Street to meet the Bishop of Wales and to do something at Wall Street television.  And got down there, and as I got to the corner, all these papers were flying down, and these fire engines were going.  And I said to the woman on the corner, who told me to stop, she said, what's--I said, "What's going on?"  And she said a small plane had just gone into the World Trade Center.  And so I, so she let the fire engines go by.  And I, she said, "Go ahead."  And I was going to the World Trade Center to get a cup of coffee.  And as I'm approaching the World Trade Center, I look above my head, and the biggest plane in the world is going into a building that I'm just about to walk into.  So I go on the ground, and I hide myself, and I took a picture with this cheap camera of the plane going into the center, and then I was under the rubble, and I got up.  And I booked it down Wall Street, and why, our lives changed a little bit after that.  I later realized--well, there was a lot that I realized.  I ran away from a story for the first time in my life because I had children, and I didn't wanna die.  And I ran away, and so I'm, I--somebody pushes me on a ferry, and I get to the other side of the Hudson River, and I'm told that, get out and I have to walk along the river because we're under attack.  And I did, and I was in a daze.  I'm not gonna lie.  I mean I would tell you that I was in a--I walk along the river, and I look up--no, I'm sorry.  Before we walked along the river, we turned around to try to get some, see if we can get some more passengers.  So we turned the horn of Manhattan Island.  So I'm at Wall Street, and you can--and then we're going on the other side of the World Trade Center, and that's when the building fell, as we were docking.  And so now, I'm up holding people who have just left that building.  And the bodies are coming down.  I mean we're seeing it all, and I'm--and then he dropped us off, and I'm in a daze, and I'm walking up.  And I still had this crap, you know, in my hair, and all this stuff is, you know, and I'm feeling like I'm breathing in--silly, I mean it was just a--bottom line is, is that I then come close to my car, which was parked on the other side of the river.  And then the second building came down.  And then I made it home, and my kids were still at school because my husband had called me and he said--and the phone was still working for a hot second.  He said, "You can't believe what I just saw," meaning, he saw the, on television.  I said, "You can't believe where I am."  And he said, "Where are you?"  I said, "I'm at the World Trade Center."  He said, "Get the hell out of there."  And I said, "What do you think I'm doing?" (Laughter).  And I'm running down the street, and then he didn't hear from me again.  And so he doesn't know what happened.  He doesn't wanna, the kids to see him, like upset.  He leaves the kids at school, not knowing that they were among the last kids left.  The only other kids who were still there were the kids whose parents died.  So I then make it, I go directly to--when I finally get and wind my way around these towns to get home, I go to church, fall into my, the rector's arms, get myself together, and then I went to pick up my children.  And my youngest one, unfortunately, was in elementary school.  The teacher told him that there had been a small accident, which is why everybody left.  And he later found out that, not only wasn't there a small accident, but his mom was at the World Trade Center.  And so we had--he needed counseling 'cause he was a wreck.  And the oldest one was just clingy for a while.  I didn't sleep so I had to go to a counselor.  So I finally, you know--and I didn't wanna take anything.  So I just finally worked it out with her, and I was fine after a while.
Story_ID: 98048
Speaker 1: But my husband [Robert G. Wright] then decides he's going on a ride, you know, he's a cyclist, and he decides, you know, the anniversary of the World Trade Center accident [September 11, 2001]--I mean, whatever they did, he's gonna go for a ride to commemorate the event and the fact that we had come through it intact.  And he, a week before his ride, and he was, you know, doing what he does, he--riding, and he got hit by a bus, and it broke every bone in his body (laughter).  So we went through it.  And I keep telling people that that was, I had such an incredible career and life, and if this is all that happened to us, thank goodness.  But then he, not--totally unrelated, got a very, very debilitating disease called Churg-Strauss [syndrome].  So I share that with you--
Speaker 2: And what is Churg-Strauss?
Speaker 1: It is when the body attacks itself.  It's vasculitis.  It's like MS [multiple sclerosis], but he's, you know, he's done very well, I mean after three years.
Speaker 2: He's coming back.
Speaker 1: He's coming back.  He had complete neuropathy.  It's a pretty, you know, pretty ugly thing, but I shared that with you to say that that was a bad period in our lives.  And it did change us.  It changed us a lot, you know, it was a difficult period.
Story_ID: 97199
Speaker 1: So you have two sons?
Speaker 2: I have two sons, yeah.
Speaker 1: Their names?
Speaker 2: My sons, my oldest son is Tyler Wright, and my youngest son is Cooper Wright.
Speaker 1: Nice.
Speaker 2: And Cooper is a family name.  It is my paternal grandmother's [Daisy Cooper] maiden name.
Speaker 1: And how old are they now?  What are--are they two years apart?
Speaker 2: No, no, Tyler is 27, and Cooper is 21.
Speaker 1: So six years apart.
Speaker 2: Six years apart, exactly.  And both live, one lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Interestingly enough, Tyler is 6'6" and Cooper is 6'4".  Tyler is, was a history major, and is working in, he developed a database for video and, that has mega-tagging and the like, and he's been doing his best to try and, you know, talk to organizations about that.  But he works in a logistics capacity, taking his database to a, not a factory, but a widget company.  I don't quite know what they do.  And he coaches basketball, actually, eighth grade team.  He gives of his time.  My youngest is in Baltimore [Maryland], and he's studying to be a sculpture at the Maryland Institute College of Art, spend, having spent his gap year--he took a gap year, and he lived on a farm in Bahia, Brazil right after high school.
Speaker 1: So are you--and then your husband [Robert G. Wright], he stayed as an editor then?
Speaker 2: He stayed as an editor, but he's also been the main parent.
Speaker 1: Because you were busy.
Speaker 2: And I was traveling and, in fact, some people thought that he was a widower (laughter).  So, you know, because he was on the PTO [Parent Teacher Organization], you know, he was like the vice president of the PTO.  He was, he was the one that was the main parent, you know.  I was the guy who came home every once in a while, and I've, never forget, youngest son--my oldest son got so upset with me.  My husband had to leave to do something with my mom [Doris Nelson] when she was still alive.  And so it was my turn, and I took the morning off 'cause I had to get him ready.  And I knew nothing about the morning routine, having never been there in the morning.  And he was fine.  He was patient until I put his hair stuff, and I sprayed it on his head, and he lost it.  "Daddy doesn't do it that way.  Daddy doesn't do it", and he just lost it.  And I finally, you know, I felt bad, and I called my husband, and he said, Oh, you have to spray it in your hand first, and then--so I figured okay, well, I can get this parenting thing down.  So the second time it happened, it was with my youngest son.  And my youngest son was, you know, my husband's in the hospital now.  He's in intensive care, and he's--I'm on, I come downstairs, and my youngest son's on the phone.  And I said, and he's saying, "And you know how you hate to have the kitchen all messed up, Dad.  Well, she has her whole office in this kitchen".  And I'm like, "Who are you talking to?"  And he says, looks up, he goes, "Dad."  I said, "He's in intensive care, son.  He's in intensive care.  Why are you telling on me and the man's in intensive care?"  So, that's the kind of, I mean my boys are used to their father, you know.  Now, I think I'm more of their buds than their dad is 'cause I think they're kind of sick of dad's rules and regulations.  But they, so they call me now.
Story_ID: 97200
Speaker 1: So that was, so this last, really, let's say--so thirteen years have been somewhat more introspective in some respects?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, I made some very real decisions to follow my heart and my heart was in the nonprofit world, not sure how smart that was, but I thought that if I could take the sensibilities and the talents that I had acquired in television and bring them to the nonprofit world, that would be kind of fun.  And so I invested in the equipment to do that, to tell the stories for nonprofit organizations and to help them raise money.  And I think I've been pretty effective at it.
Speaker 1: So tell me, why did you say you're not sure it was the right decision, and then talk about what you have been able to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, I--in following my heart, I realized that, you know, I didn't look at this as a business, you know.  I looked at this whole thing of communications for nonprofit as a--you know, I wanted to help.  And I was so grateful when people were grateful for my help.  And I kind of realized that, you know, as nonprofits become more business-like, I didn't switch with that.  I mean I still saw, you know, I didn't, I didn't switch in the ways that I should have.  And, frankly, I've been more frustrated in this realm than I thought I would--
Speaker 1: Would be.
Speaker 2: --would like to be.
Speaker 1: Now, frustrated from what?  Frustrated in terms of how they operate, frustrated, lack of budgets, frustrated at stop and start (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, I've been frustrated, I think I've been compensated well.  That has never been the issue.  The issue is, is that, you know, nonprofits are run by boards, and those boards are usually made up of professional people who in many cases run corporations.  And what happens is, is that everybody brings those sensibilities to the table, and then it gets to be crazy.  I mean I don't know how everybody has a different idea of what a website should look like.  Everybody has a different idea of what video should look like.  Everybody has different ideas--'cause it's worked for their company.  And they don't quite understand that it's so much different in the nonprofit world because to look too slick, says, speaks volumes to a donor.  There's a happy medium, and so I end up getting a tad bit frustrated because the president, CEO or the executive director is following a--or works for a board.  And so there's nothing, you know, there's just too many cooks.  And I, you know, and even if there is not a lot of cooks, and in some cases, there are not a lot of cooks, but there are the, the leadership understands some things, but they don't understand communications many times.  They don't understand trends.  They don't understand how communications fits into development in fundraising.  So I find myself a tad bit frustrated, and, you know, what?  I'm at the age now where I recognize the mistakes that I've made, and I try not to make them again.  And I'm always finding myself being pulled into the direction of making the mistake again, and I don't wanna do that.
Story_ID: 97201
Speaker 1: So (laughter) okay.  I'm trying to--so what mistakes have you made then?
Speaker 2: Well, mistakes that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Are you talking about from the communications side or the fundraising or following the Pied Piper, you know, the executive director who has to answer to the board.  I'm trying to understand what--
Speaker 2: And I'm sorry, and I should--I'm gonna be a little bit more--yeah.  Basically, I have, you know, the mistakes that I have made I think in--well, I believe I know what works.  I believe that fundraising and communications go hand-in-hand.  And I believe that part of that mission is to tell stories that resonate with the person you are trying to get resources from.  And I know when I have gone the other direction and been critical and it hasn't worked, you know.  I mean when you just give 'em, people the facts, you have to make people care.  And you have to be convincing in doing that.  And I think I have been effective in doing that, but I have been convinced to be a lot more clinical.  And when it doesn't work, you know, it doesn't work.  And so I, my--I think that what happens to me is I lose passion.  And when I lose that passion, I'm not able to do my job quite as effectively.  And that, obviously, has been frustrating for me because I need to have the passion.  And when people draw that out of me, draw the passion out because they don't agree with the way I sell, it's time to do something else.
Story_ID: 97202
Speaker 1: Right, so you have been very active with two nonprofits, the National Visionary Leadership Project.  Talk about that as a mission, and then the Rachel Robinson Foundation--right--
Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson Foundation--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Jackie (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me just say three.  It's the Riverside Church [New York City, New York], which is--
Speaker 1: Oh, the River--
Speaker 2: --which is nonprofit as well.  And, well, the National Visionary Leadership Project, I was extremely passionate about because it provided an historical perspective that needed to be shared with the rest of the world, and I loved the quality.  As a board member, I loved the quality.  I do think that I went, when there were some issues with fundraising, I decided to help out there and came off the board and was its director of development, not knowing of some of the issues involved with the IRS status.  However, I still remained very, very passionate about the work of the Visionary Project and clearly, I mean loved the leadership on the board and felt very, very emboldened, if you will, about that.  But, you know, everybody on the board, I mean, they're busy people, and, but I think we made a lot of headway in creating a board that was proactive and interested.  And that was part of my job.  It was really to get people engaged in being able to, not only contribute, but to sell.  And so we, you know, we figured out ways to do that.  And, but I was, I loved the Visionary Project, knew that it could do a lot more, but also knew that it was limited in terms of funds and also limited in terms of staff.  I taught as well.  So I was an adjunct at both Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] and CUNY [City University of New York] Graduate School of Journalism and CUNY, and loved that as well, didn't, the students were a little bit more challenging than I anticipated or expected because I was basing my teaching experience on my student experience.  And there were things I would never tell a teacher, that these young people had no problems about saying.  So I was a little disillusioned  with that, but would go back to that because I am part of the Student Mentoring Project for NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].  I then went to the Jackie Robinson--well, I was with the Jackie Robinson Foundation first.  And I went there because one of my, a dear friend had become the president and CEO.  I kind of learned not to work for friends.  But I was passionate about the mission, clearly loved the family and learned--but most of all the students we served were underserved students, financial need, but smart, engaged, and many of them were first-generation college students, just amazing young men and women whose stories would make you cry when you realized how they had risen above their circumstances.  I enjoyed meeting and seeing them every year as we bring them all to New York.  But, you know, so I decided that I was gonna get involved in something else, and that was the Riverside Church.  At the same time, I became a volunteer with the Jackie Robinson Foundation.  At the Riverside Church, it was, loved the work, church work is, interesting.  People come to church 'cause they're needy, and sometimes that need grows into something that can be politicized.  And I was, it was less me, but what was going on around me, I realized that I was losing my faith because once you understand the inner workings and the politics of the church, then you kind of go, "Whoa.  This is not the way it's supposed to be."
Story_ID: 97203
Speaker 1: And so when I had the opportunity to come back to the Jackie Robinson Foundation to work with the Robinson family and the Foundation on the movie "42," I said, you know, I've not done a movie.  I've not done publicity for a movie, and I thought it would be fantastic, and it was a fantastic year.  And the movie did better than anybody anticipated.  And it was, it was a wonderful opportunity for me.
Speaker 2: The movie was really well done.  I mean I totally enjoyed the movie.  So can you talk about your role, and what was presented 'cause I had heard that--I'm sorry.  I had heard that she had been working on that movie, and at first had approached, someone had told me--maybe I'm wrong, but, not--
Speaker 1: Robert Redford.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, initially, she's been trying to get his movie done for thirty years.  She had thought that it, initially, it wouldn't be just eighteen months, but it would be the full scope.  Spike Lee had tried to raise the money, could not.  And Robert Redford, thought that he had raised the money and did not.  And then came Thomas Tull, of Legendary Pictures and Brian Helgeland, Helgeland, Helgeland, sorry, and they came up with a script and brought it to Rachel Robinson, and she loved it.  She made some changes, but for the most part, she was only a consultant on the film.  We saw it six months prior to it coming out in April [2013].  We were all sitting in a screening room.  There were 120 and of us, and everybody, at the end of the film, people were crying.  People were, you know, applauding and, but everybody, most of us were holding our breath.  And then we said to Rachel, "So what'd you think?"  And she said, "I loved it."  And that's when everybody (laughter) had this incredible sigh, like 'cause if it--if she didn't love it, it wasn't gonna happen.  We were on the set the last day.  There were a couple of things we weren't terribly involved at all.  I got a credit at the end because I worked with Warner Bros. in publicizing the movie and making sure that the family was booked--we had them booked on everything from "Meet the Press" to, I got her a "Person of the Week" on ABC, CNN.  I mean we got the family, we got--we were everywhere.  And it was good because, you know, so I handled all of the promotion of the movie from the family and the Foundation side, which was the basic, 'cause they didn't--you know, Warner Brothers could get them on some, would get them, you know, got them in Essence magazine, and in People magazine, but, you know, I mean I did the Essence one, but they didn't have the news cache that I was able to have.  So that worked out really well.  And we worked on that, we did that movie.  And I was doing screenings even in the summer.  We did screenings at JP Morgan Chase with their black employees, and we did screenings at, in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what did you learn from that experience, and--
Speaker 1: I learned that, I did--I'm so grateful for the contacts I have made through the years.  I am so grateful for NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], and, because people trusted my opinions 'cause they knew that I was just not a PR [public relations] flack, but I understood news.  And so I was so grateful for that, and I was, and you know, I'd not done anything that extensive.  Remember, Mrs. Robinson is ninety-one years old.  And she, you know, so she--it's not that I--it took a lot of prep time, but, you know, a young person doing a remote from California would be mixed up in terms of what camera, what do I do, what do I say, what do I--she, no (unclear).  To be able to prepare her and to watch her flourish like she did and to sell a movie like she did was very gratifying to me.
Story_ID: 97204
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  So where are you now, Allison, where--what is--because you still, you know, on our world--it depends on where you see yourself.  Are you still young and have a lot of dreams?  Or are you seeing yourself at the end of your career?  What are you seeing?
Speaker 2: I am old and have a lot of dreams.  I will tell you that the things that I am--I am still at the Jackie Robinson Foundation.  I am--
Speaker 1: In what role, capacity?
Speaker 2: As a director of communications.  My dreams, however, are to really tell stories.  We no longer need television anymore to tell our stories, and I would love to be able to continue to tell stories.  What I'm doing now is I'm experimenting--not even experimenting 'cause I've, I'm doing live.  I have invested in live equipment.  So I have a, something called "Wirecast" which allows me to hook up several cameras and to switch between cameras.  And I just tried it at a basketball game where I had three cameras going and switching, and I had a ball.  I mean I did this at the Riverside Church as well.  I had what's called a Tri-caster, which is a tool that allows you to stream live and also have several inputs, camera inputs and to switch.  And so it's--what I wanna do is to really allow, I mean companies that would see this as being too expensive to actually, to do this for companies at a reasonable price.  A lot of my friends are camera people who need work.  And so, you know, it's--and I've been doing a fair amount of--I worked with the Philadelphia Police Department [Pennsylvania] on showing them how they could go live so that they can get their full story out.  And they're not truncated.  Those stories aren't truncated by mass media.  So I'm really trying to see whether or not there is something there.  At the same time, I'm grateful that my hybrid skills are in demand, and I've got, you know, a couple of folks who, you know, contact me every once in a while, and say, are you bored yet?  Are you ready to come with us?  And I'm not sure that my next step will be with another company, probably, or will it be, you know, just doing freelance stuff and kind of having fun and being in control of my own destiny.
Story_ID: 97205
Speaker 1: So when you look over your (unclear) forty-something, your career, what--would you do anything differently?
Speaker 2: I would not do anything differently.  And I ask myself that a question a lot and come to the same conclusion all the time.  You know, at first I thought, well, "Gee, would I have left places or would I have just stayed and retired at NBC or CBS if I had the opportunity or--"I'm glad that I have had the varied experiences that I've had.  I am glad that I can look back on the times that I, the history that I saw made.  I'm writing a lot about that now.  I, you know, after President [Nelson] Mandela died [2013], I remembered that I was chosen to be the pull producer and to meet him at the airport and to travel with him.  And I recall the fact that, you know, my goodness, you know, what I saw, that history that I saw that time, and, you know, coming out of the Ft. Pitt--I mean not the Fort Pitt, coming out of the Boston [Massachusetts] tunnels from the airport and seeing lines of, you know, the people lining the streets and, and remembering how important it was for me to see that history and how important it is for me to share that history, you know, I wouldn't trade it for anything in the world.  I have, I've seen the world, and I don't think I would have done that in any other profession.  You know, and I would like to do a little bit more when I finally put it all down, I wanna, you know, I would have liked to have done--I would like to do a little bit more.  But I have no regrets.  I have no regrets at all, at all.
Story_ID: 97206
Speaker 1: And when you look at the, at news, you know, news journalism today, are you pleased or are you--do you see opportunity there or, I mean if you were to step back into MSNBC as it exist--or NBC News, what would you do differently?
Speaker 2: First of all, I don't watch the news very often.  I am very frustrated by the lack of context and certainly, by the lack of, by the shallowness of news.  Here we are, we have this incredible opportunity to do basic research in the confines of our own home.  And we don't ever ask the follow-up questions.  You know, we have no sense of what came before us.  You know, I don't, I can't watch because I end up throwing stuff at the television, and I like the television.  That's a nice little thing in my room.  I cannot watch.  It doesn't, you know--one of my favorite books was "Interpreter of Maladies".  And it's a group of short stories written by a woman [Jhumpa Lahiri] who, whose name I can't pronounce 'cause she's an Indian, an Asian Indian, not an American Indian.  And she tells this story about this couple going to school and to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was an arranged marriage and how this wife really didn't like the husband.  She said "He had a capacity for facts without the least bit of curiosity."  And that's what I see.  I see facts being thrown out there, but people aren't curious enough to take it to the next step.  And if they are curious enough to take it to the next step, they--there's not enough time or there's not enough interests.  I mean I'm delighted about what's happening now to [New Jersey Governor Christopher] Chris Christie, to be very honest with you because here is something that finally people are asking the right questions and are looking into finding those answers that they weren't looking at finding before.  They just, you know, they just wanted to say that he was the best thing since sliced bread, and he was the hope for the Republican Party.  And my goodness, he can be a mean SOB.  And now, we're really looking into, you know, other things that he has done, and I don't see that enough, and it's frustrating.
Story_ID: 97207
Speaker 1: Now, you know, the other question I have is, the online space, especially because that's where, you know, you started there, the whole cyberjournalism.  Where do you see, because we've just been talking about the broadcast side, I think.  Where do you see that, and what--'cause you said it was different than what you started out to be.  But are you seeing any trends there or things that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I am com--I am very pleased with what's happening online.  I'm reminded of the Time magazine's 50th anniversary edition online of the March on Washington and how it was so rich and there was so much texture to it that after you really went through it and spent the hours that you would need to go through it, you really had a sense of what happened during that time.  And so I think as the technological tools become much more effective in terms of the bandwidth and the ability to compress videos, I think that there is, it's remarkable in terms of what we are able to extract from those stories that we were not--we're not able to do even in textbooks.  And when I saw what they did with those pieces, I was just amazed.  I was thrilled, and I think--so I'm much more optimistic about the online than I am about television for sure.
Story_ID: 97208
Speaker 1: And what do you--your mother saw your--your father [Walter Davis] died early, earlier?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But your mother [Doris Nelson] saw a lot of your success, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She's not still living, right?
Speaker 2: She's not.  My mother died in 2002.
Story_ID: 97209
Speaker 1: So when you, what do you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a good mother, as a loving wife, but most of all, I would like to be remembered as someone who made a difference.  What we didn't talk about, and I don't wanna get into much, I run a basketball league in my town.  And I've been doing it for a good twenty-two years.  And I've had the hard heads, kids that wouldn't say, were, you know, boys who, you know, were having some issues at home, were sullen.  Their only outlet was basketball, and I wanted to make sure that we kept these basketball courts open for them.  And I was in the, at the Walgreen's a while ago, and two of my hard heads who barely got out of high school and was very lucky not to be in jail, came over to me and gave me the biggest hug I have ever had, you know, in a while.  And it was not only a hug of "Hi, how're you doing," but it was a hug of "Thank you" 'cause they're heading over to Europe to play ball.  And so, you know, this a young man and his brother whose mother was killed by her lover, who lived in homeless shelters a good part of their lives, and, but we gave them some stability in our basketball league.  And so I share that only to say that, you know, when it's all said and done, and as much as journalism is important to me, and as much as I had a passion for journalism, I've only just done what I've done with the hopes that it made a difference.
Story_ID: 97210
Speaker 1: So what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I, that I--I want my legacy to be that I lived, I lived life well, that I treated people well, and that because I lived, people, somebody had a different life, that I made a difference in the lives of somebody else.  And it could be through my interaction with them, but it could also be with what I wrote, what I said or what I had other people say on the air, that somebody was enriched, and that somebody's life changed because of something that I may have initiated.  If that happened, you can kill me tomorrow.
Story_ID: 97211
Speaker 1: And what have you not told your husband [Robert G. Wright] and your kids that you would like them to know?
Speaker 2: I'm very verbose so I'm not sure I've not told them any--have not, what have I not told my children that I'd like them to know?  I mean I can think of things I don't say enough, that I'm extraordinarily proud of them and the people that they've become, that I know that they too will make a difference in the lives of others.  And I guess I probably haven't told all three of them that they have so enriched my life, that anything that I have accomplished was, in part, due to their support, their love and their confidence in me that I could do it.  We all have self doubt, but I will tell you that my biggest cheerleaders have been my family, and my biggest--and the people who, in my life, have, have been so proud of me, you know.  I'm sure I'm a pain in their behinds, but when I listen to how they, what they tell their friends about me, I know that there's a real sense of pride and I'm grateful for that because, you know, I don't want them to ever lose that, that sense of pride in me and, and I don't wanna lose that and my sense of pride in them.  So we're sort of a mutual admiration society, I guess.
