Story_ID: 665234
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Marcia Louise Dyson, M-A-R-C-I-A, L-O-U-I-S-E, D-Y-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson].
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois, October 29, 1951.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm an international consultant, the founder and CEO of the Women's Global Initiative.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 21st, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 665235
Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is pale blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall is my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Haiti.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do.  "'I am my sister's keeper!' should be the hearty response of every man and woman of the human race, and this conviction should nullify and make petty every selfish aim in life into a more noble and sacred purpose," ['A Voice from the South,' Anna Julia Cooper].
Story_ID: 665236
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We--we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Mary Elizabeth Smith, M-A-R-Y, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, S-M-I-T-H [Rosa Fields Smith].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September the 2nd, 1921, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about them?
Speaker 2: I can go as far back as my great-great-grandmother.  I discovered that my great-grandmother and grandfather were employees of a free black man in Virginia.  And when he passed, he left them with an astounding two thousand dollars in 1863 [sic.], the year my grandmother was, was born.  And with that money, I believe they came to Indiana and settled in where my mother was eventually born in 1921 and my grandmother was raised.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you give us some details?  Who was this man and who were your great-great grandparents?
Speaker 2: I forget his name, but there, they--their last name, my god, I forgot.  It was Lucille [Lucille Overton (ph.)] and Clarence, I think it was Overton [ph.], okay.  And they were servants.  He kept the yards and the gentleman had businesses, so he would do the cleaning and drive for him if necessary.  And my great-great-grandmother was his housekeeper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay but this material, you know this, you have this material written down somewhere?
Speaker 2: I do, and I really should have checked the, the names, 'cause I had so many names.  But I do have the documentation on that.
Speaker 1: So if somebody wanted to follow up, they'd be able to follow?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In- including your family members.  Overton, okay so--let's see.  So, so Lucille and Clarence Overton [ph.] ta- took this two thousand dollars and--
Speaker 2: Took two thousand dollars and came to Indiana.  And I think the reason why they did that was because the gentleman who left them their money, their--his sister was contesting the will.  And, and I think some of the people within the country--within the little town that they lived in outside of Richmond, Virginia, also probably thought that they might have been uppity Negroes.  My--I can only say that because my grandmother was so entrepreneurial for her particular time in the early '20s [1920s], as well.  But they became quite entrepreneurial in Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--what kind of businesses did they--
Speaker 2: Well when I say entrepreneurial, it wasn't having products to sell.  They had cleaning services.  My grandmother, Mary Smith [Mary Gardner] end up--was a great cook.  Her--in fact her mother was a cook, so they would cook and cater to the people in the town.  Indiana at that particular time was known for brick making.  So they had a canteen, so to speak, where they would go around and feed the workers.  My grandmother eventually when she moved from Indianapolis, my mother was born, to Brazil, Indiana, near Terre Haute [Indiana], had a boarding house.  And there she housed both black and white men, which was sort of phenomenal during that time period since Indiana was home to the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] at its heightened period.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But she boarded both white and black brick workers and also since she was a very good cook, she used to cook for the--I think it was the Rotary [Rotary International] at that particular time in Indiana, which was amazing too.
Story_ID: 665237
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your [maternal] grandparents' names were?
Speaker 2: Mary Ka- Mary Katherine Smith [Mary Gardner] and Robert Smith [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well Uncle Bob as we called my, my grandfather, was a bricklayer himself and a laborer.  And my grandmother kept my grandmother, her mother's [Lucille Overton (ph.)] habit of cooking and working through churches and making pies as well, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So your mother [Rosa Fields Smith] was born in 1921 in Indianapolis [Indiana] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen twenty-one [1921].
Speaker 1: And what--what did she say about growing up in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: Well she used to come to the City of Chicago [Illinois] because it was such a small town and it didn't have the big lights and the attraction of, of Chicago.  She had a great childhood, she said.  She was able to go to school.  My mother used to tell us things in French.  And it never dawned on me that she had a better education than I did because when I was in elementary school in Chicago [], we didn't have languages.  So she would go around and say fer- fermez la bouche, and I didn't understand that that meant shut your mouth you know and je t'aime beaucoup, how much she loved us.  So she took the, the education, which was a quality education 'cause there were very few blacks in Brazil, Indiana at that time.  So she had a quality education, though limited.  She didn't go to college.  She was a waitress and a short cook in the City of Chicago.  When she came for the summers, she would work with my aunt Vivian [ph.] who was a member of the First Church of Deliverance [Chicago, Illinois], who was also a very big numbers queen.  So my mother used to really run numbers as this girl from the small town.  And I think that that's what really kept her in Chicago, and attracted her to the city lights.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother would, would be, she'd be becoming a teenager in the mid-'30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Chicago.  So did she, she move permanently to Chicago?
Speaker 2: She moved permanently to Chicago.  She met my father there.  My father, Clarence Earl Dukes [Clarence Dukes], was a, a very handsome, chocolate man, a ladies' man she soon discovered.  But she loved him.  They lived a very colorful life.  Daddy was also a numbers runner.  In fact, I think [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones when we talked about it, he also knew my aunt, and he was in that circle of running numbers, as we call the lottery today.  But he had an uncle who had him escape and made him go to California, and that's how he got into the music business, because of that.  But daddy also worked in the Illinois railroad yard as a yardman for the Illinois Central Railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay now let me, let me formally go to him.
Story_ID: 665238
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Clarence Earl Dukes [Clarence Dukes].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: January the 10th, 1911.
Speaker 1: And what place was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Birdsong, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay in Birdsong.  Where is Birdsong in relationship I guess to Little Rock [Arkansas] or some of the other--
Speaker 2: My understanding it was on the eastern, on the, on the tip of Mississippi, on the very northern part of Mississippi, on the border there.  Mississippi County [Arkansas] in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the same questions.  How far back can you trace the Dukes family?
Speaker 2: I really can't.  Reason being is that my father left my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] when I was two years old.  And my father, being a womans--womanizer basically, and a lady's man and a gambler, seemed to me that painfully he didn't allow us to know his father [Charles Dukes], that I didn't find out until just recently, within the City of Chicago [Illinois] when we were children, I'd never knew, but one of his sisters, Aunt Dorothy [ph.].  So I was never able to take my father's lineage back far enough because of him not giving us information and me not having any relatives on his side that were living that he introduced us to, to get enough information on his life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he, was he related to R.L. Dukes [Rufus L. Dukes] at all?
Speaker 2: Well he said that they were cousins.
Speaker 1: The auto dealer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He, he would say that they were cousins.  I do know that when he came to Chicago, my father like my mother, took advantage of the social life and the segregation of Chicago.  He was very good friends with a gentleman named Harold Washington.  So that in his later years, he became a part of the Cook County Sheriff's Department [Cook County Sheriff's Police Department; Cook County Sheriff's Office], he was a precinct captain under old man Daley [Richard J. Daley].  So daddy didn't allow his limited education or his being engaged in the numbers or gambling or womanizing that excel him in the opportunities that African Americans would basically could have because of the, the circles into which we were sequestered in, and him being a dynamic individual full of character and charismatic.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was, he was a real Chicago man.
Speaker 2: He was a real Chicago man, yeah.
Speaker 1: What they called the Low End [Chicago, Illinois] down there.
Speaker 2: From the Low End.  I mean Mayor Daley absolutely loved him.  You know, he worked the engine.  And I never knew these kind of things or put them into order, you know, of his rise.  And he end up also working for the union for the railroad too.  Became a union representative.
Story_ID: 665239
Speaker 1: But he [Dyson's biological father, Clarence Dukes] wasn't around when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: He wasn't around.  It was my stepfather who came in and rescued us from poverty.
Speaker 1: And what--what is his name?
Speaker 2: Matthew Perkins Smith, M-A-T-T-H-E-W, P-E-R-K-I-N-S, Smith [Matthew Smith].
Speaker 1: And where was he from?
Speaker 2: He was born December the 27th in 1929 in --I think it was Columbus, Ohio, or Cincinnati, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: In Cincinnati.  He was raised in Maysville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well he went to podiatry school.  He graduated from I think it was Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And he came up to Chicago [Illinois] and he was finishing his podiatry degree at Chicago podiatry school.  In the meantime, he worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] like most professional black men who you were trying to further your education.  So he was a manager at the post office in the City of Chicago while he finished podiatry school.
Speaker 1: Did he stay with the post office after he finished?
Speaker 2: No he didn't.  He retired from the post office and opened up his practice on 79th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, 79th and Cottage Grove.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665240
Speaker 1: Little backtracking, is there a story about how your, your mother [Rosa Fields Smith] met your biological father [Clarence Dukes]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think because of my--the whole business of the lottery, not the lottery, the numbers running, that he met my mother via my, my great aunt, the great church woman who was the numbers queen.  And he was there I think when my mother was in my grandmother--my great aunt's presence, and they met there.  Both of them running numbers for my great aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that didn't last long, that's about a two year--
Speaker 2: It was a two year--well it did, it was over four years, because I have older siblings.  My--I have two older sisters [Beverly Dukes and Luella Dukes] by my father and my mother.  So it was at least a four year relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then your, your mother met your stepfather [Matthew Smith].
Speaker 2: She met my stepfather when she was working as a short order cook trying to make ends meet for her, her children.  He was nine years her junior, I think that's correct, and--
Speaker 1: Eight, yeah, he was born, yeah in '29 [1929].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But he was--
Speaker 1: Well your mother must have been really pretty I guess.
Speaker 2: She was pretty, she had pretty big legs, a small waist.  She was a very loving woman.  I mean I learned how to learn because of my mother.  She was very creative.  And even though she finished high school, didn't go to college, she knew the world and so she had this intelligence and this deep common sense that I'm quite sure attracted him.  And her wonderful laugh and, and smile I'm sure, as well as her hips.
Story_ID: 665241
Speaker 1: So now when you think about, you know, all of these per- personalities, your mother [Rosa Fields Smith], your biological father [Clarence Dukes] and your stepfather [Matthew Smith], when you think about their, their personalities, their sense of humor, the way they walk, the way they talk, and what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think my mother.  Really when I think about being able to love unconditionally, which sort of propelled me into being able to do the work I do now.  But my stepfather because he was Bill Cosby before Bill Cosby.  He was a Dr. Huxtable [Cliff Huxtable].  He made us not realize that we didn't have many things because of the way in which he and my mother were able to stretch their income.  How he treat us to things that I thought we would never able to, to have in our life because of the stinginess of my biological father.  But he gave us so much joy.  And I try to I think input that in everything in my life.  The joy that they brought us up in I think in segregated Chicago [Illinois], in the midst of poverty, which a lot of people were, which I'm not embarrassed to say, in the 1950s.  As we made our way up and migrated from community to community in Chicago.  From Englewood to Chatham to South Shore, which is where, you know, they end up residing until their deaths.  And m- my being able to then as an adult, go into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 665242
Speaker 1: When you were born, your--the family was living in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: We were living in Englewood.  In fact, I was born before the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway].  And when the Dan Ryan was built, they moved our home and we still ended up in the neighborhood on Wentworth [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were near what would have been Dearborn [Street] I guess.
Speaker 2: Near Dearborn.  In fact where Francis Parker School [sic. Francis Parkman Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] resides right now on 51st [Street] and State Street [sic. Wells Street], that Dan Ryan is where they took our house, our first house where I remember, when I was born.
Story_ID: 665243
Speaker 1: Do you have a--now you have siblings.  Ca- can you name your siblings from--from the eldest to--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have six siblings, all right.  The eldest one was James Vernon Bass [James Bass], Estol Bass, my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] was married several times.  Geraldine Fleming, Bella Elizabeth Dukes [Beverly Dukes], Luella Elaine Dukes [Luella Dukes], and Robert Anderson [Robert Bright].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that's six.  And, so she had like a couple be- before she met your father [Dyson's biological father, Clarence Dukes].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then she had two--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with him, then two more.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was kind of like Elizabeth Taylor.  She'd rather marry them and love them than just to be their lovers I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  So she married more than once.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was married to, to Vernon Bass [Estol Bass], she was married to my father, and she was married also to Matthew Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now she was married to Mr. Bass before you came along, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was her first husband, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 665244
Speaker 1: Can you describe--your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was really I think the longing for my father [Dyson's biological father, Clarence Dukes], you know, often waiting for him when promising to pick me up from the--after he worked on the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad] in the school yards.  Those were unpleasant.  But the most memorable I think were, I think were--children still, I think they wait for before school, was the Bud Billiken Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic].  Those were very happy times, the summers and the day camp at Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and the field house [Washington Fieldhouse, Chicago, Illinois].  Spending time with my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Gardner], going from the busyness of Chicago [Illinois] to the small town quietness of Brazil, Indiana were very memorable moments too.  And lessons of history.  And I think racism.  Not knowing it then, but feeling the difference being in Chicago and then going to Brazil, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Well Indiana has a reputation of, as being like a Alabama up north or something.
Speaker 2: It was an Alabama up north.  We couldn't understand why my grandmother would always try to keep us close at the house.  She would, she would tell us that she thought we were gonna get hit by the car.  But, you know, we lived in a very busy street off of State Street in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], so we didn't quite understand it.  All we ever saw was one car driving through the neighborhood in Brazil, Indiana.  But I think that really quietly she was trying to protect us as young black children and though we were not south, Indiana had its southern ways and I think she tried to protect us without being able to say it to us because we wouldn't have understood it at that particular time.
Story_ID: 665245
Speaker 1: Your initial house you remember was in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Was in Englewood.
Speaker 1: And de- describe where you all were living in Englewood.
Speaker 2: It was a frame house like the ghettos of Chicago [Illinois] in the early '50s [1950s].  Multiple units in the house.  I remember we lived on the first floor.  I remember the neighbors upstairs and the small, dirt yard.  And the schoolchildren being--well we had a--there were a few Mexicans who lived in our community, so we went to a quasi-integrated school, but mostly black.  I remember the cobblestone streets and during Halloween you could hear the iceman and the, the milkman and the bottles rattling through the streets.  And those are very memorable times to me.  I remember when you could burn the leaves in the fall.  And those sort of sounds and smells are very endearing to me, which you can't capture now with environmentalists and burning leaves.  But those were things that were so wonderful about Chicago in the '50s [1950s].  It wasn't about the poverty that kept you down, it was just the joy of having a childhood that was so wonderful that I lament the children don't have today.  It was about hearing, you know the clanging of the bottles and the hoof prints on the cobblestone, or the electric trolleys that they used to have in the City of Chicago as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw the transition in between the, you know, from the electric tr- trolley to the horse and--
Speaker 2: I know I feel like an ancient woman when I, when I tell my children [Mwata Dyson, Michael Eric Dyson II and Maisha Dyson Daniels] I was born before the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway], they cannot even imagine Chicago without the Dan Ryan and they ask me, "Were there dinosaurs roaming there too?"  But I do, I remember that transition happening, you know.
Speaker 1: I'm older than you are, and I, you know I grew up in another city, but I would--had assumed that the Dan Ryan had been there long before--it was a lot older than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  I remember like I said, our house was actually moved so that the Dan Ryan can--could be built.  41 [U.S. Route 41] was the main highway when you wanted to go from Indiana up to Wisconsin.  We didn't have 94 [Interstate 94] at that time.
Speaker 1: And U.S. 41 followed the lake [Lake Michigan].
Speaker 2: U.S. 41, yeah, to go over to the Riverview [Riverview Park, Chicago, Illinois], which was another childhood memory.  Being able to go to the Riverview was such a treat, either through Vacation Bible School or summer camps because, you know, it was a place where you could pass downtown.  This place where--we would ride the school bus or the church bus and you would see the link fence that captured us, or sequestered us from the North [North Side] and South Side of Chicago.  And I always kind of looked over the fence, wanted to know what that world was like.  And the Riverview would let you pass the North Shore, which we weren't able to do 'cause you couldn't just get on the--as a kid on the bus and go that far without being questioning.  In fact, I used to actually skip school as a very young girl when my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] was working, before my stepfather [Matthew Smith] became a podiatrist, and would take the "L" train [elevated train] and just ride it downtown so I could see that world.  I would skip school.  My mother, I think she died not knowing that, 'cause I wanted to know what was beyond 47th Street, what was beyond 63rd Street.  So I was always adventurous.  And to me my first adventurous rides were that on the "L" train.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are stories in Chicago about people who never leave their neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Never left the neighborhood.  But I--
Speaker 1: On the West Side, South Side (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I wanted to.  Absolutely.  I wanted to see this world that I saw when I took those buses to the Riverview.  I wanted to see them and smell them and know that world, the beautiful world.
Speaker 1: Riverview, for those who don't know, is an amusement park.
Speaker 2: Was an amusement park.  It was before you had Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] and Disneyland [Anaheim, California] and Kings whatever that [Kings Island, Mason, Ohio], Six Flags over America [Six Flags America, Upper Marlboro, Maryland].  Riverview was the quintessential amusement park for Chicago.  I think people came from the tri-state areas, Wisconsin and Indiana for the Riverview.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it's now defunct, and--
Speaker 2: Very defunct, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hear stories about it all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a great time.
Story_ID: 665246
Speaker 1: You've covered some of this, but (cough) what--what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Chicago [Illinois]?  Now you moved from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] in what year was it?
Speaker 2: We moved from Englewood in like the '60s [1960s], like '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: So you were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean but it's Englewood until--from 54th [Street] and Wentworth [Avenue] until 71st and Union [Avenue].  That was still in that area, still in the Englewood area.  But we went from 54th and Wentworth to 71st and Union, 612 East 71st Street to be exact.  And that was an interesting experience because it was a lot of whites living in that neighborhood.  And it was the first time we had interacted with a nonblack community.  And because my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] would work on Sunday, one thing that was also memorable is she used to tell us that we couldn't play until we prayed.  So I end up having been baptized Baptist and Lutheran and Methodist, depending upon what church was on the corner in our community.  Mama didn't have a fixation on, on, on which denomination we would worship, but she wanted to make sure that her children, like the character in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] knew her God.  So the great thing about that, is that when I went to--we moved to 71st and Union, we got a chance to go to a Lutheran church.  And I had my first indoctrination to a nonblack experience via the parishioners there and neighbors who lived in our three flat building.
Speaker 1: 71st and Union, okay.  So, well--so you went from 71st and Union to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: To Chatham, went 71st and Union to 82nd [Street] and Langley [Avenue].
Speaker 1: 82nd and Langley, okay.  And, and then to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And to South Shore, 89th [Street] and East End [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well considering all those places, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well in--the thing I liked about Chatham is that I was introduced to the middle class black experience.  There you had the Arthur Dixon School [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was a great school.
Speaker 1: So you were in middle school then.
Speaker 2: I was in middle school, yeah.  I was--and I graduated in 1965 from Arthur Dixon School, and I met some of my lifetime friends that I still have there today.  And from there of course when you had the integration of, you know, the--I would call my bourgeoisie, but they were the bourgeoisie Negroes at the time.  You had the, the high schoolers from Harlan [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Hirsch [Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois], and it was exciting because things were happening then in the '60s [1960s].  You could go to the point [Promontory Point, Chicago, Illinois] at the lakefront, which we absolutely loved.  We would walk there in the summer times when you could stay out late at night and burn the campfire, so to speak, on the beach.  But it was also a time when you had the formation of the gangs, like the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation], but it was just exciting because I was introduced to some people who had traveled the world.  The only place I had traveled was to my [maternal] grandmother's [Mary Gardner] home, which was in Brazil, Indiana.  In fact, they were travelling as African Americans to Mexico.  We couldn't afford to travel.  We didn't even have a car until I was sixteen 'cause my stepfather [Matthew Smith] didn't drive.  And so I used to tell people, "I'm going to Brazil," but would never say Indiana because I wanted to have that heightened experience and make people like excited about me, you know, as I was about them as well.
Story_ID: 665247
Speaker 1: You're talking about Chatham [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --82nd [Street] and Langley [Avenue].  Chatham is been a long time, you know, stable community, black community.  Black homeowners there are--they're concerned about street maintenance, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, family legacies there.  It's just a turnover from generation to generation.  Another important thing, you know how we talk about back in the day, that Ki- Bill Cosby sort of speak anyway, where, how you were segregated and you met everybody.  I mean I remember meeting this young man who was a boxer named Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali].  Because Herbert Muhammad [Jabir Herbert Muhammad] had a Tastee Freez on 83rd and Cottage Grove [Avenue] where I used to work in the summertime.  And your school teacher was right there.  So even after school you would sit on her porch and play with her children.  Elijah Muhammad's grandson [HistoryMaker Ozier Muhammad] lived right across from Dixon School [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  Emanuel--Nathaniel Muhammad [Nathaniel Muhammad, Sr.] was there.  You had Willie Mays living in the neighborhood.  Was it Willie Mays?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks I think.
Speaker 2: Ernie Banks, it was Ernie Banks living on the corner.  Okay Ernie Banks was right there.  Like you said, you had the Rayner [A.A. Rayner and Sons Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois], you had the ethnic hair care companies, all with--there within the neighborhoods.  So Chicago [Illinois] is a great place to have grown up, you know, as a, a kid being at least having access to the success of other African Americans to aspire to.
Speaker 1: Speaking of the Nation, now, they sort of colonized that part of 83rd Street and Cottage Grove area.
Speaker 2: They did.  Your Supermarket [Chicago, Illinois], then the Tastee Freez, then they had the social center that was across the street.  In fact--
Speaker 1: Salaam Restaurant [Salaam Restaurant and Bakery, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Salaam Restaurant, that's right.  And it's because of that affinity and after I went through all of my, you know, Christian religions, I kind of dated one of Elijah Muhammad's grandsons and joined the Nation of Islam for a very short time as a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 665248
Speaker 1: As a teenager, now you had a teenage life that sounds a lot like a friend of mine we were discussing, Pat Simpson Turner [Patricia Simpson Turner].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who's a part of a--did you become a part of the topographical research center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] too?
Speaker 2: I--gave my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] a heart attack.  The Nation of Islam, they wanted to adopt me.  I think I was the only girl in the '60s [1960s] who would leave the house in a mini skirt, go into a phone booth, which we had phone booths back then, and change into a long skirt, long sleeves and a scarf, and go off to Mosque 51 [sic.].  And I was so great at what I was doing and learning the language and taking in the culture of, of this new religion, that when they found out, the minister found out that my mother was displeased with my joining the Nation, that he and sister Sarah [ph.] were going to adopt me.  But I was inquisitive as always, and asked them some questions around the message to the black man and black superiority, of some kind of form or fashion.  I was--put in my hand was 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcom X and Alex Haley].  And I was so excited.  I was working at Herbert Muhammad's [Jabir Herbert Muhammad] Tastee Freez in fact and I was telling the brothers when they came back from a meeting, I wanted to take a hajj, I wanted to go to Mecca [Saudi Arabia].  And they said, "How do I know these things?"  I said "'Cause I'm reading this book by Malcolm X, who is this man?"  And they told me that I was committing treason and that he was a traitor.  And because I had that closeness to the minister, I sat down and asked him those questions about Malcolm X.  And I asked him about you know, him saying that God was a God of all men and that he saw white men with blue eyes and they were all--there was only one God and we were all God's children.  And because I've always been this kind of Marcia Dyson [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson], sort of in your face and inquisitive and adventurous, they put me out.  So I left as Marcia X striving for my Marcia Shabazz, my chosen name if I'd completed it because they told me I had too much power and influence over the young women, and I asked too many questions and I was not a girl of faith.  And so that really sort of busted my bubble because I was seeking something then.  So my future brother-in-law, my current boyfriend at that time who became my first husband and my children's father, came back from Vietnam War and joined the topographical center.  And he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Vietnam vets founded the topographical center.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  And Jimmy [ph.] was a Ivy League sort of guy, the (unclear), Brooks Brothers shirt and khaki pants and I'm going like wow, what, what changed your life to go into this deep black-centric sort of phenomena happening in Chicago [Illinois]?  And so I followed him in there blindly.  Did this study, took the tours, you know, this topographical tours in Wisconsin and you know all of a sudden becoming aware of the man and scaring my mother again to death because her adventurous daughter was now going into these more dangerous waters because it was a little bit more militant.  I used to call it quasi-Black Panther [Black Panther Party] to explain it to my friends who didn't understand what the topogra- topographical center was, but one thing I learned about it was cooperative communities.  We had our own school.  We had--would go to the farms together.  We had fish shops and record stores and we worked this together.  I'm not embarrassed to say I used to sell 8 track tapes collectively with some of the women and men at the "L" station [elevated train].  I've done it all, so.  But it was very entrepreneurial.  We bought buildings in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] when there was a migration of the Jewish community into the suburbs more, or further north.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you're right.  South Shore was Jewish largely (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Jewish.  And at twenty-five I bought a building with my first husband for twenty-five thousand dollars on 68th [Street] and Paxton [Avenue].
Speaker 1: So your first husband was a member of the top- ?
Speaker 2: He was also a member of the topographical center, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And I know they built a black martial art--
Speaker 2: Black martial arts, yeah, it was all of it.  We owned a good piece of property, you know, collectively, in South Shore.  We helped to develop with our collective money, the South Shore Bank [ShoreBank, Chicago, Illinois] where people like Carol Adams [HistoryMaker Carol L. Adams] who took the lead on that to stabilize it.  And these were very intelligent, young, African Americans.  They had Ph.D.'s, they were going to school, they were, you know, accountants.  So we had a little bit of a great community within the South Shore area during the early and mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah the South Shore was making that transition.  I didn't realize it when I lived there, you know, how recently it had been Jewish.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was, yes.
Story_ID: 665249
Speaker 1: So we moved pretty fast, but we need to go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to talk about, about school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Dixon [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were--were there any particular teachers or role models in, at Dixon when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was.  There was my math teacher, Mrs. Falkner [ph.] who lived across the street from Nathaniel Muhammad [Nathaniel Muhammad, Sr.], that I absolutely love.  I loved math all my life.  So I, really loved her.  And my English teacher Mrs. Beavers [ph.], who ended up becoming, came the president, not the president, the principal of, of the school as well.  And my science teacher, I can't recall his name, but they became very influential, you know in my life and--Mr. Hamilton [ph.].  They taught us a lot of the classics.  They made it relevant, our black history.  Taught us to be entrepreneurial and I, being new to the community, I didn't feel like an outsider.  There was a classism going on within Chatham [Chicago, Illinois].  You know, there was the paper bag test of, you know, if you were light enough or if your hair was straight enough.  And so because of the financial situation my family was in, I never was in the clique of a certain class, but within the school itself and because of my personality, I was a charmer.  So I made it pretty well within that community.  In fact, I remember one of the most memorable things that I did at Dixon was to run--as a new kid on the block, was to run for a post for the school graduating class.  So I think I ran for vice president.  I had a very corny slogan based upon my maiden name.  Put up Dukes [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson] for vice president.  Well I got knocked out on that one, but I still, you know, liked the fact that I was bold enough to be the kid new to the neighborhood, who thought that she could make a mark for her class.
Story_ID: 665250
Speaker 1: Then you went on to--you went to Hirsch (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to, to Hirsch High School [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] for two years.
Speaker 1: All right.  Hirsch is right at 78th [Street] and--
Speaker 2: 78th and Englewood.  Great experience there.
Speaker 1: Ingleside [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Ingleside, that's right, 78th and Ingleside.
Speaker 1: Near Grand Crossing Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about Hirsch High School, in those days?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  I never will forget my English teacher Mrs. Pruitt [ph.].  She was young, sassy, the sharp haircut that they would have in the magazine with freckles on their face, very contemporary.  But it's also--I was en- engaged in a lot of the honor classes.  I used to take college courses in the summer, I enjoyed being in honors Latin.  I just had affinity for languages and words.  I used to read the dictionary just for the fun of it, encyclopedia.  I loved science early on and math, so I would study quantum physics as well.  And at Hirsch High School, though it was not integrated, we had a lot of nonblack teachers and a wealth of black teachers that really gave us a stellar curricula to spawn this inquisitiveness that I was feeling to grow into with language and math and music classes.  And so I enjoyed that experience very well at Hirsch High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so but you, you were at Hirsch for--
Speaker 2: From '65 [1965] to '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665251
Speaker 1: So your last, what, two years of, of high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Last two years I went to Bowen High School [James H. Bowen High School, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Okay, Bowen.
Speaker 2: --'cause we moved then to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], and my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] wanted me in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bowen High School, on a sprawling campus.
Speaker 2: A very sprawling campus.  And that kind of situated me too for I think what I'm doing even now too, because it was more integrated.  I was going to school with very wealthy Jewish kids, South Shore where I lived was called Pill Hill because of the Jewish doctors that lived there.  And so we also had the Polish kids from the steel mill area.  You had a lot of Mexican population over there from Commercial Street [sic. Commercial Avenue] activities and from the stores that they had there.  So I was finally really at an integrated high school at Bowen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any particular teachers there that stand out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mrs. Coclowski [ph.], again, a language teacher and a math teacher who saw promise in me.  Then I was taking courses in math like topology, honors calculus.  I was one of only--one woman and only African American young girl in the honors business classes, which were predominantly Jewish young men at the time.  And I, I liked it because some of those--especially the young women that were there.  I had the chance to meet later on in life in public relations and marketing as well.  And I competed.  It allowed me to be more competitive in a nonblack experience that I thought that anything that they could do, I could do, I wanted to do it.  Whether it was in classroom or dressing, you know, I had to end up learning how to sew because we didn't have the finances to allow me to dress the way I wanted to dress of course, being a girl, to compete with my Jewish sisters at the particular time and ended up being the best dresser in my graduating class.  And to me that was more important than the scholarship that I had at Bowen High School.
Story_ID: 665252
Speaker 1: You were at Bowen in '68 [1968] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and that was a turning point.
Speaker 1: And what was--in the integrated environment there, but you know, surrounded basically by the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean it really is I think what allowed me to be later on in the topographical center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois].  Though I was very close to the, the Jewish community.  In fact the woman who was neighbors to us, she gave us--really supported me to have my first job and being in some of the classes.  I was made the honorary Jew because they said I was so smart.  I had attended Seders.  But when Dr. King was killed and of course the burning of the properties and Maxwell Street and the disruption within the city per se, I was told by my Jewish friends, "What is wrong with my people?"  You know, and how their maids were acting up and they couldn't understand it.  And I had to realize right, you're talking about my people.  And so things changed for me.  And now they're--looking at them, but they made a line in the sand that I realized that I was not them.  That my living in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] did not afford me the opportunity to be inclusion because people acting outside of that particular neighborhood to response to a man who has tried to great works, allowed me to know that I was basically what Malcolm X said we were.  Despite where we might live, despite how we may be well in school, or despite anything else, that I was one of them, and I stayed with them.  I think that that's when I started really delving into black life that was not brought to me and my family.  I brought the world to my family.  They were ahistorical, asocial and apolitical.  And not in a demeaning way, it's just that we were not socialized to have this information.  But I always wanted to seek it out of my adventurous spirit.  But that particular incident and them asking me what could I do to help my people to simmer down and I said for me to join my people because I was incensed by the killing of Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Yeah now the riots took place on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: It took place on the West Side of Chicago, but remember when I was going to school in Bowen, that a lot of the children who were going to school at Bowen, their families had business predominantly on the West Side of Chicago, on Maxwell Street, in Jew Town, which you could say then, but it's not politically, politically correct to say so today.  But yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And up and down Madison Street (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's very--I was--they--my people were destroying their income.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Madison Street was burned basically down.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean all along Madison the West Side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of Jewish b- businesses in those days, relationship--the Jewish community and the black community was much as it is in many areas now with the Arab community, running these small stores and gas stations and things in the community.  So but in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], it would have been the same dynamic except that--you had Jewish classmates.
Speaker 2: We had Jewish classmates.  But it was still--you know, the cinders of the West Side flew on the South Side.  When it came to Dr. King's death, there was no line of demarcation or geographical boundary, you, you felt that.  Because everything that you thought that you had migrated from was at your front door.  So I couldn't, you know, going to Bowen High School [James H. Bowen High School, Chicago, Illinois], taking honor classes, knowing Latin, taking topographical, I mean topological math courses.  All that sort of dissipated with the cinders of the City of Chicago.  And though my family was not engaged in it, something in my soul burned as well.  And I think that if that girlfriend had not asked that question, I may have had--taken a different trajectory.  But she made me stop and want to answer that question.  She made me stop to look behind what seemingly I may have thought consciously I had left, and I had not.  Though I never lived on the West Side, it was really about this thing within me, this--I think that the poverty made me more black than my external perception of them to me.  That they--maybe they thought I wanted to pass because I was light skinned at the time.  But I think that question made me choose at that time something I had never thought about.  Was I those people?  You know, was I my people?
Story_ID: 665253
Speaker 1: So w- was it around that time you, you started engaging in the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  It--I'd gone back in fact and became part of the Nation of Islam because I had to address that.  I had no place to go.  Because we had to go to every Christian church because of the neighborhood like I said, my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] said, "If you don't pray, you don't play."  So I wanted to look at it.  It made me a little bit militant.  I think that's when the militarism really came in.  But yeah, I didn't have anyone directed me in it.  It was just this--the question was asked, I wanted to answer it and here was an alternative, all right.  'Cause if it was my people, there must have been a leader for my people.  So if you don't have Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to whom I really wasn't that well introduced to because of my family's, you know, lack of engagement in the Civil Rights Movement.  Then it was this Malcolm X because I did know his grandson [sic.] based upon my going to school at Dixon [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and their living in the neighborhood [Chatham, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting though that once you get in the Nation, you find out that the Nation, you know, didn't like--I mean the current population of the Nation anyway, did not care for Malcolm X.  In fact they were--considered him immature (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  And that was a surprise.  I mean I had not heard about Malcolm X.  Remember I'm--I won't do revisionist history.  I didn't know about Malcolm X.  Really didn't know much about Dr. King.  You know I was just a kid going to school, enjoying the trajectory of life in which my stepfather's [Matthew Smith] success as a podiatrist allowed me to get far away from poverty as possible.  And that was the thing that made me happy.  I was no longer poor.  So anything else was just gravy.  But like I said, Dr. King is killed, I'm asked the question, I have to stop and think about my life.
Story_ID: 665254
Speaker 1: As you're a senior I guess in school in '69 [1969], what were you thinking about in terms of a career?
Speaker 2: Because I like math and science, I thought I would be a math teacher or science teacher.  I loved physics.  I thought, okay let me get into insurance, be an underwriter, anything with numbers, you know.  And so I pursued that.  I took computer sciences when it was FORTRAN [Formula Translation] language, where you really had to know computer sciences and create the languages or know the programs yourself.  So I thought I would be anywhere that math or science to do with it, that's where I thought I would end up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  If you were like taking honors calculus, you were certainly in rarified air, you know, and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so as you approached graduation, what kind of counseling did you get about college?
Speaker 2: Well by then my stepmother [Amanda McWhorter Dukes] introduced my sister through her cosmetology association to the Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  And I was so proud of my sister who went there for the summer.  So I thought maybe I would go out the state like she went out of the state as well.  But I ended up going to University of Illinois Circle campus [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Did--did you get any advice about that?
Speaker 2: I did not have any advice.  I did not get the proper counseling I thought, even at Bowen [James H. Bowen High School, Chicago, Illinois], my counselors were not as astute about my care as my teachers were in my classroom.  I had gone through summer school at DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] to take advance science and math classes and thought that I would possibly go to DePaul.  But a lot of my friends ended up at U of I Circle campus, so I followed them over to U of I as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now that's fall of 1969.
Story_ID: 665255
Speaker 1: Were you still in association with the topographical re-research center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] by then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time I was just getting engaged into that, because this was after Fred Hampton was killed.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was--so it was another thing that propelled me from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I was going to raise that.  Now this happens in--
Speaker 2: In Dece--
Speaker 1: December, early December, or late November of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: December, right.  And my fist year, my first year in college.  So now I'm finished with the Nation of Islam because they kicked me out; I'm lost, you know, socially.  Can't go back to being the naive girl about race at that particular time.  And so when Fred Hampton was killed, you know and again my future brother-in-law came back from Vietnam and, and I was there.  You know I wanted to join.  I know I didn't wanna be part of the Panthers [Black Panther Party].  I'm not quite sure why.  So the topographical center was presented to me.  My boyfriend, because of his brother's influence, was part of the topical center [sic.], so I was following him.  And some of my friends went into the topographical center.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So yeah and there's the aspect of Fred Hampton was, was killed just not very far from the campus, UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not very far at all.  And I remember that--yes and, and one thing I liked about Circle campus is that all the students really came out to protest that tragedy around Fred Hampton's death, and the--really the massacre.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at that time it was a controversy; today we know that the police just shot into the apartment; shot everybody in there that they could shoot and without even looking, you know, made it seem that it was some kind of a shootout.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And there were no bullet holes going out.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And I think that the, the topographical center was more I think attractive because it was a little bit more radical and I needed something more radical at this point to address some of that particular ills that was taking place within the community, that they would target this person.  That I knew at that particular time being more aware of, of what was happening for disenfranchised people, people marginalized, the people that's really trying to do a good thing like feeding and educating children as well and trying to get some social and political consciousness to a particular African American community.  So I, I did get engaged into the topographical center.  Started wearing the gele, the African dress, becoming quite Afrocentric in a way.  Creating cooperatives with farming, shops, education.  My marriage to my first husband the first year was a common law marriage because of (air quotes) the man couldn't tell us anything we didn't need the God to sanctify and edify our relationship.  So I was in it like everything else, 100 percent, to my mother's [Rosa Fields Smith] again, dismay.
Speaker 1: You know topographical research center, I think if she had known more, she probably would be more afraid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she definitely would have been more afraid.  As I became, you know, when I saw some of the underlying things that went on, that were in the background that I hadn't properly addressed.  I was going after mostly because it satisfied my social need and my political awakening.  And it also--my affection for my husband and my boyfriend as well.  And trusting the intellectual community that was there who fed that intellectualism that I was aspiring to as well, without the formal college curriculum, learning so much more from that enterprise.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting.  Very little has been writing about the topographical research center.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Speaker 1: But it existed in several cities I know.  I was told about it by a brother from Boston [Massachusetts].  There was one in Boston.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in several other cities.  I'm not sure all the cities, but we did visit the one in Chicago [Illinois] in the '70s [1970s] just to see, hear the spiel about the topographical maps and what would happen if there's a riot in the country.
Speaker 2: If there's a riot, you know, basically what the--what's happening now in the Northwest part of the country.  We weren't a militia, but how to survive.  It was a survival instilling formation to me, I would, I would suggest.  And because then remember the verbiage was, you know, of overpopulation.  Making black people think that we were overpopulating the world or there was not enough food, there was not enough water, there was not enough land.  And when you travel through the topographical center and we would see the landscape, we would look at possible farming places and look at places for escape, then you knew that those things weren't real and how do you communicate that to a general population who was unaware of the particular lies that we were told in our community.
Story_ID: 665256
Speaker 1: Now were you doing any writing at this time?
Speaker 2: No.  I was not doing any writing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Considering your career, you know what your career has been--you weren't doing--
Speaker 2: No, I was not.  I was more protesting.  I was being the wife, you know, one thing about the topographical center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] was highly patriarchal.  You had your place, you know.  Even though we were cooperative, it was highly patriarchal, so no I wasn't writing, I wasn't speaking out like I'm doing now.  But I was keenly aware of everything that was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So all right, and, and you were taking--you were pursuing science at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still pursuing science, but I stopped when I had my, my first child, Mwata Dyson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right so Mwata was born in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 1972, okay.  So, so you were in the topographical research center a pretty long time, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty long time.  We had started buying real estate, you know, making it more businesslike.  It wasn't until--there was some incident, I'm not sure what it was, but in the topographical center was common law wives.  You could have multiple wives.  And there was a tragedy.  It's not something that I adhere to or my, my former husband, multiple wives.  But there was a murder with one of the wives who did not accept the second wife and that's when it became--again, it took a death or took a bullet for me to stop and think about what I was engaged in.  And at that particular time, what I was engaged in because now I had a son.  Is this the so- kind of society that I wanted my son to be in?  Something that would promote again non-inclusivity, that would promote hate.  And because of me becoming a mother, it made me more sensitive to what his particular needs would be outside of a closed community, which the topographical center was.
Speaker 1: Right.  It definitely was a closed community, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so now how was topograph- did the, this cause the demise of the Chicago [Illinois] group of--
Speaker 2: It definitely did.  And also unbeknownst to me too, that there were a lot of business dealings and more properties that were bought that were cooperative, which meant that people had qualms about who owned what.  There was also a hierarchy struggle as to who would be the leadership along with this person called (unclear).  So it started to crumble.  But by then, my husband and I, we got out.  Finished our education, well I did much later than he did.  And started a so called normal life.  I requested that I--my marriage be legalized, which it was at Cook County [Illinois], that I did not want to be a common wa- common law wife.
Story_ID: 665257
Speaker 1: This incident took place around '75 [1975], you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is--okay.  And but you said the organization, the topographical research center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] that was going through some changes, it basically hung together until the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Almost to the early '80s [1980s] I would, I would say.  You know, forms of it did with those who were just gung ho topographical stalwarts, it held onto them.  But we got out much earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: But still adhere to the principal of cooperative communities.  We still kept closely knit with certain of the family members that were in the topographical center, became neighbors, bought buildings in close proximity.  And our children end up going to the same, either private or public schools together, remain friends even until this day.
Speaker 1: So it's almost like, correct me if I'm wrong, it's almost like a shadow government at that point.  'Cause you, you had the building on 75th Street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --that--there was no longer a headquarters of topographical research center--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --you know, by 1977.
Speaker 2: Right, right, there was the headquarters.  But we never lived there; we always lived independently, and like I said in the 1975 I started pursuing property independently of the topographical center and purchased it in 1977 in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: I know there's, there's a printing establishment that, that Tony Courtney was involved in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And some other people and other little businesses too.  Okay so, so this, so, so you married and you're still going to school, are you still pursuing school?
Speaker 2: I stopped going to school, but I didn't stop studying 'cause I was before--continuing on with the cooperative spirit, since everybody was owning property.  I was studying tax accounting, so that I could deal with real estate taxes.  We were owning little businesses.  A lot of us became quite entrepreneurial.  So I--I would do the taxes and marketing and branding for the small businesses that we were creating amongst ourselves.
Story_ID: 665258
Speaker 1: In 1980, and, and, you know bring me back if I'm going too fast here.  But--well, oh, in '73 [1973] now I have a note here that you were involved with Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You did some teaching there?
Speaker 2: Yes, after my son [Mwata Dyson] was born, I still had passion for education and though I had not completed college at the time, I was concerned about the young children who lived in the neighborhoods.  I lived in T.K. Lawless Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], which was a pretty nice housing development.  But around me were the Ida B. Wells projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and I saw the kids and, and I went up to the school and had talked to some of the, the kids.  They were--I don't know how, they just felt in love with me.  So they would come to the house and I would, you know, tutor them and I went up to their school and I saw that they were being educated by some nuns who may have loved them, but they didn't care about their welfare.  These kids could not read and write.  And so Father Clements in one of my religious experience, I had also become baptized Catholic by Father Clements, yes, okay.
Speaker 1: By--by '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: By seventy--I was Catholic I think when I was a sophomore [at Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Before I became the Nation of Islam, before that, I was baptized Catholic by [HistoryMaker] Father George Clements (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  So that preceded the Nation.
Speaker 2: Yes, preceded the Nation of Islam.  And Father Clements was over the church [Holy Angels Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] at the time.  And so I told him that it seemed to me in observing the kids in the neighborhood that they were not getting a quality education.  And because we had the oppor- cooperative schools through the topographical center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois], I knew what a quality education could look like for children who were behind the eight ball as far as learning tools or the lack thereof.  And I was able to convince the principal, Sister Paulette [ph.], to let me teach at Holy Angels without a degree.
Speaker 1: What did you teach?
Speaker 2: I taught math, I taught science and I taught the seventh grade.  And the classroom that they gave me was a little bit like 'To Sir, with Love' experience.  They had gotten rid of or ran out three teachers by the time I got to them.  I was very young, very naive, no makeup.  And most of these students came from families that were single headed households.  Their fathers may have been in prison, drugs, prostitution.  The children couldn't read, they couldn't speak in a complete sentence.  And observing the whole school, I was able to talk to Father Smith [Paul Smith] who was the principal actually of the, of the school, and the nun, Sister Paulette, to work with the science research association [Science Research Associates Inc.] to develop a curriculum for those students so that they could graduate with at least reading capacity for their age bracket and know enough about the world and history and science to be able to perform well in high school.
Speaker 1: So these kids are--this is on Oakwood Boulevard, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's Oakwood Boulevard, 39th Street [Pershing Road].
Speaker 1: 39th Place [sic.], basically, near Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and other high rise project.
Speaker 2: High rise projects.  Now, because of making this observation and working with the science research association, I asked Father Smith also to do a very daring thing, and that was to hold back the whole school a year because the students were not prepared on any level.  So I felt like the deer caught in the headlights, or a Mack truck, because I had to tell this auditorium of parents that we were holding the kids back.  And we started the year round school at Holy Angels at that time too.  And I took that--the, the cussing out of the parents only because, I think, of love for the children, and the teachers gathered around me, those who were not nuns.  The nuns didn't appreciate it.  They wanted to graduate the children.  But the lay teachers got behind this initiative and the curriculum that was created with the science research association.  And we worked really hard that year, really hard that summer.  And those students that end up graduating the following year, did graduate with their reading level two grades above what was expected from them.  And the lower classes end up really excelling much better because of that initiative.  And it's something that I still campaign for when I look at other schools and what is happening to our school systems today is that I hate the test taking that is put on our children today.  They don't know anything about scholarship and the love of learning for learning.  And I know how that really can make or break a student's desire to want to learn.  Not for the sake of just passing, but being an informed citizen within their community.
Story_ID: 665259
Speaker 1: Did you ever--during those days did you ever go to Communiversity over at Northeastern?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, positively I sure did.  In fact, one of the students that was in my class, you know these students were much older too.  I was twenty, some of them were sixteen and seventeen.  I was at the Congressional Black Caucus three years ago and I heard someone call my name.  And I turned around and the woman was crying.  And she said, "Mrs. Dyson [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson], Mrs. Dyson, don't you remember me?"  And I'm looking at her saying like, "Okay, did we--were we in a club together, did we lecture somewhere together?"  And she told me that she was one of the students at Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] and she was now a dean at Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois].  And some of the other students that I had taught were now taking classes in their later part of their life (background noise) at that particular university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's kind of a brag point there, but I, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) yeah, over there with Anderson Thompson and Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] and Usni Perkins [HistoryMaker Useni Eugene Perkins], teaching--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ben--the journalist, you know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 1: Not Lu [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II]--
Speaker 2: Gosh.  It'll come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, was he (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It wasn't Lerone Bennett.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can see it now, Robert [HistoryMaker Robert T. Starks], last name starts with a S.  I'll think about it.  'Cause we kept in contact.  I just can't think of it now.  Having a senior moment.
Speaker 1: Not Bobby Sengtsacke [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke].
Speaker 2: Not Bobby Sengtstacke, I loved Bobby and, yeah, he was a photographer.
Story_ID: 665260
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a rich cultural time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, very, yeah. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a lot of things going on politically.  In '80 [1980], you served as the chief of staff for Jesse Jackson's Operation PUSH International Trade Bureau [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because I was doing the tax accounting for the cooperative that had moved to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], post the topographical center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] days, I wanted to not become a housewife anymore.  My children [Mwata Dyson and Maisha Dyson Daniels] were in school.  I, you know I'd done a lot of things and so I started working for James Field CPA company--James Fields CPA [ph.].  And went to Operation PUSH as an external auditor.  Now during my high school years--when I was at PUSH, my best girlfriend Diane [ph.] used to babysit Reverend Jackson's children.  I remember Jesse Jr. [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] in diapers and Santita [Santita Jackson] and Yusef [Yusef Jackson] at that particular time.  I didn't care anything about Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  Of all of my black experiences, I had never gone to Operation PUSH.  So I came as an external auditor there and then being sequestered in the basement near the community hall, I started hearing his message and started going to the community center and listening to Reverend Jackson.  And because also I was still a community person and liked to help individuals, during the lunch break at the community center you had a lot of small business people there and so I used to ask them about their businesses and what their needs were and end up just as a friendly gesture, helping them with their marketing and consulting.  And Reverend Jackson started missing some of his businesspeople in the forum after the lunch session was over.  And when asked where were they, they said that they're with that little woman down there in the accounting office and she's helping them.  So had some conversations, realized that I had some talents that were broad based, and miraculously he made me his chief of staff of the International Trade Bureau because I showed I think that I could reach out to various communities and help people grow their businesses.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was Operation PUSH's International Trade Bureau?
Speaker 2: Well his--it was the precursor to what is now what is his Wall Street [Wall Street Project].  Jesse wanted to expand the businesses in the African American community to the Caribbean.  He realized that there was an audience there that the African American community, given the sequestering of black businesses and possibly non-growth during that time in the '80s [1980s], could possibly have that relationship with the Caribbean and vice versa.  And it was I think much more accessible to get African Americans in Chicago [Illinois], particularly in the businesspeople according to the places that they had probably visit as a tourist, the Caribbean, which was his target, to interact with them and possibly then later on a global level than anything else.  So he wanted to have this outreach.  I think he wanted to also position Operation PUSH as a global entity.  And it was not yet that, even though it's the International Trade Bureau.  And I think what really spawned that was that this was post the coup in Liberia.  So you had people like Romeo Horton [A. Romeo Horton] who was in administration during the coup of Liberia, and Robert Grays [ph.] who came over.  I think he was the minister of communications, probably came to Operation PUSH and Jesse for sanctioning and safety.  And I think that since they were engaged in the World Bank, of Africa, that they were the ones who really pushed it to Jesse's head this opportunity of not only in the Caribbean, but also the possibilities of economic development in Africa, and helped spawn that.  In fact, it was Romeo Horton who was the executive director of the International Trade Bureau from Liberia.
Story_ID: 665261
Speaker 1: You worked with Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] for two years.
Speaker 2: For two years.
Speaker 1: What happened at the end of two years?
Speaker 2: I was working with Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And he's a great man, but he's Reverend Jackson.  And he would have epiphanies and you would do this massive work and this collaboration with people and then all of a sudden he had a dream.  And so all the work you did was sort of like a castle in--of sand, and erased.  And I wanted to grow.  I was tired of having as a woman, my ideas undermined.  And I felt at that time not appreciated.  But I was afforded a larger community to do marketing.  I found out some--another talent that I thought I had and that was definitely for community awareness, for marketing and branding.  And I wanted to pursue that as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you--I know in '82 [1982] you served as a community relations director for Black Family magazine.
Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs. Shadd [Mary Ellen Shadd Strong], I think that was her name, they owned the, the publication.  I met them at Operation PUSH.  I had started writing at Operation PUSH, working with the person who was doing our brochures and writing the brochures and writing convention materials as well and community events.  So I wanted to have a greater outreach.  I wanted to travel.  My children [Mwata Dyson and Maisha Dyson Daniels] again were older, so I wanted to be this person related to a real magazine.  And I thought that her publication was a worthwhile endeavor.  So I became the community outreach for Black Family magazine.
Speaker 1: Now did you go back to school during this period as well?
Speaker 2: I was going back to school.  I went to Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] with my children in tow.  They remember those days too.  But they were good children.
Speaker 1: All right, so you had been taking courses all along here and there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], now Chicago State.  In '82 [1982] you also established Marcia L. Dyson Public Relations [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yes I did, because again I had so many small businesspeople who were associated with Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] who were still following me and asking me questions.  So I said let me monetize, you know, my, my skills for it because if I'm gonna be a person help train them in their business and grow their business, then I needed a business myself, you know.  So I--rather than to be unemployed since I left the (unclear); I was separated from my first husband at the time.  I needed to have an income myself.  So I took that entrepreneurial spirit that I was teaching everyone else to help with marketing and form the public relations and communications.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So in 1983 you finally finished your, you finished your B.A., your B.S. rather.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At University of Illinois in business administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any particular professors or teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 2: Not really because I was so occupied with being a mother and trying to make ends meet and still engage at that time in a very engaged church life, you know, outside of black activism, now as this spiritual woman, you know, religious woman.  And so between God and children and being an entrepreneur, that's all the time I had.
Story_ID: 665262
Speaker 1: Now what church were you involved with?
Speaker 2: Well in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] I went to South Shore Baptist Church.  And then I flirted with some Pentecostal churches, so I became a holy roller, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're trying a lot of different things.
Speaker 2: I did.  I mean I just said maybe I was like Julian of Norwich who said at some point in her life she felt she was rolling towards God.  And when I look at it, I think I really was.  I just thought in every aspect of my life, I needed this covering.  I don't know if that was because of not having this relationship with my father [Dyson's biological father, Clarence Dukes], I don't know what it was.  But I really always looked for a spiritual, if not a religious experience.  I needed God somewhere, you know, in black face, white face, some place, God face.
Story_ID: 665263
Speaker 1: So you're experimenting with different religious experiences.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now you--at, like you said '83 [1983] you started wor- working with Aaron Cushman--
Speaker 2: Aaron Cushman public relations [Aaron D. Cushman and Associates; Cushman Amberg Communications], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  And so what--where did they--are they--this a big concern?
Speaker 2: It wasn't for me.  You know it was the first job that I had that was in the downtown area, so it was a big deal not to be on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], becoming corporate.  We had clients like McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and I think they had Kraft Foods [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.].  So it really allowed me to become a more astute professional in marketing.  It wasn't just this innate thing that I was doing for Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] or for my own business [Marcia L. Dyson Public Relations (ph.)], or the love of community.  It really put me in as a professional in the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were with--anything significant happen with Aaron Cushman and Associates before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was one of very few black women allowed in the advertising industry in downtown Chicago [Illinois].  But it also afforded me to meet other professionals who were African American in the business through the National Association of Black Journalists.  And I met really great PR [public relations] people.  This is when I was introduced to Tom Burrell's agency [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois].  People like Michelle Flowers [Michelle Flowers Welch] and other PR mavens to whom became my idols who taught me the craft and honed my craft even better as a public relations and marketing professional.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm trying to think of some--[HistoryMaker] Marian Cullers was really involved--Vince Cullers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Vince Cullers, yes Vince Cullers, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and his wife was really involved in the business aspect of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, so they were very influential as well.
Speaker 1: Tom Burrell's wife was really involved in--
Speaker 2: Barbara Burrell [sic. Joli Burrell], yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor].
Speaker 2: And Barbara Proctor, absolutely and Barbara Proctor.
Speaker 1: So, so you had, you were thinking about really getting--going to the ad business, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--public relations and marketing are parts of, aspects of marketing.  Community relations, branding and advertising and placement, and creativity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is '83 [1983] I guess--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --marks time when you were with Cushman and then in '85 [1985] with Margie Korshak (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Korshak and Associates [Margie Korshak and Associates; Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: This is--you're making decent money here.
Speaker 2: Oh, for that particular time and for a black woman in the industry, very much so.  But not only making money, going (background noise) from--
Story_ID: 665264
Speaker 1: From Aaron Cushman [Aaron D. Cushman and Associates; Cushman Amberg Communications] to Margie Korshak [Margie Korshak and Associates; Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], Margie Korshak was a strong PR [public relations] agency at that particular time.  Her father was Marshall Korshak, a state legislature member.  And she had cousins with great influence that were supposedly in--they wouldn't say the Jewish mafia, but she had--the Korshaks were a very strong family in the City of Chicago [Illinois] politically and socially and financially.  And Margie Korshak had any client that was exciting, whether it was entertainment.  I worked with Margie Korshak.  I was able to meet the Rat Pack because of their appearance at the Chicago Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].  We had all the banks, we had American Ballet Theatre.  We had the department stores.  So socially, she opened up through her agency, this great North Side [Chicago, Illinois] world to me that inspired me even more to get better insight into the City of Chicago to learn various communities, and to grow friends outside of my circle like I never had before since my days at Bowen High School [James H. Bowen High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well you mentioned the Rat Pack, I kind of chuckled 'cause there's a, there's a group of black businessmen that call themselves the Rat Pack in Chicago, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, no, it wasn't that Rat Pack.  This was the real Pa- Rat Pack.
Speaker 2: This was the Dean--and Dean Martin.
Speaker 1: Yes, Sammy Davis, Jr.  I mean I had the opportunity to host [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and Vic Damone when they came to Chicago, at the Chicago Theatre.  I was able to interface with Lena Horne when she did her one woman show.  We did the filmmakers tribute to black film and filmmakers because Seagrams [Joseph E. Seagram and Sons, Inc.] was a client and turned the old train station into a beautiful Arabian tent.  We brought in the Nicholas Brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], Pam Grier was in town filming 'Above the Law.'  This was when Michael Schultz [sic. HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] had just did 'House Party.'  This young man called Robert Townsend had just finished 'Hollywood Shuffle.'  So she allowed me not to only do astute business marketing planning, but also do these fun events that were very informative and instrumental to the film industry, particularly the tribute to black film and filmmakers in the City of Chicago.  Because of that particular event, you know I was able to get some residual benefits for the DuSable Museum of African American History [Chicago, Illinois].  I wanted to teach our community that there was more to film than being an actor, so we brought in [HistoryMaker] Reuben Cannon, whom everybody thought was Jewish, to come in a do a workshop.  We had one on one conversations with audience with the Nicholas Brothers, and I mean given the way the industry is today, to have that historical moment was not only a dream for the community, it was really a treasure for me to be able to touch these icons like Moses Brown [sic.], you know--Moses Gunn, I think and all of these people I had seen on screen.  Now I had access to them because of Margie Korshak.
Story_ID: 665265
Speaker 1: Now what I did not mention and I should have mentioned was the Harold Washington campaign--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of '83 [1983].  We shall see in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] said--started saying this in '82 [1982].  Did you have a role in the campaign?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was a, like a backseat consultant because of my community activism.  Before Harold Washington, I was already working as a community organizer on my own, again concerned about the community.  Worked with Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] on the Black on Black Love campaigns because I was concerned about gang formation, even when I was at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], and what was happening to our children in the community and trying to dwarf that expansion of violence in the community.  So having that community organizational skills and getting out into the communities, not minding going to places that most women wouldn't go regardless of that being our kinfolk, you know, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], into the projects since I had taught the children there, I wasn't afraid, you know, to go into these places.  I was already I think a good campaigner for him to get people to come out and vote.  And again, it was almost like Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  It wasn't just about his blackness because you're talking about going against a Daley machine.  And even though Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] wasn't alive, the machinery was there at that time.  You had Ed Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak], you know, and so the loyalty to the Daley machine was greater than our loyalty to a black man.  But Harold Washington was a very special person, and he had to work for that loyalty of the black community because of the legacy of old man Daley.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So in, in--you mentioned the Black on Black Love campaign, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Ed Gardner funded that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.
Speaker 1: And I remember the Chatham's businessmen's association [Chatham Business Association, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --helped push that.  Other people were talking about--try to reduce the violence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's something almost that we need today, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And Gardner also--did you participate in the voter registration campaign (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did partici- absolutely the voter--
Speaker 1: --when Gardner lost [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  And I really held him up in the community.  He was a stellar community person.  In fact one of my sister-in-laws was teaching at Julian High School [Percy L. Julian High School, Chicago, Illinois] and when they wanted to cut out the arts in the public schools of City of Chicago [Chicago Public Schools], he personally paid for her to stay at that school to teach theater and drama.  So I will always appreciate what he's done for the community and personally for our family member.
Speaker 1: Ed Gardner of Soft Sheen hair products [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: So in--during the campaign itself, did you actually have any role I guess as a--I mean specific role.
Speaker 2: Not any specific role.  Whatever they needed me to do, I would do it.  Knock on doors, host events if necessary.  Try to get out the vote.  You know try to eradicate some of that stronghold and the fear that black people had if they didn't fall in line with the Daley machine, that they wouldn't get anywhere in the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 665266
Speaker 1: Likewise, now this period of time, correct me if I'm wrong, but I'm thinking this, this was a time, '83 [1983], when the City of Chicago [Illinois] hired more black people than it ever had before.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because of Harold Washington's election.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I remember that election.  I mean, it was a time of glee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the other thing also I think that other businesses that dealt with the city, you know, hired additional black people, almost as they had in '68 [1968] after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: There was a demonstration that they were, they were trying to be more diverse.
Speaker 2: That was true.  It was like a renaissance for African Americans, a Reconstruction period so to speak.  And I remember the day after the elections on South Shore Drive going to work, all you saw was black people in the cars celebrating and it was like--where the other communities were acting as if they went to a funeral or something like that.  It was very melancholic for them, but the city did grow.  He, you know, you want Harold, we got Harold.  He tried to do a very good job for the city.  But I did critique him, when you asked about my writing.  After he got in office, he said he wanted to break up the Daley machine.  And I sat back and I wrote a piece for the Illinois Center [ph.] because the way a lot of the businesses was to say that you know, the one thing about the City of Chicago, it really was true to its model.  It was a city that worked.  And the Daley machine was instrumental in that city that worked, even if it didn't include us in some time in its history.  So I wanted him to allow us to at least have an apprenticeship on the machinery called the Daley machine so at least we would have some blueprint on how to continue to make it work.  I don't believe that you have to totally destroy something because the person is different than you.  If it works, it works.  But we didn't have that opportunity to see the real mechanisms because of the squabbling that took place after Mayor Washington died within our own community.  The jumping over the fence of the political party with you know, the--I can't even think of his name, with Ed, it wasn't Ed.  It was--with one of the staunch Democratic persons who became Republican, he was white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Ed Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak].
Speaker 2: Yeah, with Ed Vrdolyak.  When he jumped over the fence, you know, to that.  And so I really said that we should have kept that opportunity to see what was inside this Trojan horse.  It was a gift to be the mayor of the city, but why it worked--'cause my father [Dyson's biological father, Clarence Dukes] was a precinct captain, like I said with, with Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] at a time when Chicago was still quite racist.  But daddy was able to break into that and learned a lot because he excelled.  I mean he came from being a yardman to a Cook County [Illinois] sheriff to becoming, you know, on the Illinois Central Railroad union board, so to speak.  And so whatever afforded daddy that, I wanted a lot of people to have that, so I critiqued Harold Washington.
Story_ID: 665267
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Harold Washington campaign--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and at the time, you know, shortly afterwards or during the campaign you started working for Aaron Cushman and Associates [Aaron D. Cushman and Associates; Cushman Amberg Communications] and then with--later on for Margie Korshak and Associates [Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  You're talking all the events that you all were holding in those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we were holding.
Speaker 1: During those golden days in Chicago [Illinois] when Harold Washington was the mayor.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: I know there were fights and--the city worked pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a lot of internecine squabbling in the black community because we finally got a taste of power.  And people knew eventually that, you know, he wouldn't be in office of course.  Not talking about his death, pre--imminent death, but the fact that since we could get there, you could feel the squabbling already in the community, like who was gonna be the next black mayor after Harold Washington while he was already in office.  We liked the taste of that power and I think that it elevated the community for sure.  I mean the infectious, "You want Harold? You got Harold," resonated throughout the community.  And we all wanted to be Harold Washington if you were in politics to make that kind of landmark, and especially for the City of Chicago because it was the most racist city in the North.  That we still experienced during Harold Washington's tenure as mayor.  I remember going over to the southwest Side, way West Side, and that you still had signs on the building that said, "Read nigger and run."  Nobody if you were black, wanted their car to break down if you were on any street that started with a K.  We used to call it the KKK community [K-Town, Chicago, Illinois] because you know all those streets with the Ks, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Karlov [Avenue], and--
Speaker 2: Right, and so it was still that trepidation and going at nighttime, especially if you were a woman in that community, if you were going to the shopping center in that area.
Speaker 1: Right.  Harold Washington in '87 [1987] he, after winning reelection, shortly after--about less than six months after.
Speaker 2: After he died, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he dies in office and a lot of speculation about what happened, but [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer finishes his administration, followed by, by I think former Mayor Richard Daley's son, Richard M. Daley.
Speaker 2: Yes, to whom I ended up working for.
Story_ID: 665268
Speaker 1: But in '87 [1987] you took a course at University of Chicago's executive business program [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now this is a certificate course (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a certificate course, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the significance of it then?
Speaker 2: Well because after working for Margie Korshak [Margie Korshak and Associates; Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], I knew that I wanted to have an executive level understanding of it.  There was some more things that I wanted to learn, having the global experience through Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and then through the Margie Korshak association--agency, I had interacted with other agencies that were international.  And I knew that they had taken the course.  And if--I felt that anybody who was able to elevate themselves, I wanted to follow that path.  So I joined some colleagues in taking those courses 'cause I thought it was just great for me as a professional.
Story_ID: 665269
Speaker 1: And in '87 [1987] also you changed employment again and started working for Robert J. Dale (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did.  And I wanted to do that because of the things that I was doing for Margie Korshak [Margie Korshak and Associates; Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  Again, I was the only black person in the agency of forty women, all young Jewish women.  And it was a wonderful position to have.  I learned a lot.  But it was also stressful because it was--I would say a little bit racist too.  You know, anything that happened in agency, the black woman did it, you know.  And I was the oldest person as well.  But because I had a sense of community and had so many various experiences, I could do the work quick because I knew how to connect people.  And they couldn't believe that the black woman could do something successful unless she honestly slept with somebody, you know, and that to me was very demeaning.  And when I met Bob Dale, who was also my profess- one of my professors in marketing at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], he hired me and appreciated what I had done for Margie Korshak and wanted to bring those skills and consecutiveness to the agency [R.J. Dale Advertising and Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois].  And I was more than happy to go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Robert Dale, one of the advertising, the black ad agencies, directors in Chicago [Illinois].  So what was it like working for Robert J. Dale?  What, what ad campaigns did you work on?
Speaker 2: We worked on the Illinois State Lottery, which was great.  The executive director happened to have been African American as well.  We worked a little bit somewhat on McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation].  But what was great about the Illinois State Lottery is that it was at a time when corporations during Black History Month only wanted to talk about the black kings and queens of Africa.  They wanted to talk about the black athlete or the black businessperson.  But I collaborated with Bob and told him again from my teaching experiences and always connecting back to the community, that our children were undereducated and I saw so much promise in the kids because of my own children [Mwata Dyson and Maisha Dyson Daniels] and some of their classmates as well.  So we created a campaign called the Illinois Young Black Achievers.  We didn't want them to be stellar students.  These were the students who got up and went to school with bullets pouring over their heads, whose parents were in prison or drug infested communities.  And we made it statewide because Illinois lottery was statewide.  And what was amazing about that is that we got applications from people who were not the best writers, who told us stories about kids who got up early in the morning, who didn't have clothes, who mother may have been on the streets, but yet they went to school, was a B student.  To me that was an achiever.  And Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was alive at the time.  And Mr. Johnson let us host these kids to have a judging, and Oprah Winfrey was one of my honorary chairpersons for that honor, to honor these students.  And so when they selected these students who were not the stellar students, who were not the children from middle class environments, but came throughout the state.  We had some of those students; we didn't try to ostracize those students who were great, but I really wanted the opportunity for those unseen children who had potential to know that, so their commu- they could go back to their community and have a badge of honor that other kids in their neighborhood might want to aspire to.  What was so great about that, was that we took those students down to the state capitol [Illinois State Capitol, Springfield, Illinois] because Illinois lottery was a state entity.  And the legislators in their communities who did nothing for those kids, had to acknowledge them because they were actually placed in the records of Illinois as being Illinois Young Black Achievers.  They were written in their state's history, and they had to take pictures with them.  That to me was one of my proudest moments in marketing.  Those kids being acknowledged, being seen, the parents who wrote those letters in broken English being heard, was one of the most important things to me in my career as a marketing person.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's--so what did--are there some follow up stories to some of the kids that were involved that?
Speaker 2: Only the fact that that program itself continued.  The students, no because again I'm moving on to other things and trying to engage children like the Beatrice Foods Marathon [Chicago Marathon], Chicago's marathon, the same thing.  It was a sleepy marathon.  Ten thousand people would come from around the world to run in Chicago.  I looked at the city map where they were running.  Most of the tour was around projects, and no black people were out there.  So I was able to take some of those world citizens to the schools in the ghetto so that they can know off the map what that person language was like, what that person's culture was like.  They got a chance to meet people from Ethiopia, they got a chance to eat their food.  We had community events.  The bands came out and lined the, the track, the, the racecourse of the marathon.  Harold Washington was alive, he came out and we took pictures with the banners.  And it because a lot--it was written up in Wall Street Journal [The Wall Street Journal].  And from that, we trained some of the children in the projects for the marathon to actually run in the marathon.  Never had happened before.  Some of them almost finished, I mean never a winner, but a lot of them finished at a very early pace.  And from that training, too came Midnight Basketball 'cause we used basketball as one of the sports to train the children to run.  So that was another proud, proud moment.
Story_ID: 665270
Speaker 1: In 1990 you joined the Mayor's Office of Special Events, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This was when Mayor Richard M. Daley was elected.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that come about and I know Lois Weisberg spans both administrations.
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: So did you know her?
Speaker 2: I did know Lois Weisberg, and she liked me.  And because of all these community events that I did for the city under Harold Washington, whether it was faith based or social for the corporations, that started getting a name in the city.  And a lot of my friends had started to work for Mayor Daley, [HistoryMaker] Avis LaVelle was his press secretary.  And that was a kind of tenuous time for me because at that point I had done everything black outside of Margie Korshak [Margie Korshak and Associates; Margie Korshak, Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  And so when I went to work for Mayor Daley, a lot of people didn't like that idea because of the fact that it was the Mayor Daley legacy.  But I let him know and he would tell you this today.  I told him, "You do not have a spook who sat by the door.  I can be here as a public information officer for the City of Chicago [Illinois], representing eighty-seven distinct ethnic communities, Chicago, the world by the lake [Lake Michigan].  But if I cannot talk about the community from which I came from, the African American community, I would not take the position because I was putting my integrity and my street credibility with the African American community on the line for working for you, since we had flirted with and had experienced a black mayor.  And here you were," and I knew that the wealth of information that I had, my loyalty to the City of Chicago, that it was going to enhance his mayoralship.  In fact, my husband [Michael Eric Dyson] and I used to really tutor Mayor Daley, midnight hours, explaining to him the various ethnic communities he didn't know.  He was a Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] boy.  He couldn't tell the difference between Chicanos, Dominicans, Cubans, you know.  So through the special events, we made sure that that was pronounced, that he had an understanding of that.  But he was a great employer, and I gained his respect and he gained mine.
Story_ID: 665271
Speaker 1: This is in 1990 you started working with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now, and--well tell us how you met Michael Eric Dyson.  I guess around this time you must have known him, or, or met (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, well no.  I am a voracious reader.  And I would hang out at the Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois] and read tons of books, was reading radical magazines, and one of them was Z magazine.  And I just took fancy to this person whose last name happened to be the same as mine, Dyson.  And when Michael came to--moved to Chicago [Illinois] to teach at the Chicago Theological Seminary, he was part of the 2000 Program [ph.] that they had.  I don't know if it was BET [Black Entertainment Television] at that time or whatever, and it was hosted at, at Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] where Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.] was the minister.  And so when Jeremiah Wright announced that this author, or this writer for Z magazine was in the house, Michael Eric Dyson, it was like being--a rock star being in the house.  And I wanted to meet him and let him know that I had read his work.  And he was amazed that a woman who was in public relations and marketing, would want to read something so philosophical and something so far beyond what I was doing as a professional.  And he, you know, and so we started teasing we're cousins, you know, "You're a Dyson, I'm a Dyson.  As long as you weren't part of my first husband's family, you're cool with me," 'cause if, you know, not.  We would have never become, you know, friends, lovers and husband and wife--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) if that was the case.
Story_ID: 665272
Speaker 1: So you get married in 1992, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, I think '92 [1992], that was the year that had the--they had the special election where--for, where Richard M. Daley was elected.  And then the regular election took place in '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  When we got married--we, I left Chicago [Illinois] for the first time in my life too.  We moved to Providence, Rhode Island when Michael took a position at Brown University.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and that year you founded your own business [M and M Dyson, LLC]?
Speaker 2: Yes, because I wanted to still stay engaged and active.  So I had this product.  I had this product called Michael Eric Dyson and I gave Michael Eric Dyson and this young man named Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] their first multi-thousand speaking engagement when I was in power in the City of Chicago.  Michael had not written a book.  This man, Barack Obama had not yet run for any political office, and so I always remind him of that when I see them now.  And so I wanted to bring this individual I thought who had a lot of potential and star power, this brilliant intellectual that I thought that everybody need to hear you, Michael.  I said, "One day you're gonna be on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' you know, you need to be heard and not just in the university setting."  And so I started branding the Michael Eric Dyson and made that one client and my life purpose until I started engaging in more women activities, being introduced to these university circle and of course and interacting with young women on the campus and becoming more global through the interactions and the diversity of the students and the interests and studies in which they were partaking, which was more liberal and engaging than what I had experienced at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your husband published his first book ['Reflecting Black: African American Cultural Criticism,' Michael Eric Dyson] in '94 [sic. 1993].
Speaker 2: Yes.  See what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah now I'm not sure when 'Dreams of My Father' [sic. 'Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance'] came out, was it--I mean Barack Obama's book.  Was that--
Speaker 2: That was much later [sic.].  That was right before--it must have been, well you know, no.  It was after the speech I think he gave in '94 [1994] when he did the convention, right?  So yeah.  So it was after.
Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004], 2004, so it was much later.
Speaker 1: I think it was before the speech.  I think it was before the--
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  I can't remember.  I remember--
Speaker 1: Because he was a state senator I think when it came out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so but it had to least be--because we were supporting him after we left the city of Chicago as well, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is Michael Eric Dy- Dyson an ordained minister too?  Is he (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Michael was ordained when he was seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan].
Story_ID: 665273
Speaker 1: At Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], what were things like at Brown?  Now that's in Rhode Island, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was sort of a shock to me.  First of all, I found out that Rhode Island was the armpit of America.  I mean 'cause I was used to activity and the vibrancy of a major city and I ruled, you know Chicago [Illinois] was my city.  And going to Providence [Rhode Island], there was no political activism, you had Mayor Cianci [Vincent "Buddy" Cianci], kind of like a Mayor Daley, sort of Italian, you know, versus Irish, entrenched community.  And there was no place for my professional talents.  And I--it was really a bad time for me, personally because even though I enjoyed promoting Michael [Michael Eric Dyson], I had a sense of loss of myself there.  But of course I started going to his classes, engaging with the students.  We were also masters, or fellows they called them.  So the university gave us a house and I used to have over two hundred students for them, and had salons so to speak, and started cooking for them, and became the campus den mother.  So when Michael was teaching, I was out protesting with the students and one of the protests that I really remember getting behind in 1994 was over the im- the refugees from Haiti, when they were disproportionately turning back Haitian refugees from Florida when they were allowing so many Cuban refugees into the country.
Speaker 1: Now the Haitian boat crisis was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the Haitian boat crisis.  And I led the student protest on Brown University's campus, despite Michael without tenure, because it was important to me that we were in a country that could not find white powder cocaine, but you could see these brown bodies washing up onto shores and you wanted to throw them back into the sea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this--does this being your like--you've had a lifelong involvement with--
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it ignited that activism again.  You know, and it gave me a base in which to share that activism with the students.  And so I would host the students a lot.  I ended up mentoring a lot of the, the students outside their classes, supporting them in the works that they wanted to do, trying to help direct them in their, their dissertations and the papers that they were writing.  And for them to challenge their professors.  They wanted to idolize people like this guy Michael Dyson.  And I told them look, he wrote--by then had written one book ['Reflecting Black: African American Cultural Criticism,' Michael Eric Dyson].  I said, "I want to see your book next to his book."  So it allowed me a forum of activism.  Limited, but I grew myself because these kids were so smart.  The Brown University students to me were the ones where they would rule the world.  You had the Kennedy children went there, you had Diana Ross' daughters went to Brown University.  You had kids coming in from the Middle East.  So that afforded me another diverse community into which I found some sort of reprieve, not from the adults, but from the students themselves.
Story_ID: 665274
Speaker 1: How long were you in Providence [Rhode Island], (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Two years, two miserable years, but it was great. Two years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you came back and--did you come back to--
Speaker 2: No, we went from Providence to North Carolina.  Michael [Michael Eric Dyson] got a job at--started teaching a tenure position at University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  And to have a real southern experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do in Chapel Hill [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: There I had a more active relationship with the university.  I was part of the executive committee with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and Dean Smith in raising funds for the Black Cultural Center [Sonja Haynes Stone Center for Black Culture and History, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] for the students.  Got engaged with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the little southern town which, you know I even wore a flower dress and a straw hat.  My daughter [Maisha Dyson Daniels] thought I was gone go be Minnie Pearl.  She warned me, you know, going from this savvy, you know, northern girl to the southern comfort.  'Cause I would move so fast and talk so fast and I remember going to one of the little malls in Durham [North Carolina], and the lady pulled my coat, literally, an old black woman.  She say, "Honey, where you going so fast?  It's gone be there when you get there."  And my pace started to slow down a little bit.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I can see in my mind, as a [HistoryMaker] Jonathan Green pai- painting, going through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean I went (makes sound), would move on.
Speaker 1: Big hats and all that.
Story_ID: 665275
Speaker 1: How long were you in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: We were there for three years. But that remind me of something.  Can I go back to 1969?  A really pivotal moment in my life, I call it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-nine [1969]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. One of my best girlfriends went away to school and we had known each other since I was twelve years old.  She went to Southern Illinois--Southern Louisiana University [sic. Southern University at Shreveport] in Shreveport, Louisiana.  And so I took my second flight ever in my life down to Shreveport, Louisiana.  And there--now I've gone through some black experiences, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis is my icon.  I go down to the South in the '60s [1960s] with an Afro, short pants, tight t-shirt with the peace sign, in a place that still---where people if you were black, had to dress up with some form of docili- being docile and with servility if you were going downtown.  You had to be in your Sunday dress.  But I didn't do that.  In going to the stores, women would tell me, the white women would say, you know, "Baby, you aren't from here, are you?"  Because I wasn't saying, "Yes ma'am."  I wasn't giving them the proper southern props.  And my best friend's grandmother lived way in the country.  And she lived in the outback with the outhouse.  And I decided one day being the adventurous Marcia [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson], to take a bike ride on the country road.  And on that country road looking at the trees and glistening, I went and stopped at a little country store, just like out of Spanky [George "Spanky" McFarland] and 'Our Gang,' the ragged screen fence, the little store and the eggs on ice and a little boy, black boy with a striped t-shirt was buying six eggs.  Not even in a crate, just had six eggs, holding them and put them on the counter.  And was looking in his pocket and threw the money on--put the money--was gonna put the money on the counter.  And I told the little boy, "Boy if you giving the man your money, you can look the man in his eyes."  And the little boy looked at me kind of head cocked like I was crazy.  He threw that money on the counter, grabbed those eggs, put them whatever cloth, maybe his mother--and ran out the store.  And again, this man in the store said like, "Girl, you must not be from here."  I was like, "No, I'm not from here, I'm from Chicago [Illinois]."  Now forget Emmett Till, forget--and I'm this big, black girl with the black experiences.  I have seen some things, I have seen Fred Hampton killed.  I know about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and all this shuffling Negroes.  This is not me, I'm this tough girl from the North.  I am from Chicago.  But I started riding that bike back home, back, bike back to her, her grandmother's house.  And on the way there, a car full of rednecks came behind me.  Then they were beside me.  And they were saying things to me that when I saw that sun glistening on the trees, I thought my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] would never see me again because they were gonna take me into those woods and I'm sure rape me.  A school bus came with white children.  And I pedaled that bus [sic.] to keep up with the school bus and cross that bus in front of it perilously, rather be hit than be snatched in the woods by those white men.  And the fear of every black person that I had seen in the movies, that trepidation, that southern fear, took hold of me and let me realize that like they said about Malcolm X compared to Martin Luther King, I saw the South on a soapbox, they saw it from the struggle.  And it was my comeuppance.  I started respecting the struggle more, the southern experience more.  I understood the fear because it was in me.  And it humbled me, you know, a great deal.  I just thought that was, that was a very marker in my life as well, you know, of humbling.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad you told it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it (unclear).
Speaker 1: But you made it out okay, I mean it (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I did, I did.  And then was disappointed 'cause my girlfriend came back with me and I was mad because I spent $109 for a flight, which was a lot of money in 1969, and she decided that she wanted to come back to school.  But I was glad that I had that experience because it allowed me to have the sensitivity towards southern culture.  It allowed me to know that blackness was not monolithic, that there was a different experience that you cannot read about; that you really have to experience.  For me not to have been really been cognizant of the Civil Rights Movement and the people who had died because of the way my family was, I got a chance to live their bravery in that particular moment.
Story_ID: 665276
Speaker 1: You served on the executive committee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Committee, yeah.
Speaker 1: --with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I guess people would want to know, you know, what your impression of Maya Angelou was.
Speaker 2: Well, I have a picture of her on my piano with Oprah Winfrey.  But that time it was Dr. Maya Angelou and like I said, I was on the board with she and Dean Smith and Michael Jordan's mother [Deloris Jordan].  And we were trying to raise funds for the Cul- Black Cultural Center [Sonja Haynes Stone Center for Black Culture and History, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  And Dr.--
Speaker 1: This is Dean Smith, the coach of the University of North Carolina basketball team [University of North Carolina Tar Heels] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, he was, he was Michael Jordan's coach and I had known Michael Jordan because one of the clients I had in marketing was McDonald's.  So when Michael Jordan moved to Chicago [Illinois], I befriended him and his soon-to-be wife [Juanita Vanoy Jordan].  I created the Michael Jordan Golf Classic [Michael Jordan Ronald McDonald Children's Charities Celebrity Golf Classic] for the McDonald's Corporation around Michael Jordan.  And so down there I thought it could be easy as pie, you know.  I know Michael, created this golf event around his passion for golf and McDonald's.  But Michael Jordan didn't want to give any money.  Even with his mother on the committee, he didn't want to give them money because he was apolitical.  You know how they take in, the league [National Basketball Association], they take in our basketball players.  They ostracize them from their community, wanted them to be the safe Negro.  And if you politicize your life, then you may not get the sponsorships.  Well Michael Jordan will tell you, he was that kind of athlete at that particular time, so he did not give money.  Even with his mother and the Dean and Dr. Angelou on his executive committee.  He gave it to the social center.  In fact Michael, at a graduation speech at North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], talked about that scenario, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is, this is when--now you're in North Carolina during the, I guess the final years of Jordan's championships with the Bulls [Chicago Bulls], right?
Speaker 2: This was post his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was post, okay.
Speaker 2: --Bulls.  This was after his father [James R. Jordan, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: This is like ninety--
Speaker 2: This was when he was--he left the Bulls during that particular time.  He also--his father--I think his father was murdered during that time period.  He had--was playing baseball.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--so this is '94 [1994], '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, he had left the City of Chicago [Illinois] by then.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I think he returned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was at the Wizards [Washington Wizards].  He came to Washington [D.C.] I believe after his--after he got over the death of his father and realized that he wasn't going to be a great baseball player.
Speaker 1: Now he actually came back to the Bulls and won three more championships, then in '98 [1998] he goes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because I was there for the championships.  They won--how many championships did they win?
Speaker 1: Six.
Speaker 2: Six, okay I was there for the first three, okay that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Three, he goes to baseball.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then go back.
Speaker 1: Win three more, '98 [1998] he's out of basketball for a minute, but he comes back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back, you're right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and plays with the Wizards. You know, until he finally retires and becomes an executive, but.  So when were you in--this North Carolina experience with Maya Angelou, this is like, this is--
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994] to '97 [1997].  So it must have been around that time period.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is yeah, so this is when he's on hiatus and when he first comes back for the first two championships, last one in '98 [1998], okay.  All right so he's still a player.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still a player.
Speaker 1: When he's--he's not making the donations, and so.
Speaker 2: Right, but he had his foundation [James R. Jordan Foundation].
Speaker 1: Did he change any at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean at the post-Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]--well he did a little bit.  Whenever he would see me now, he would run 'cause he said I'm gonna always ask him something.  But after Katrina, I went to him for a contribution for the people that were relocated to the Reliant Center [Reliant Stadium; NRG Stadium] in Houston [Texas].  He didn't give me money, but he did give me a lot of shoes and the t-shirts from the Air Jordan collection that he had from Nike [Nike, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he became a little bit more philanthropic.
Story_ID: 665277
Speaker 1: I guess during this period of time after 1997, now you, now you're, you're in North Carolina for how long?  Until '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Yes, three years.
Speaker 1: Okay and then, and then where did you go?
Speaker 2: We went to New York [New York] for Columbia University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Pause) Now did, did your husband want tenure at--
Speaker 2: He had tenure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so he had it there.
Speaker 2: He had tenure at North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], he came with tenure.
Speaker 1: He didn't want to stay there?
Speaker 2: No, I mean the South was too restrictive for us politically and socially.  And we were too loud mouthed, you know, too progressive for the South to stay there forever.  That's a great place if you're gonna go and retire, but not the way into which I felt my spirit started growing again.  I was getting the Marcia [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson] back.  So I needed to be in a big city.  So he was offered a position at Columbia University and we went to New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so this is in 1997.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay in New York?
Speaker 2: 'Til 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now it was there then that you are ordained.
Speaker 2: I was ordained in 1999 at the chapel in--by the Reverend Barbara King [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara L. King] at the Truth Chapel Hill [Hillside International Chapel and Truth Center] in Atlanta, Georgia.  I became more concerned about women, through the university experience and seeing the lives of women I wanted to minister more to women.  I had taken studies at the seminary [Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois] and sat in in some of Michael's [Michael Eric Dyson] classes.  I didn't finish theological school, but I was called, so I accepted the call and then became an ordained minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But it's also where I had the opportunity to write for Essence.
Story_ID: 665278
Speaker 1: So what did you write for Essence?
Speaker 2: Well I started it because, you know, having had the opportunity to visit many churches and, and seeing the solemness of women and the brokenness of women, and the, the dominance of women in the church, but yet no power in the community.  I had to look at the congregation, what was going on.  And I used to say that the minister was--they were holding the women down.  And--but then I also knew about the sexual exploitation in the church.  Because the church was predominantly, 75 percent female, and I knew some of the women who had experienced it, myself as well.  I wrote about it in Essence.  And I said we got to stop this sexual exploitation of, of ministers in the church and in the synagogues and in mosques.  And I remember telling Oprah Winfrey this situation.  That it was problematic for me.  This is when Henry Lyons [Henry J. Lyons] fiasco came out with his wife and--Debbie Lyons [Deborah Lyons] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah this is the--
Speaker 2: --burned the house down in Florida.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Henry Lyons.
Speaker 2: Henry Lyons.
Speaker 1: Reverend Henry Lyons--
Speaker 2: Lyons.
Speaker 1: --is the president of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Convention, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Embezzled money.
Speaker 2: Embezzled money, he had a, a, an affair with a--he had a mistress.  And his wife doing what any wife would do, forget your first lady status, she burned the house down because she found out that he had a home on which her name was not on the title, but another woman.
Speaker 1: Now the home was built with this embezzled money (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Built with embezzled money, yes.
Speaker 1: --and so the house actually belonged to the National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Or should have.
Speaker 2: But what Reverend Henry Lyons did and what he said that got my goat was that he said his wife should have shut up.  And I said he should have kept his zipper zipped up.  And that was the thing that pushed me to write 'When Preachers Prey' [Marcia Dyson], P-R-E-Y, the sexual exploitation in the black church.  When I told Oprah that I wanted to write something about it, she told me that I was messing with the golden calf of the community.  And I said, "You know what Oprah?  You're right.  It is a golden calf and a church should not be a idol."  We shouldn't have any idols in the community and I needed to write this.  And when I wrote it, I wrote it with great anxiety because I was married to a very prominent man at this time, Michael was Michael Eric Dyson.  I had to talk about my own failings as a woman between--in the midst of my divorce who was taken advantage of by a married minister, which I acquiesced to his advances.  And I wanted to tell on myself, you know because it separated me, my relationship with God.  I wanted to tell on myself.  I wanted to tell on the ministers.  I didn't want to say it from a perch because I had to owe apology to the wife of the minister to whom I had that affair.  And subsequently found out that he had many affairs.  But when that, that article also was written, I was afraid from the church community and their backlash to Michael because I was--told on the guys.  But I had wrote it so that I had to look at their ills as well.  That there was some pathology going on in these ministers' lives where they felt they had access and privilege to all of these women.  And I wrote it so that it wasn't just a finger pointing, but it was understanding what is going on with you psychologically that you would exploit these women who came to have a relationship with God and yet you allow yourself to step in as a proxy for God.  When the article was published, it was one of the most read--well read articles for Essence that immediately made me a contributor writer.  That particular article then became a part of anthologies in the seminary to talk about relationships between clergy and the congregation that are still taught today.  And a lot of the ministers that I thought when I started to do radio interviews for it were gonna just attack me, they said they were glad they got the spanking because they needed to have that particular situation in life, whether it was sexual addiction, whether it was the same male privilege.  The ways in which they try to keep women who wanted to become clergy out because they had this congregation of choices, which you know, they took advantage of.  That it was a, really awakening moment within the church.  But it was that reason for that particular article that I became a contributor for Essence magazine.  So it didn't come easy and it didn't come without looking at my own frailties and vulnerability as well.
Story_ID: 665279
Speaker 1: How many articles did you write for Essence?
Speaker 2: I think I end up writing about six or seven more [after 'When Preachers Prey,' Marcia Dyson].  But I was more engaged into the social activities and community outreach with Essence.  I'm the one who told Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] that they needed a spiritual retreat.  So we end up going to Brazil to have these retreats with some of the readers and the editors of the publication.  Doing more community outreaches with women as well.  I wanted to make it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this retreat in Brazil was in Brazil, South America, or--
Speaker 2: It was in Brazil--yes, it wasn't in Brazil, Indiana, no.  Because I wanted to redeem that lie when they allowed me to choose.  First I wanted to go to Egypt.  And because the state department [U.S. Department of State] had a sanction or there was a red flag or warning about Egypt, I said, "Okay let's go to Brazil."  I said, "God, let me redeem this lie, let's go to Brazil."  So miraculously I took ten lessons of Portuguese and kept learning on my own until our trip.  I got down there, knew the language was like--born again, speaking in tongues for me.  But we went to Bahia [Brazil], to Salvador [Brazil] and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Got a chance to visit the priestess of the Candomble, went to Candomble houses and experienced the food and culture and got a chance to see the real appropriation of African culture, more so than anywhere in the world is in Brazil, and especially Bahia to Salvador.
Speaker 1: In terms of--as an ordained minister, you're ordained in the Christian church--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but you've been a Muslim.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you've been in an organization that practiced Yoruba, basically, the topographical research center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes Yoruba, yes.
Speaker 1: --organization.  So, and you've been different kinds of Christian churches, ordained as a Catholic.  So and now you're in Brazil and you're experiencing, appreciating Candomble.
Speaker 2: Candomble. I had my own orisha (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you see--yeah, how do you see spirituality?  The spirituality of black people in particular?  Do you see it as--I guess you don't see it as a sectarian way.
Speaker 2: I really don't.  And I think that also I had experiences when I was at the Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] where I just was oversaturated with church, organized church.  I wanted to take a reprieve and just spend time with God.  And I thought about my experiences, being a Muslim, being baptized a Methodist, Episcopalian, a Lutheran, you name it, being part of the Nation of Islam, topographical center.  That there--that that God didn't change at any point in my life.  I changed, but the God that I, I thought that I was trying to appeal to, or that was following me or propelling me to, was this one God that didn't care about the paeans of men, didn't care about the denominations.  My blessings were no less, my curses were no fewer than a change in religion.  There was nothing that enhanced my life based upon which sect or denomination I was in, or the form of religion to which I practice.  And I think that having been--the opportunities employment wise like the public information officer [in the Mayor's Office of Special Events], the cultural experiences, the diversity of that also translated to the various religious experiences that I had.  And, and made me a very open person so that when I came to do more international work around--when I went to Haiti, the first person I went to was not to the president or to the leadership.  I went to Cite Soleil [Haiti], but I also went to see Max Beauvoir who was the high priest of voodoo in Haiti because even though they try to squash it and make it underground like in Brazil, I did know how well it influenced the lives of everyday people who speak--spoke Creole in Haiti, whether they said it or not.  That it was a great influence there.  And so I wanted to meet with him so I could have that cultural experience and see how it related to Candomble or to Santeria when I was in, in Cuba.  So I could relate better to the spirituality of a people who had a great tenacity for natural and manmade disasters, this resiliency had to come beyond the Christian experience that I've had.  And this was before the earthquake.
Story_ID: 665280
Speaker 1: So you're in Brazil in--
Speaker 2: Brazil, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when is this?  Is this in--
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], '99 [1999]--it was right before we moved to Chicago [Illinois], so it was in that year, it was ninety--it was in '99 [1999] or yeah, between '99 [1999] and 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you came back to Chicago in 2000.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the impetus for that was my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] was aging and I wanted to be closer to my, my mother and my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  DePaul University.  Now this is year 2000.  So--
Speaker 2: I was writing more, you know, I was--some of my works included some anthologies, Beverly Sheftall [HistoryMaker Beverly Guy-Sheftall] and Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'When and Where I Enter' ['When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America,' Paula Giddings]?
Speaker 2: 'When and Where I Enter,' 'Father Songs' ['Father Songs: Testimonies by African American Sons and Daughters,' Gloria Jean Wade Gayles].  Let's see, the 'Men We Cherish' ['Men We Cherish: African American Women Praise the Men in Their Lives,' Brooke Stephens].  I was in anthology around--that was after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  But I was--still writing more for Essence and I was lecturing at that point, going and preaching more at that particular time period too.  Getting engaged in more women organizations as well.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  So how had Chicago changed when you came back in?
Speaker 2: It was like going back to a wilderness, you know.  All the experience I had had on the East Coast and the vibrancy that I remembered in the heyday of the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s] and the even the '90s [1990s], to me I felt like it had been abandoned.  A lot of the people had left, like Bobby was now in [U.S.] Congress, you know, Dorothy Till- [HistoryMaker Dorothy Tillman] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush.
Speaker 2: Bobby Rush was in Congress.  Daley [Richard M. Daley] was sutured into that mayoralship and had sort of settled the land.  You had young people like Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] coming in and changing landscape, that was exciting.  But the real changing of the, the change of guard that Chicago afforded to me was no longer there, so I was not as happy in Chicago, except that I was back with my family.  And had an opportunity to be with, with friends.  But by that point I was traveling two hundred days out of the year anyway.  So Chicago was just a place to empty the luggage, see my parents and to move on to various other places for speaking, media and preaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so that was--so your life revolved around a lot of speaking engagements and appearances (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Speaking engagements, church activities, conferences and such.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in--I'm trying to figure out where to go here.  The outline doesn't have much for the years between 2000 and 2005.  So--
Speaker 2: Well at that time I was really growing.  I was sitting in more on helping women, you know, going to visit women in prison, working with women organizations that are not the National Council of Negro Women, or The Links [The Links, Incorporated].  But these grassroots organizations of women, women that I met on college campuses.  Some of the offshoot ministries from women in the churches.  And doing a lot of mentoring at that time, still with women in businesses, getting more engaged with the women I had met in Africa, women I had met in the Middle East.  So that time was my individual growing again.  It was another cocooning of my, of my life I would say.
Story_ID: 665281
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Coalition of Hope Foundation.
Speaker 2: The Coalition of Hope, well that really started here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  I--after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], or during Katrina, I, I was so upset in how our government handled the situation of not being able to find information on the people who had lost their home and was making recommendations on first disaster relief.  Trying to find housing for people so they could get out the Reliant Center [Reliant Stadium; NRG Stadium, Houston, Texas].  And the Coalition of Hope is [U.S.] military, active and retired military personnel who wanted to have a really good rescue relief disaster, not only in America, but around the world.  And when they heard about my shared experiences and the possibility of helping to raise funds for this vessel to be revamped and my ministerial capacity, they asked me to be chaplain because of my world reach and my influence within [U.S.] Congress and, and the state department [U.S Department of State].  Because in order for this to be done, we need to get the sanction of our country as well as the fund raisings that were necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay, hold on one second (cough).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're talking about your role as chaplain with the Coalition of Hope.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I'm still very active and engaged in that.  I think it's important because one thing about this vessel is that whatever port, whatever country has the crisis, it's not the United States flag that will be at the masthead, it will be that country.  So they could actively participate.  And there was another way in which to interact with the veterans, the vets who would come back from the service, they would have a job.  They could have a place where they can absolve themselves of their military obligation that didn't sit well with their moral responsibilities or moral mooring so to speak, that they could go back to a country and help heal a place possibly where we had not been the best citizens as well.
Story_ID: 665282
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about (background noise) Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], from?
Speaker 2: I do.  Having written for Essence and partaken in their Essence Music Festival for ten years, I really had what I call my New Orleans [Louisiana] family.  You would go down there and you would see the same people every year, and you did.  You grew a family that you will be concerned about.  And when Katrina happened, and the slow response to Katrina, to its citizens and calling them refugees in our country, was very offensive to me.  And when they relocated a lot of the New Orleans folks to the Reliant Center [Reliant Stadium; NRG Stadium, Houston, Texas] and places that was, were culturally foreign to the New Oleanders, I was concerned as we went down--part of the ministerial, part of being with Essence, [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and some of the other readers and some of the other women who wrote for Essence and some of the men to whom we had a relationships with.  We went there and tried to minister to them.  And I made note of some of the ills in the Reliant Center.  And they wanted an advocate on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  So I would come back and call FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] for them, I would do everything that they said in order for them to get that two thousand dollars, and it wasn't happening fast enough.  So I wouldn't leave the phone thinking somebody would call and thought that they were sequestered.  So I told Michael [Michael Eric Dyson], I said, "I have to get on a train and come down to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]."  I said, "I have to talk to somebody."  In fact, Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was hosting a meeting on Katrina.  So I came down here and sat in the meeting and FEMA was on one side, the ministers from the Gulf were on the other side.  And they were talking about everything but the situation of the people.  And I had asked if they could just give me the formula so that the people could get the money that was due to them.  Tell them what their housing would be like, because you had the tiger at the table.  And didn't get what I want, the information, and so I told the good senator Oba- that when he wanted to run for president--he said, "Marcia [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson]," he said, "you know you're, you're charismatic as usually, but if you want to do something for the women, you need to get the women together."  To use like the Afghanistan situation where the women, they came out and they're the ones who changed the course of, of, of history in that land, to get the women together.  So I did that.  So I called him back on the phone and left it with his aide and said, "Okay, when you run for president, I will have the women with me."  You know, because I'm gonna go back, 'cause I felt like Mother Hubbard and I didn't get anybody to give me what I needed for the people.  And worked with some women, we sold our clothes on eBay to satisfy some of the housing needs; to get people back to New Orleans if they wanted to come back to New Orleans.  To try to relocate them with their families, even if it was in different places.  And it was because of that decision, that in 2008 I ended up campaigning for Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  'Cause I didn't think he was stronger advocate.  Hate to say this on film, but it was one of the reasons why I did not campaign for Ba- Barack Obama.
Story_ID: 665283
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were selected by former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to be on the Women's Global Summit leadership committee I guess in 2007.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was that--what is that?  I mean it sounds maybe be self-explanatory, but it's--
Speaker 2: No, it's--every year the, the, the National Cathedral women's organization [Cathedral Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in the City and Diocese of Washington, Washington, D.C.] will have a global summit with the women to come.  And based upon my conversations and visits with her at the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.], and the kind of work that I did post-Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], the work I did with women on college campuses, though I was not extensively traveling internationally, she thought that my life experiences had something to--valuable for the women that were in the audience.  So she wanted me to be part of the leadership, along with her, in hosting these women for these events, for the global women's summit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the, the next year you founded the Women's Global Initiative.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It wasn't, it was more for nonprofit work so that I could have a base to do the work that I was doing, more as a solo journalist that I was doing.  And I wanted--so many women wanted to help me in the work.  So we formed this nonprofit organization.  It wa- it was the entity that helped me to do the work when I went to Haiti.  That I could also help some of the university students that were in the country who wanted to be able to have education outside the country.  It also afforded me to work in a more organized way with wis- women who were in prison, to work with young women who were having issues in the penal institutions.  So I thought to have a foundation myself would be a good way to do it, so it could be more recognizable and acceptable than there's Marcia Dyson [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson].  So I formed the Women's Global Initiative at that time.
Speaker 1: All right now who are your board members?  Who are some of them?
Speaker 2: Some of the board members, they are women now from all over the world.  I have a woman, her name is Alma Suwannee [ph.].  She's an affiliate of the United Nations [UN] around peace out of Canada.  Bisila Bokoko who is Congolese, but she's out of Spain, ha- does international work.  Harriet Fulbright [Harriet Mayor Fulbright] of the Fulbright scholars and the Fulbright college here in Washington, D.C.  Sister Jenna whose grandmother is one of the stellar individuals of the Brahma Kumaris.  I also have Donna St. Hill from South Africa.  We have Avis Charles who lives in London [England].  So it's a global event of women who have done a great amount of work to help women, now, for profit.  We left the nonprofit and now we're a nonprofit [sic.] entity in trying to help with economic development and social activism with women.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And this, this continues today, right?
Speaker 2: This continues today.
Story_ID: 665284
Speaker 1: You mentioned you campaigned for Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] in 2008 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you regret that at all or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.  When she conceded, I told her and, and one thing about Chicago [Illinois] politics is that you're very loyal, even when you're disagreeing.  And I did not spend almost two years of my life on the trail telling a lie.  So--and I told her and, and my good friends the Obamas knew that I would not you know, retract anything that I had said because I was never a person to use ad hominems.  But I based--my campaign wasn't just for Hillary, it was for evolved politics and more engaged people in the political game.  So no I don't regret it.  I did campaign for him as I had promised on the Tom Joyner show ['Tom Joyner Morning Show'], for Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  But I was also asked by John McCain to campaign for him because when a large contingency of the Hillary women didn't want to go and get into the Obama's camp, I followed them out of loyalty with them when they flirted with John McCain to see what they would be doing, what they were saying, what the McCain camp had to offer and try to bring them back into the fold, though I was still lukewarm about it.  And he, his camp asked me to be a surrogate and of course I, I declined to do so, and campaigned for the rest of the 2008 for Barack Obama.
Speaker 1: Did you foresee, I mean did you--I guess you did not think he was going to win.  Didn't have a sense that, that this was--
Speaker 2: I really thought America was too racist to elect a black man.  In a way, I'll tell you what I told Hillary when she asked me why would I want to campaign for her since I had too done everything so black and I told her first I thought she was brilliant.  I knew when I was in New York City [New York, New York] if we had not left New York, I would have campaigned for her senatorial run.  I knew too that she, probably like I was, very instrumental in her husband's growth and some of the better things maybe she was partaker of that.  And I told her as a black woman from the South Side of Chicago and having been a victim of racism myself, that I thought that it was only time for a white woman to clean up a white man's mess.  And if they didn't let her husband Bubba, which basically the bluebloods consider Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], into the White House on the level in which they allowed every other president because of his southern and--ways and his very black cultural tastes, that they would not let this black man rule the way into which he wanted to because of the racism of America.  And that's the honest God truth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I thought that then she would say, you know because I had said what I said.  I mean I believed in her talents and skills, but she came back with something very okie dokie in her campaign called clean up America.  Get your buckets, your brooms and your mops.  But I have been a person that always--never a sycophant for anybody, even when I consulted for President Clinton for Haiti.  I challenged him, I challenged Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and the mayor, you know, and challenged Obama, and challenged the first lady [Michelle Obama] as well.
Speaker 1: So are you--are you satisfied with the performance of the Obama administration in terms of--
Speaker 2: I am, and saddened by the way in which they wouldn't allow him once he was in the office, to do the things in which this man who had dreams and could possibly make those dreams a reality for all of America.  I know he didn't run as a black president.  But I know that because his welfare was for all American citizenry and for those at the bottom of the totem pole, that we were in that mix at the bottom.  I think that he had a Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] agenda, which was inclusivity, but other people try to make it think it was for blacks only.  I am pleased with his efforts.
Story_ID: 665285
Speaker 1: In 2010, you know you have the Haitian earthquake.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is--now the Coalition of Hope Foundation you know went into Haiti.
Speaker 2: Yes they went into Haiti.
Speaker 1: Did you go with the coalition there?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did a lot of work.  Once they allowed people in, I went straight to Haiti 'cause I knew so many people, it was a second home to me.  I kind of imagined myself being the next [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham for Haiti.  You know I advocated for Haiti before the earthquake on more money coming to Haiti at the state department [U.S. Department of State].  I had started interacting with students, working with the businesswomen there, working with some of the women organizations as well.  And after the earthquake, I wanted to make sure that the billions of dollars that were allocated from the United States tax coffers were given to Haiti, to Haitians that had the wherewithal to build back their country and not to outside, non--NGOs [non-governmental organization] who would take the majority of the money for administrative cost and still treat Haitians like most--that sort of relationship with NGOs and the diaspora as pets.  So yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 'cause I know there were many groups competing for donations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were many groups--you mean within the United States for Haiti?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or within, yeah.
Speaker 1: And actually in Haiti too.
Speaker 2: And in Haiti too.  You know and people talk about, you know, the squalling of the money, of the misuse of the funds in Haiti.  But unless you go to Haiti and see some of the good things that were done--you know I remind people that even though they were waiting on the contributions from America, that the Haitian diaspora annually sent over a billion dollars to that country.  And they were not gonna be an Atlantis because we did not fulfill our promises in the international community of their pledges, that they were holding down the forts.  And unless you go to Haiti, you don't know that there are a wealth of wealthy Haitians who are businesspeople, they have hotels.  I mean it's not a poor Haiti.  I mean there are very--places, various places of course where poverty is rampant, but there are places like this in Haiti where you have a working class that though they're not the best toward their fellow citizens, really have and still are keeping that country stabilized, even with troubling politicians and governance, like anywhere.
Speaker 1: Are you encouraged that Haiti's going to re- rebound at some point?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think so because of working with a group of women like Nous Avancer [We Advance] and with Femmes en Democratie, I do interact with the president of Haiti [Michel Martelly] now and always I'm giving two cents.  I interact with the Haitian embassy--ambassador [Paul Altidor] as a friend of the embassy.  And I'm seeing a lot of these students of Haitian descent schooled in America and other places going back to the country to make it a better place for its citizenry and a greater partner in the world for its own economic development, and for the wherewithal of the growth of the country politically and socially as well.  It has a long way to go, but I think that some of the steps have been shortened.
Story_ID: 665286
Speaker 1: Yeah you were commenting off camera about the presidency of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the, that politics is local, really.  I mean you know the frus- some of the frustrations around President Obama's tenure have taught you some lessons about the nature of politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know even though I had a sense of ethnic pride as an African American woman with him being there, I also saw how the politics shifted, and that a lot of the districts where we could have congressional members of, of African American descent into [U.S.] Congress was being lessened.  I saw where a lot of the mayors' boundaries were eradicated and so when you don't have a real diversity in government, then whether you run as, as a black person for general population, you still don't have a voice to articulate the needs of--particularly of the African American community.  So, so when I say that power is local, I told people, "You know I'm all for the groom, but I'm thinking and am more concerned about the wedding party."  So I have supported the National Conference of Black Mayors individually, you know, and personally with my time and my money and advocate people to get--become more engaged in that.  Whether it's city councils because if we don't keep these organizations alive and we don't have black mayors and you're not gonna have a chance for black governors or black legislators within their own state, so power is local.  And I'm hoping that when the president is out of office that the same fervor that we had to elect him, that we really will concentrate on doing that in our communities, in our counties, in whatever the case may be, as you have a party [Republican Party] that's willing to destroy themselves not to be equal and just in America.  Okay.
Story_ID: 665287
Speaker 1: In 2012 you hosted the first ladies global summit.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was this?
Speaker 2: It was a, a group of women from--first ladies of Africa [African First Ladies Initiative] and they were--they came to mentor young women from the diaspora in Maryland.  And I helped to execute it, to make sure they had the young women from the various communities there.  Brought sanction, not sanctions, brought greetings from various dignitaries here in the Washington, D.C. area, made sure that they had an opportunity to interact with women leaders as well.  So it's my interaction with the first ladies to let them know how African Americans interact with one another, with the hope that they themselves will go back with that same sort of sorority minded in their country to do better with the young women and to create the same sort of summit building in their country.
Story_ID: 665288
Speaker 1: In 2013 you became a board member and international spokesperson for the Middle East Peace Working Group.  Now wh--what group is this?
Speaker 2: Well it's to address the Israeli Palestinian conflict and, and the question around the two state solution.  I joined that at the request of my good friend Harriet Fulbright [Harriet Mayor Fulbright], and a good friend was an aide to Congressman Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.], Joel Segals [sic. Joel Segal], to add my voice then as a minister with the ecumenical community to bring awareness to the Christian community that the conflict in the Middle East was not just a moment to which we should usher in an apocalyptic moment, but that we should try to come in with our love, you know, to try to intervene and see if ways in which there could be some sort of peace making in that region.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So w- were you able to do any--
Speaker 2: We have.  Right now, we have a more civil society engaged.  [U.S.] Congress is more engaged and, and in May we have some of the civil societies from Israel and Palestine coming in where we, we do communicate with the president's office in--around the Middle East peace conflict, that we have some influences on that.  And support, he has support from us in trying to as an outside, as a civil society, to do something to make that situation better resolved.
Story_ID: 665289
Speaker 1: You worked with the United Nations [UN] in 2014 on a special day for women entrepreneurs, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. That's coming up this fall where we're hi- highlighting women--entrepreneurs all over the world because we talk about going from non-profit to profit, and we want to show that back in the day when we had cottage industries, that that's when the women who had the leisure of being a housewife, when they were bored, becoming, you know, just taking care of their children, they found industry within their homes so they could be a good mother and also supply some form of economics within their--finances within their own home.  And I think that that's something that we have forgotten, so we want to encourage women to become entrepreneurs, to go away from non-profit, which is a form of begging because when you're entrepreneurial, then you're also social, you're political as well and you have more power and sense of self to advocate for yourself without being empowered by an outside agency because you have the financial means to make a difference.  Because collectively, money speaks louder than one's gender or one's ethnicity.  So we want to empower them to be- become greater entrepreneurs and to support their work as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What are some of the ways economic condition of women are being changed?  I mean the--
Speaker 2: Well through the Women's Global Initiative, when we are now going from non-profit to profit, what we call ourselves is a living organism.  We have a lot of women who are entrepreneurs that may need funding.  So we can do what we call collective, sort of consultancies that will build the wealth in there.  We also have--encouraging funding sources for women who have an invention or a product that they want to launch that we can invest in that product or in that service collectively and because women are the greater consumers, through our membership we can be your first customers to support your effort as we invest in it also.  So we're personally engrafted into that, that business and, and--or organization or service, or social output.
Speaker 1: I know before I left Chicago [Illinois], South Shore Bank [ShoreBank] was engaged in micro--for women in the so called third world.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's good but only up to a point.  We want to do better than the microfinancing because it still leaves you in a, in a, a--you're better off, but it doesn't eradicate the poverty.  We really want to do things on a more grander scale that would really eradicate some of the poverty on a, on a fast--you know instead of a teaspoon of loving, a tablespoon of loving, of eradicating poverty through economic development and creating consortiums of investments as well.
Story_ID: 665290
Speaker 1: This year you've been involved in a World Leaders Forum in--of Dubai [United Arab Emirates], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Going to be Dubai, yeah it's happening, um-hm.  I did extensive travel in the Middle East, and a lot of it has been peace work.  I was in a Syrian refugee camp in Zaatari in Jordan, in occupied territory of Lebanon on the border of Syria as well.  And one of the ministerial awakenings that I had is how akin and the suffering of our children in America is with the children all over the world.  And the suffering of, of, of women.  And part of the World Leaders Forum Dubai, which would be a collectively, a majority of women doing this, is just a peace initiative where we don't only meditate, but again, use--interact with women who have entree into policymaking to collaborate with other women and men who are likeminded to change the dynamics of the world to evolve humanity.  So it's a very spiritual endeavor more so than a financial or organizational one.  We're gonna--our goal is in 2012 they had over 100,000 followers.  Our goal is a million people to be engaged actively in the whole notion of peace and have conversation of peace like they did yesterday, the Day of Happiness [International Day of Happiness].  And to make it a reality by--through policy changes and challenging governors and governments to be better leaders as well.  So it's a call for leaders and for lay people to get more involved for real peace 'cause peace is not just when you sit in the sun.  You can have peace and still have starvation, still have women being abused based upon someone's notion of peace.  So it's about that awakening as well.
Story_ID: 665291
Speaker 1: From what I understand you're working towards--you're part of a group called Ready for Hillary [Ready Political Action Committee], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ready for Hillary.
Speaker 1: And what--that sounds like--
Speaker 2: Ready for Hillary.  Yeah, it's you know right now of course the lady [Hillary Rodham Clinton] has not made any indication, maybe a few winks and shoulder lifting, if she would run or not.  We're hoping that she will because she will be a great leader.  I think that's a consensus of the majority of the Democratic Party at this point.  And a lot of people in the--who are independent.  And so we're doing a lot of grassroots work, getting out--collecting funds and, and hoping that she will to prepare for the people to, to vote because I think that after Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration and some of the hardships that he suffered, the nation has suffered as well, economically.  Our school system is still you know, in a mess.  Unemployment rates are still high for certain communities.  But we didn't want people to lose their soul and to become complacent or lethargic on voting.  So we're--the Ready for Hillary is just to energize a maybe lulled base to become ready for when the campaign is on for 2016.
Story_ID: 665292
Speaker 1: You're doing a lot--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but, but what's next?  What, what are you thinking about doing?
Speaker 2: Well, all is--really is all encompassed with the Women's Global Initiative, traveling more and more to the Middle East.  Taking some of my African American sisters to the places that I have been on my solo journey.  Preparing for the African leaders summit [U.S. Africa Leaders Summit] that is happening in August.  Call back President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] to using the opportunity for the men who have caused so much problem on the continent for their constituencies to show them how leadership is done in America by example.  I'm hoping that the first ladies [African First Ladies Initiative] will come and so we can partner with them to see what they're actually doing in their countries as well so that we can learn from them and they can learn from us.  I, I've come to understanding with my own ignorance and a lot of people that I speak to who actually have not traveled in those countries, not as a tourist, but really don't know each other.  We can romanticize Africa all we want to, but until we're there on a real grassroots level, all we are doing is romanticizing Africa.  We don't really know Africa or its countries.  So that's what I'm hoping to do.  To know more about the various countries, the cultures, the ethnicities, the ways in which the women work there, and so that they can know more how we work, and that we can find some common ground to grow, you know, the diasporas of wealth and economic, economic wealth and equal, more partners and more just I think systems when you compare it to the EU [European Union], the Latino communities that the diaspora will come together in the ways in which the African Union hope through a confederation of the, of the continent to grow stronger.  Because African Americans, even the entrepreneurs, we don't have that many frontiers to grow.  In Africa, if all the other nations can come to Africa to grow, I think African Americans should prepare themselves when we say go back to Africa, that is not to go back to the motherland, but it's to go back to a place into which we have opportunity to be part of the business development of the continent.  And that we can use some of our ways of knowing things that have grown America in the ways in which they are going, Africa--some of the groups there.  That we can do this thing together and strengthen the diaspora.  That's one of my goals and aspirations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --for 2014, '15 [2015].
Story_ID: 665293
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Our children.  Really, when I look at the fact that, coming from Chicago [Illinois] and I, I travel to the Zaatari refugee camp [Jordan] and see hundreds of thousands of children without childhood.  I go to Haiti and see how the earthquake have made so many orphans.  And I look on--in the streets of, of my own City of Chicago where so many children have their blood spilled by the rampant of assault weapons in the country.  That I lament the fact that we have adults who would put our children in those situations.  That even when children in Connecticut, babies, are shot with assault weapons [at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Newtown, Connecticut] and it would not move the hearts of men of the NRA [National Rifle Association] to readdress the Second Amendment.  When the Second Amendment was written, the bear, or the right to bear arms, they were talking about muskets.  They weren't talking about Uzis and assault weapons and all the things in which we have now which is really for military usage, for combat in foreign lands against a real threat and enemy and not against one's self.  So it's the worst friendly fire ever to me.  And so whenever to me a child is not allowed a childhood, then that child at any moment, we may--in America we call them gang--gangbangers.  In the Middle East we'll call them future terrorists, you know.  In other countries we just call them lost souls.  So for me the biggest thing that we must do is better ways in which to integrate our children into a better society, which means we have to be better adults and better leaders.  And also my concern over the education system with the charter school versus the public school system, it's public monies that are fulfilling the needs of charter school.  I don't, I don't think we should, should make a difference between who gets a charter education, a school education and not.  And also for all the American citizens to realize that at the end of the day, despite our differences, whether it's race, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation or age or generation, we're all Americans and we all have put something in this country.  And that we should allow every American the opportunity to have--the opportunity to have this so called pursuit of happiness in every form and fashion to which that individual think they are entitled to without restriction and without biases.
Story_ID: 665294
Speaker 1: Yeah when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there anything major that you would do over again or tweak or something, if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There are--there are a couple of things.  I think one is definitely in--I wish I had a little bit more of my own history, before I did.  You know I mean I wish I had--if you're talking about personally or my situation.  I think that I, I--if it was afforded me, then it missed me.  But I really wish I had a better honing of, of my culture before I was able to save another person.  I really wish I had known more.  And personally, I wish that I had been able to politically I think I wouldn't have changed the--my, my campaigning for Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  But I wish that I had an opportunity to have more time with the people that I met on the campaign trail to really speak up more about the America that I learned to know, and that that campaign afforded me.  So much so that I am writing a book about the--my trail on the 2008--because when I look at what happ- is happening between the GOP [Republican Party] and the Democratic Party is that I found America black, white and Hispanic.  That we're not allowed to even see that really is not engaged in this whole fracturing that we have in the country.  So I wish I had spent more time in those places that I had just consciously said I never wanted to go there.  I wish I had of gone there sooner.  Not for the campaign, but for my own growth as an American citizen to speak better about what is happening in our, our, our land for other people as well.  And maybe spent more time in making sure my children [Mwata Dyson, Michael Eric Dyson II and Maisha Dyson Daniels] are now global citizens, but wish I had the funding to, to have allowed them to travel more outside the country on a personal level.  But other than that, I think it's just being a better citizen and being more--I wish I had been more informed at a, at an earlier age than learning everything.  I think most of my life really has been by trial and error.  I stumbled onto my life and I stumbled onto my growth, that it wasn't planned out.  That I didn't have that opportunity to have that five, that ten year plan.  But I'm, I'm grateful for the trial and error.  I'm grateful for the stumbling.  I'm gra- I'm grateful for the falling into the situations that I have.  And I really love my life.  So there's no real regret.  I mean I love the poverty, I love the fact that my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] liked to be a numbers runner.  I'm glad at the way in which she loved to party.  I'm glad of the way in which I was able to have that experience of poverty because it allowed me to understand what Haiti was like.  That I didn't become snobbish or insensitive.  I'm glad the way in which I had to learn to design.  So I, I love my life.  So if that's too much that I'm, I'm you know, regretful for, and what really helped me to say that and seemingly arrogantly and I think would create the pause.  I was with [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll last year at the Leading Women Defined summit hosted by the BET [Black Entertainment Television].  And she lived a stellar life.  She lived a problematic life.  She had problems with her daughter [Suzanne Kay].  You know she writes about it and she talks about it.  And they asked her that sense of, sensitive question.  Is there anything that you regret?  And she paused for a split second and said, "No, I don't regret anything.  I don't want to go back.  I loved my life.  My daughter may have a problem.  She may need therapy, you know, the lovers that I had that wanted to have me longer may regret that I didn't stay longer.  But no regrets."  And I think I'm pretty much there.  I really have no regrets.  I love everything about my life.  I just wish I had known a lot more, traveled faster than I did.  I think I was a late person out the gate because of poverty and the educational system, and--but glad that I was able to go to the schools that diversified my life without the richness that I can't even imagine, and how I would use that diversity later on in my life, that primed me for today.
Story_ID: 665295
Speaker 1: I take it at some point you reunited with your father, right?  Your biological father.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: How did that take place, and?
Speaker 2: Well you know he floated in and out of my life and as he aged, my stepmother [Amanda McWhorter Dukes] died and my father had showing of Alzheimer's.  And I was the one who was in between marriages at the time and had the more leisure to take care of my father.  And so I end up taking care of him at the latter part of his life, you know, because he didn't have anyone else.  I felt like if I were saving at that point everybody else that I owed it to him as a child of God.  Now that's my biological father.  So we made amends.  I spent time with him.  During my high school years had some interactions with him.  It was never as regal as I would love to because I really owed that to my stepfather [Matthew Smith].  In fact in my anthologies in which I wrote, I wrote one called, 'Is My Daddy Here?' [Marcia Dyson], which talked about the heartbreak when I actually skipped kindergarten when I found out that my father lived not far from me.  He made me think as if he lived far away.  And so I confronted his girlfriend.  And she told me that--I said, "Is my father here?"  And she said, "Well who's your father?"  And I said, "Clarence Earl Dukes [Clarence Dukes]."  And she said, "Well Clarence Earl Dukes doesn't have any children."  I said, "Yes he does, I'm his baby.  And you tell Clarence Earl Dukes that you know, I came to see him," and she slammed the door in my face.  And I sat on 317 West 47th Street--43rd Street crying in my poodle skirt.  And when my stepfather stepped in, he was regal to me but because I wanted this love from my father, I could not call Doc, which we called my stepfather, daddy until my father died, at my father's funeral.  But Doc really saved my family.  He took my mother [Rosa Fields Smith] who was nine years older, seven, six children, seven children.  He was the person who really let us know that college education was valuable.  He made our life grand by taking us just to get--I cry about it because I can't think that, you know I tell my sisters, "Where would we have been if this man with a middle class sensibility had not come into mama's life?"  We would have probably still been in poverty, may have still been in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  Though we--Beverly [Beverly Dukes], my sister graduated from grammar school when she was eleven years old and I had this love for learning, I loved science and math.  But he honed it in for us, you know.  So even though I end up taking care of my father, the man I call Doc was my daddy, you know and so I was fulfilled in that sort of thing.  If that makes sense or not, but yeah.  But I was reconciled to my father and out of my Christian heart more so than my relation to him biologically because he was not a kind man to us.
Story_ID: 665296
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children, now.
Speaker 2: Ah, my son Dr. Mwata Omotio Dyson [Mwata Dyson].  He's living in New York [New York] now, he's an anesthesiologist.  He has a master's of public health policy from Columbia University [New York, New York].  He has a certification for wellness, and he also has a podcast called 'Living Well' by Dr. Mwata Dyson.  And he's the father of two beautiful sons, Maxum [ph.] and Mosi [Mosi Dyson].  And they live in Brooklyn [New York].  And my daughter Maisha [Maisha Dyson Daniels] is a Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate.  Went to Whitney Young High School [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Was an actress, a dancer, she also has a, a master's degree from Columbia University in education.  She's now launching a global sports recruitment company that's online to deal with the rise of sports as a way of diplomacy that is international, especially on the continent, and getting young students from the continent here to America for, for sports.  And I have a very delightful son called Michael Eric Dyson II, that was birthed with me when he was twelve years old--he came to live with Michael [Dyson's husband, Michael Eric Dyson] and I--who is in Atlanta [Georgia], who's also in the sports arena, into the journalism and stats for sports.
Story_ID: 665297
Speaker 1: Now if you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: My work with women and my peace initiatives.  You know I, I just said that I never plan anything.  But just yesterday I said, "You know what?  I have a dream."  There's--of all the awards that I've been given, I used to not even want a reward and refused a lot of them, just started accepting them later when I found out how important they were to get into certain places where I wanted to serve.  I want to win a Nobel Peace Prize.  I do.  For my legacy have not been fulfilled, but I do have a aim.  I really want to be an instrument of peace.  And that peace being economic development, real social justice, real equality, and educational opportunities and security for everybody in this world.  I think that when I look at my experiences in various forms of religion, that that one God has never changed.  And the messes that we're in, tsunamis, earthquakes, tornadoes, anything that is natural, we can't--our arms are too short to box with God.  But this other mess, it's a Sojourner Truth moment.  She said you know this mess is manmade mess and women, we can clean up the mess.  I think that the messes if made by man and that with a change of heart, that peace is possible.  So I want to be an instrument of peace and show the ways in which collectively with other women, something I think I will share with other women, that we can do this.  That it will make a mark on this, on this earth.  That's the legacy that I want to have.  Nothing else.  And with that, I don't have to dream for my grandchildren because they will be benefit of those efforts.  But not only them, I want it for every child I saw in the Syrian refugee camp.  Every child I saw in Cite Soleil of Haiti and every child on the street corner in the urban spaces of America.  I want that peace to be beneficial for them too.  So that propels me to do the work, and that's the legacy that I really desire to have; that I was a peacemaker.
Story_ID: 665298
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  My god, I feel ancient.  No.
Speaker 1: No, all right.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now this is--the last question is almost just like legacy, but it's a little different.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How or by whom?  Is--I think that I'd like to be remembered as an unselfish person.  A person who really did try to give unselfishly.  And that's different from the legacy of wanting to be peace, that--and that I was a person who was (air quotes) a choir singer, and not a person who wanted to be by themselves or just have the solo limelight.  So yeah, I hope that they remember me as a choir singer.  That I tried to help the people who were trying to do some good things and never wanted the platform by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 665299
Speaker 1: My mother and biological father, Rosa Elizabeth Smith [Rosa Fields Smith] and Clarence Earl Dukes [Clarence Dukes], 1948.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Don't know the gentleman, but Senator Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and myself Marcia Dyson [HistoryMaker Reverend Marcia Dyson], and to the right Sheila Olgen [ph.] at the Essence Music Festival when Hillary announced her--
Speaker 2: Candidacy?
Speaker 1: Candidacy.
Speaker 2: In 2007.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], 2007.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Janet Langhart Cohen, myself and the prime--former prime minister of Haiti, Michele Pierre-Louis.
Speaker 2: My mother Rosa Elizabeth Smith, and my stepfather Dr. Matthew Perkins Smith [Matthew Smith], 1993.
Speaker 1: In the center, myself and Harriet Fulbright [Harriet Mayor Fulbright] in the white hair and the women of ColorComm [ColorComm: Women of Color in Communications], a consortium of women that I mentor in communications and marketing.
Speaker 2: My son and now the Dr. Mwata Dyson and before he was a congressman, [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] in 1989.
Speaker 1: That's my kindergarten school picture, and I'm at the very left.
Speaker 2: And that's Francis Parker.
Speaker 1: Francis Parkman School [Francis Parkman Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] before the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] was built.
Speaker 2: My husband, Michael Eric Dyson and my former boss, the Reverend Jesse Jackson, Jr. [sic. HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] at--this was taken in Dallas, Texas in 2001.
Speaker 1: Former mayor of City of Chicago [Illinois], Richard M. Daley at the announcement of my appointment as the public information officer of the City of Chicago in 1990.
Speaker 2: That's Marcia Louise Dyson as a baby, three months old, 1951.
Speaker 1: Parkman School.
Speaker 2: My second grade school, I'm second from the end on the right.  Parkman School.
Speaker 1: Joe Gardner [Joseph Gardner], former Department of Streets and Sanitation [sic. Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago] I believe.  Harold, Mayor Harold Washington, myself, I forget the gentleman on the end.  But this is during the Chicago's marathon [Chicago Marathon], City of Chicago, 1987 I believe.
Speaker 2: Is that Gil Walker?
Speaker 1: Gil Walker, yes.
Speaker 2: That's what I thought. Midnight Basketball.
Speaker 1: Midnight Basketball.
Speaker 2: Myself, Tommy Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] the famous gospel singer, The Staple Singers, Mayor Daley at a tribute to Thomas Dorsey with [HistoryMaker] Reverend Clay Evans at the very end on the right, during the Chicago Gospel Festival [Chicago Gospel Music Festival], City of Chicago, Grant Park.  That was in 1993 I believe.  I'm sorry 1991, had to be '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's me as a teenager in 1969 or '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who were you modeling for?
Speaker 2: Well this was [HistoryMaker] Ozier Muhammad, Elijah Muhammad's grandson was a photographer, so he took that photo.
Speaker 1: That's Marcia Louise Dyson at six years old on 54th [Street] and Wentworth [Avenue] before the Dan Ryan was built.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's Rosa Parks, Mayor Daley and Mrs. Emmett Till [sic. Mamie Till Mobley] at the street dedication of Emmett Till [Emmett Till Road; 71st Street] in 1991 when I was working as public information officer for the City of Chicago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here's the last one.
Speaker 2: And my eighth grade graduation picture.  I'm the fourth from the end on the right, Dix- Arthur Dixon School [Arthur Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
