Story_ID: 21352
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interview today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Georgia, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, M, for Mae, M-A-E, Dunston, D-U-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Norfolk, Virginia, August the 4th, 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professor, Microbiology at Howard University, College of Medicine and Director, founding director, in fact, of the National Human Genome Center here at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Good question.  May the 4th (laughter), 2012, okay.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are seated in the director's office of the National Human Genome Center, which is located on the sixth floor of the Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] Cancer Center.
Story_ID: 21353
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.  And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I love Chinese food (laughter), favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color is black (laughter), got a lot of black.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love, I love spring.  I love the springtime of the year.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not a destination, a type of setting. I love waterfront, oceanfront settings.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying, "All things are possible to the one that believes."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21354
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  And then we're gonna try to put 'em together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mom's full name, Rosa Anna Barton, B-A-R-T-O-N.  By the way, Rosa is R-O-S-A, Anna, A-N-N-A.  Barton was her maiden name, B-A-R-T-O-N and married name, Dunston, D-U-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mom was born May 23rd, 1923.  Yes--
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: Oh, her place.  Princess Anne, Princess Anne County, Virginia, Virginia.  Princess Anne County is actually Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Although I'm a geneticist, I really have not done deep history for my family, so it's just very superficial recall.  I basically know those that I experienced life with.  I remember my mom's mom, grandmother, because she was living with one of my mom's sisters.  And I remember her well in terms of sitting in her rocking chair, okay.  She, and that was really what I remember most.  She was like, kind of kept to her room and just sat to the window in her chair and rocked.  Now, that was my mom.  I didn't know my grand dad on the mom's side at all.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Ida, her name was Ida, I-D-A.
Speaker 1: Ida Barton or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, right, Ida Barton.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you say you didn't know your grandfather--
Speaker 2: On my mom's side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side, yeah.  But did you hear anything about him?  Do you know what his name was and what he did?
Speaker 2: Nothing that I really recall vividly.  There wasn't a lot of conversation.  Like I said, I didn't hear--my mom was not one who was telling stories about her childhood or dad, and I don't recall that we inquired much.  And like I said, I'm not really, had not really made much attempt, so, to delve into what wasn't present at the time.
Speaker 1: Do you think that, now, do you think, did they do farming or did he do some other kind of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they, they basically grew up, like I said in the rural part, actually rural part of Virginia.  This is what I was told, at this Princess Anne County.  And so I recall my mom's--of course, I know my mom's nuclear family, and then some of the cousins, my mom's siblings' children. So I knew some of the cousins, and they lived in the area.  And it was a typical kind of rural, in the sense that they lived off of farming and probably did odds and ends types of jobs that go along with community life in the area.  But I didn't have real ties with my--
Speaker 1: Did they own their own land?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I doubt it, in terms of my grandparents, in terms of the grandparents.  They were probably more like sharecroppers, worked the land, lived on it, but I'm not--I don't, I definitely don't recall any history like I do with some other folks in terms of land that the children treasured or, no, no.  We're just different from some--
Speaker 1: All right.  So are there any stories from that side of the family about the end of Slavery [1865] or Reconstruction [1865-1877] or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not gonna be very good for those kind of stories, no.  And, again, on my mom's side, we're talking about; I just don't really have any deep history on, on my grandparents' generation or before then.  I don't, I don't have any history, really, there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 21355
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Rosa Anna Barton] talk about what it was--well, first of all, did she grow up in Princess Anne County on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think, you know, the stories on that side at least, they grew up there, and they--I guess the stories, kind of, that I do have, take up more with meeting my dad and when they moved to the, to Norfolk [Virginia], where I was born.  And then the life and the family from that point is where my memories really go.  As I said, they were not persons, neither of my parents, mom nor dad, were historian types talking about the family from a history point of view, but just from every-day living experiences and who was doing what and what was the lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't have to be anything groundbreaking.  But, you know, it might be a story passed down about a dog or a mule or owing somebody some money, or it could be anything.
Speaker 2: Well, I have some stories, but it's from my parents' generation.  It wouldn't be from their parents' generation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I say, honestly, I just don't--if we switched to my father's side, I know a bit more about his parents and there was a mother and a father there, but I don't want to jump as much--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in terms of your mother's side, now, did she--what did she say about growing up in the country?  Did she say anything about that?  Or did she have a chance to go to school when she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to school, but she didn't finish high school.  I think she probably, maybe seventh or eighth grades might be the extent of her school.
Speaker 1: And did she have any special talents or anything or anything that she liked to do that she talked about?
Speaker 2: Take care of people.  My mom, she, she was the caretaker in our, in the family, both sides.  That's her legacy, home.  She loved home.  She loved her children.  She loved taking care of her children.  And we literally, were her life, and she was a, a, a homemaker, just a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Did she have any dreams about doing something else at any point in her life?  Did she think that she--?
Speaker 2: I, you know, my mom, and actually, as I got older, I discussed some of those things with her.  She was not a person who expressed any ambition beyond what she had.  I mean her ambition was to take care of her children, take care of her home, in the best way she could, under the circumstances.  And she would do the things there, which included the jobs that I knew that she had.  She worked to add income to take care of the things that we needed.  That really was her existence, our care (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21356
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Ulyses, U-L-Y-S-E-S Grant, G-R-A-N-T, Dunston, D-U-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind his name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my dad is a character.  No, there's no story that has passed down with regard to his name other than they chose names that represented figures that they knew.  No, that's interesting, and I never really inquired.  I don't know of anyone else in the family whose name was Ulyses.  So, it's interesting.
Speaker 1: So, Ulyses Grant [sic, Ulysses S. Grant], I mean now, he's the, he's the commander of the Union Army.  So--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It indicates at least that he was, that whoever named him identified with the Union Army in the Civil War [referring to American Civil War of 1861-1865].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a good point, and it's something that I'm surprised that I really never queried.  I guess it was just that I didn't, I didn't have that kind of curiosity about how names and who aside from folk that were named after folk in the family.
Story_ID: 21357
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your dad's [Ulyses Grant Dunston] date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Dad was born September 25th, and also 1923.
Speaker 1: Now, was he born in the same area?
Speaker 2: Kind of the same area, but his, I attribute to Moyock, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-O-Y-O-C-K, and North Carolina, and we used to go down there, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's close to that part of Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, close to the Virginia, North Carolina line.  That's why I was even toying with Princess Anne; Princess Anne was Virginia, Virginia Beach area.  But dad, they are North Carolinians.
Story_ID: 21358
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's [Ulyses Grant Dunston] side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: He had lots of siblings (laughter), and but, in terms of my grandparents on his side, I remember both mom or grandma and granddad on his side.  And for our family, I guess, that brought in the color distinction.  His mom, we called her mother, mama dear and papa dear.  Those were their call names.  And she was very fair, with fine hair, but, but considered black.  And papa dear, it was always so funny 'cause he was blue black.  He was very dark, very dark.  And she was very light (laughter).  And so we had a whole spectrum of colors in the family.  And during that time, too, you know, who had good hair and stuff like that.  Those were kinds of sensitivities.  But I remember them because we used to go down to country.  It's the kids.  And we called it "go down to country".  And his dad definitely was a farmer.  I remember his farming.  I remember the, the farm and his behind the plows and the horses and chickens and, and I can, I can see their land, their big front porch that we would sit on.  Now, here's her story where we would go down there.  And it was a country road, and we would sit on the front porch at night and they would tell ghost stories about growing up and coming down that road.  But I remember that house, that country house with the big front porch and the big yard and the farmland around and the potbelly stove in the area and the connection way between the living and the kitchen.  And grandma, and cooking was a cooking, family, eating, church.  Those were part of the lifestyle and knew something about the family in that area.  And the other big story with, with grandma, when grandma dear, mama dear was her child.  My dad had, I was told at one time, there were eighteen of them, two sets of twins.  One set died.  But I think the most repeated number where we actually had done some count up some times is sixteen.  But there were two sets of twins, like I said, but I think the word was one set died, either at birth or born--there was no period of virtual life.  But one of the sets of twins actually, over time, came to live with us, so I knew about that set.  But he had many siblings (laughter), lots of Dunston's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was kind of like she was, that was her life, having babies (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  So are any stories on that side of the family about the end of Slavery [1865] or Reconstruction [1865-1877] or any of the--
Speaker 2: No, the story on that side is that, now, the deep history there is the mother of my, of mama dear, her mom, who actually lived quite a while and moved--I knew her during the period of her life, was full-blooded Indian [Native American].  And, and my memories of her again was when she was really just, she was living with my, with my grandma, her mother.  And I just remember her because she just had this beautiful long hair; I mean down to like her butt and just braided and comb it for her.  And that was about all.  And she, every day, I mean her meal was, she had a slice of bread, a frank and an egg.  And that, I just remember that 'cause here's someone that ate the same thing every day.  It was her staple.  But she was, she was always, the story, of course, is that she was full-blooded Indian.
Speaker 1: Did they say what kind of Indian she was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that, and it might have been some mention of Cherokee [referring to Native American tribe], but I really wouldn't put any, any weight on it.  I don't know whether I just heard Cherokee more or that that really got tied to her.  But she was, she had the high cheekbones, and she was very fair, she was fair.  But that long hair that they used to comb, my mom or grandma would comb and roll it up was what I remember of her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did she have any sense of being an Indian herself?  Did she talk about it at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember even conversations with her.  So I, what I remember, like I said, was her meal and that, her room that she pretty much stayed in, and her hair, and that she was an Indian.  But I don't recall that I ever even talked with her.  It wasn't like I sat at her knee because it was, she's, like I said, she was the mother of my grandmother, and I had some interaction, obviously, with my grandmother.  But she was, my great grandmother was only with us a while, I mean only with my overlap a short while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was up there in age, though.
Story_ID: 21359
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did your father [Ulyses Grant Dunston] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: Dad did not finish high school either.  But I think he probably, a grade or two more than mom [Rosa Anna Barton].  Maybe it's tenth grade.  But dad was super smart (laughter).  He's a very, very, very intelligent man.  He could do, he was truly gifted.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, for instance, what would he do that you were impressed with?
Speaker 2: Well, first, he was certainly good with his hands and his mind.  In terms of his hands, he could do all kinds of carpentry.  I mean we grew up in very modest surroundings.  There were stories, like I remember, I remember the Christmas that he paneled the house with cardboard (laughter).  I mean he saved boxes, you know, and I remember how he just cut the squares and what have you and paneled the whole house with cardboard.  And I was very much a kid.  But later on, he also paneled our house with wood, I mean, as we moved up.  So he was very good with his hands in carpentry.  He did, just did a number of things in the house.  We, he had several jobs.  I remember several jobs over the course of time.  The ones that had length was a driving job where he would drive for, what they called the "tally," where you go and pick up dead animals, different places.  I knew he did that for a while, but his longest job was as a cook.  And, and that also brings some of his other talents in the sense that he, cooked for a barbeque firm.  And he ran the kitchen, and he ran; he literally ran the operation.  It was clear that the owner pretty much entrusted the management of that business to him.  He was--that company is still around today, Dowdy's Barbeque.  He was Mr. Dowdy, he was known as "Mr. Dowdy."
Speaker 1: So it's Dowdy's Barbeque.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And which means we had lots of barbeque and lots of other kinds of (laughter) meat.  But he pretty much managed that.  There were some other kinds of things that he did that I don't know if I can go on the record as saying (laughter), but it showed his ability to manage monies and incomes.
Speaker 1: Now, all this was--
Speaker 2: And he was good with numbers.  He was good with numbers.
Story_ID: 21360
Speaker 1: So this was in Norfolk [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: This was in Norfolk.  This is during my growing up years, and I remember.  And he was quite a lady's man too in the sense that he; he was a member of a social club.  And, and he ran with the guys at, in his group at that time.  You know, their social club was the ones who were, "with it", I guess that would be the term, 'cause I would remember their socials, and what have you.  And I guess it was, it was fashionable if you're one of the guys, you have your home, and you have (laughter), your other folk too.  So he was pretty, just a young man out there working.  You know, he liked the good, what was considered the "good life," drinking, smoking, the city life.  They had moved from the country to the city now, we're in Norfolk.  And, and I remember, like I said, I remember that, that he enjoyed the social life.  And, and we had some experiences that were tied to that.  But dad was really committed to whatever he was doing.  So he had a brush with, he had a brush with the law.  And also, but I think the, the biggest thing was, he also had an experience where he almost drowned.  And he was one of those persons where he certainly shares with us and had a life to back it up, where we were brought up in a church environment.  Pretty much our home was school, church and, and the family, the neighborhood.  And so we had lots of uncles.  I had lots of aunts that were church folk, his sisters and what have you.  But when he had his brush with the law and was drowning one time--he shares this story.  He told the Lord if he would save him, he would live for Him.  And my dad was one of those persons that I can bear witness to that was an instant turnaround.  I mean he drank, and he would get quite out of control in that.  But when he told the Lord if the Lord would save him from going to jail and like I said, and he was drowning, and he said he could see himself going down for the--
Speaker 1: Where was he drowning at and--
Speaker 2: It was, I think it was Elizabeth River [Virginia] off the pier [sic, Hampton Roads harbor] and what have you.  And he does share the story that he saw the Lord just reach in and lift him up (chuckle).  I don't know how he got--maybe then to the shore or what.  But he shares that he made the confession that if the Lord saved him, he would live for Him.  And he turned around like night and day, started going to church (laughter), and then, like I said, dad was the kind that gave himself fully.  I mean he got, he stopped drinking instantly.  I mean he stopped drinking overnight, and he wasn't a teetotaler either, and gave himself fully to studying the bible.  He loved studying, as I said, he loved studying the bible.  Some of my treasured memories of my father are times that I would come home.  And we would sit to the table and really study the scriptures together; always talking about the word says and had a real love for the scriptures, went right up.  Anyone that encounters him in the church, he was one of the kind that would know more than the pastor.  But his knowledge and his sincerity brought him an immediate recognition with the clergy.  And they would be invited, deacon, prayer band, what have you.
Story_ID: 21361
Speaker 1: Was he a Baptist [referring to denomination of Christianity]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, we grew up Baptist, and--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church, the longest one, First Baptist Church in Berkley [referring to a town in Norfolk, Virginia].  And that was the first one where (laughter), where, of course, from his study and the Lord speaking to him, in his first run-in that he wanted to know more than the pastor so (laughter), finally, (laughter), okay, that separated.  Then I had an aunt who had a church--
Speaker 1: Oh, they, okay, so he split from that church because he had a run-in with the pastor?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And then he went with my--my aunt had a church.  Now, this was CGIC, Church of God in Christ.  And she was really, 'cause she had come and become a minister at a time where clearly, it wasn't as fashionable then, I don't know if it still is, but she would share her difficulties and how the bishop at the time, Bishop Willis, had really stood by her in getting her church and keeping her church.  Anyway, dad went over there.  And he gave himself to that 'cause dad also was quite a photographer.  He liked taking pictures, and he would get the cameras and the videos and what have you.  He also was, what is it?  I was saying the camera, so he did videos for the church.  Oh, I was gonna say, and in his earlier days too, he was the music master.  He would spin the records at the parties and what have you that he would go to.  So, he was the DJ.  So he had that side skill.  But the video, when videos came out, taking pictures and so he became that historian, if you will, for the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was this his sister's church?
Speaker 2: Sister-in-law, my--
Speaker 1: Sister-in-law, okay.
Speaker 2: --um-hum, sister-in-law, my mom's brother's wife.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of it again?
Speaker 2: New Jerusalem, New Jerusalem Church of God in Christ in Norfolk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21362
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you said there was a story that your parents [Rosa Anna Barton and Ulyses Grant Dunston] told about how they met and got to Norfolk [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Well, what I was earlier saying is most of what I recall of my story is from their meeting, as opposed to their lives before their meeting.  That's what I meant.  Now, they met, and the story that's told when we ask, "How did you guys meet?"  (Laughter).  It sounds like it was kind of like, maybe like a little social gathering or what have you, where the kids were.  And, and the story is that, mom--'cause we asked who saw who first and what have you.  And, of course, mom says that dad eyed her, but he affirms that he, the story is, he asked who she was.  And, and I guess it was one of these things where--this is not part of any really strong history there, but one of, dad knew the brother or someone that knew my mom in the family and was able to tell him who, who she was.  And he wanted to buy her a soda.  That's, that the one continuous thing.  He, he offered to buy her a pop, as it was called.  And she, during the--who wants to buy me a pop?  Why he wants to buy me a pop?  So they supposedly had met over a soda pop, okay (laughter).  And--
Speaker 1: About how old were they then?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I suppose they were in their late teens, maybe, 17, 18, something like that.  I think they were probably both out of school.  I don't, the story of their meeting is not in school.  It is like some little gathering the kids were having.  And I don't recall that it was at a store, but I do recall that he wanted, he offered to buy her a pop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so she saw this fellow and he saw her, and then they start seeing each other afterwards.  And they, they married, and then moved to Norfolk.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father serve in the War, World War II [1939-1945]?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did not.  He, of the young men at that time, he did not, and was--he was the youngest.  He was youngest of the brothers.  He was the youngest of the, like I said, the large family.  But, no, he did not serve in the War.
Speaker 1: So about what year did they go to Norfolk, would you say?  We know it was before '44 [1944] because that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, 'cause my brother was born in, in Princess Anne in that area, but I think my other two--and I have two sisters.  And I think each of; all of us were born there.  So I would say probably about 1939, around that time, in '39 [1939], '40 [1940].
Story_ID: 21363
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their attitudes and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My physical features, I think I look more like my dad [Ulyses Grant Dunston], in body build like my dad.  Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: What about otherwise?
Speaker 2: I mean people tell me I look like my mom [Rosa Anna Barton], but you, but I, when I recall now, especially as he got older, there were characteristics that he had that I clearly, like say, will say, I got that from his side of the family, kind of thing.  But they were both about the same coloration, and they didn't have like strong, distinctive, separate features.  My mom, for example, had a kind of little smaller sized, little curved nose whereas my dad had more flared and that's the kind of thing, I mean like when I say that I tend to have that more from his side.  And my other sister, for example, you can see the difference.  She had that same little, kind of smaller, curved nose as our mom.  So, at least I see in myself physical features like him.  For, also my dad's intellectual curiosity and his reading love had us working crossword puzzles and doing things.  I mean his; he gravitated towards the intellectual side of things.  Like I say, he was kind of a, clearly a jack-of-all trades, and one of those stories I can tell you one time 'cause money was not that, always fluent or running, available.  But dad was the kind where if he had it, you could get it, but you couldn't be sure that he was gonna have it when you needed it.  But mom was the steady one literally putting money under the rugs and hiding money, and when you would need something for school, you know, like I said, if dad had it, you had it.  But you couldn't be sure that he was gonna have it 'cause he, you know, had his lifestyle and things that he was doing.  But one time our electricity was turned off, and included in dad's carpentry skills, musical talents, mental intellect, he also--and I know this, went up the telegram pole and turned our lights on from the, from the (laughter) electrical pole.  And mom went, brother, you're gonna--'cause they called him brother, you're gonna hurt yourself and what have you.  But, "I know what I'm doing".  He turned our lights on.  He turned our lights on (laughter).  That's the story that, but to me, it was another example of just how versatile, shall I say, and the skills--
Speaker 1: And resourceful.
Speaker 2: Resourceful, industrious and knowing what wires and what to do 'cause he did electrical things around the house too.  And this is what I'm saying; the man could repair electrical things.  He was very good with the carpentry.  He could handle numbers in business aspects of his, his job.  And he loved study, and he loved study.  He had, he was the book man.  My mom, on the other hand, like I said, caring, gentle, nurturing, I mean for her, we were her children.  We were her life.  We were her life.  She worked as a, as a dishwasher most of the time that I can recall.  But it was totally to have some money to help with the things the kids needed for school and to pay bills and the house.  She, a quiet kind of woman, but very firm in terms of the mother kind of thing when she says do something.  And she was the typical one that you might get a smack from her, but the word was, "You wait till your dad comes home", you know.  And I do have some memories of when dad comes home, and the report was made of what had been done or not done (laughter).  And, yeah, I actually have some of those stories.  You go outside, and you pick your own whip (laughter).  And, and he would skin it, and the, and I certainly can agree with some of those refrains, "You gonna do it anymore?"  "No, sir".  "You gonna do it anymore?"  "No, sir."  I never believed that it hurt them more than it (laughter) hurt me, but I didn't have a lot, I must confess, I didn't have a lot of whippings, but certainly, whipping was not beyond instilling that you are not to do that.  One of the whippings that I actually remember was the time that the kids, we, as the kids, went out into the street, actually, to meet my mom at the bus stop.  But we were told to stay home.  We were told to stay home.  But we decided we were gonna go and meet her at the bus stop.  And, and, and we got a whipping for that.  And you don't do what we tell you not to do, you know.  But I, I don't remember a lot of whippings, but I do remember a couple where I have, I can share my experience and say, yeah, I remember those, "Go pick your own poison, (laughter), go pick your own switch."
Story_ID: 21364
Speaker 1: So do you have an earliest memory of Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a good; I mean I have thought about that before.  You know, my earliest memory, and sometimes I wonder do I remember it or was this one told to me so much.  But I have a deaf mute sister.  I have a sister who, for all I know, she was either deaf very early on 'cause we didn't check into that either.  I don't recall that my mom knew about mumps or having any reason that it occurred at birth.  But my whole history is her deaf.  And the earliest story that I remember and that has been told to me is the house where we were living, it was not paved.  And there were horses at that time that were carrying the--
Speaker 1: Ice or--
Speaker 2: Ice, oh, yeah, but I was sitting in the street, this is what they were saying, I was sitting in the street eating dirt, they like to tell me that, sitting there in my diaper.  So I was really young.  And the horse was coming, and all the kids ran off--they tell me this all the time.  And I, they tell me so much, I think I remember it, but I do know I was supposed to be in diapers, so that was (laughter) very early on.  I was sitting in the street eating dirt, minding my own business and the horse was coming.  All the other kids ran off and my, my deaf sister turned around, saw the, saw the horse coming, and the violent thing is, she was also--and she's just two or three, a couple years older.  But she ran back from all the kids, and she rescued me.  She pulled me out of, out of the way of the danger.  And that story, that's one of the early stories that's told.  The other kids ran, and they're screaming and what have you.  She couldn't hear any of that, but when she turned around, and she saw me sitting there, she went and got me and pulled me out of the way of danger.
Story_ID: 21365
Speaker 1: All right, now, can you name your brothers and sisters and tell us where you fit in the lineup?
Speaker 2: The oldest is my brother.  His name is Joe Thomas Dunston.  And then, it's my deaf sister, the sister that's deaf mute.  Her name is Shirley Maxine Dunston.  And then the next is my sister, Rosa.  Her name Rosa Lee Dunston.  She's married, Jefferson.  And then myself.  There were three girls and one boy.  The boy is the oldest and I'm the youngest of the four, and the youngest girl.  And that's kind of the lineup.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always--now, what side of town did you live or did you--was there like a separate black community in Norfolk [Virginia] where you lived?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I grew up in, definitely segregated times.  And we lived in a section called Berkley, the Berkley part of Norfolk, which was across the river, as I say, the Elizabeth River between what was considered Norfolk proper or downtown Norfolk.  Berkley would be today described as a suburb (laughter), although it was the country part.  And, and the area, there were homes in the area, were spaced apart where I was born.  But before, before that, before the house where I was born that I remember that area, my parents lived on Liberty Street, which was like the Main Street in the Berkley section.  And they lived in an apartment.  When they moved from the country to the city, they lived in an upstairs apartment on like the main street.  And we do have some stories there, of course, in my parents' young days because we lived across from the movie theater.  And my mom loved going to the movies.  She loved going to the movies, and when TV came in, she was a stickler for the "soaps", okay.  Yes, those are memories I have of my mom.  "The Edge of Night" [CBS broadcasting network, 1956-1975], okay, and the (laughter), and "As the World Turns" [CBS broadcasting network, 1956-2010].  I mean she knew those soaps, but again, that went along with the, in-the-house kind of thing.  So that's a memory of my mom.  She knew the soaps, she enjoyed the soaps.  She loved going to the movies.  They (unclear) dated, that probably constituted part of their social life going to the date where my dad liked to party and be with the club and what have you.  I think the family thing or more enjoyment for them was going to the movie.
Speaker 1: Now, were the movies segregated in Norfolk?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.  As I was, as I recall, I think the movie was the Ritz Theater, but in the early growing up, yes, it was segregated.
Speaker 1: And did the blacks go to the balcony like they do in some cities or, how did it work?
Speaker 2: Now, I think this was just, it was a black area.
Speaker 1: Black theater.
Speaker 2: Black area and only blacks there.  The only whites were the Jews that owned the stores along the way.  I remember there was a shoe store that I worked in as a child for a little while.  And they were white.  But the white folk in the community were there as business owners, and they were gone after their stores closed.  So all of the stores and shops, what have you; I mean it was a black community, it was a black community.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's a larger shopping area of Norfolk across the river, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: A bigger black community across the river.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But in your section, there was a smaller, kind of enclave of black people with a black theater--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a little settlement, yeah, on that side, Berkley, and it was all black.  The elementary school and, was, that I went to.  And, I mean like I said, there were, I knew, I'd see white folk, but they were basically tied to, mostly, it would be Jews (laughter) in our, in terms of those that were in our community.  But I was certainly very conscious of white folk.  I mean they didn't live next door to me, but on the Norfolk side, when I went to junior high school, Ruffner, and that's what we call the Norfolk side, but it was pretty much segregated too (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 21366
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this question.  We always ask it like this too before we talk about school so much.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church, growing up, sights and sounds.  It would be church.  It would be home itself in terms of food, okay.  We, I remember the time where we lived with my dad's [Ulyses Grant Dunston] mom.  And she did the cooking.  I mean I remember the peach cobbler--and she was a good cook, my grandmother.  And she was a good cook, and she did the cooking.  And so when I think of memories, I, I think of her cooking (laughter) as good.  My mom [Rosa Anna Barton] was known as a cook, but she, and especially growing up time, but I had no problem with her, with her food.  But my grandmother would be the one that was the cook, okay.  And church, my church was a major part of my growing up memories, even from a little child.  My aunt, my dad's sister that I'm named after, Georgia, is the name of my aunt.  And she was holy and sanctified, and with a traditional kind (laughter), from our community, prayer band.  And I remember the prayer band.  And I remember the, the ladies in their white.  And they went from house to house, and they would come to our house sometime.  But their sessions, the kids would be there, and we would be looking at them and hiding.  And they would, I remember those things, and we would, they would--my Aunt Georgia would take us around with her to the prayer--when I say "us", me and my sister.  And then also a couple of other kids that were part of our family in that area.  And we would be singing and praying and shouting and falling out under the power too and laughing and what have you.  And so, going to the prayer meeting, being taken to the prayer meetings and just making, like kids do, making fun out of that.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the kind of church that has, you know, people would get happy and speak in tongues--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, but right now, I'm talking at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I talk about the prayer band, this was a home thing, a circle around.  But, yes, because we, the church we went to was First Baptist [First Baptist Church in Berkley], which was typical Baptist, black Baptist, okay, very much structured in terms of wanting to make sure we do things like, like Baptist (laughter).  That was our regular church.  That's where I went to Sunday school, BTU, choir, you know, and had the whole community.  But the prayer band was like a community thing that my aunt was a part of.  And she kept us a lot while my parents worked.  And, and that entailed taking us with her to her prayer meetings.  And those were home kind of things, and, yes, they, they did all those things, talk in tongues, shout, fall out under the spirit, and therefore, we did 'em too, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you all kind of made fun of it, sort of, you said?
Speaker 2: No, this is inside.  We're all doing it, okay.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, this is within the way this experience was.  So there's no one to make fun in that we're all in there, okay.  Outside, like I said, on Sunday morning is the Baptist church, okay.  And they wouldn't know anything about our life in the prayer meeting.  And even if they did, it wouldn't be any making fun of it because their grandparents were probably part of some of the circle too (laughter), that was moving around.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, any other sights and sounds or sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: In school, I was basically, as I said, church, in terms of my early life, church, home there and school.  I mean those were the things, even growing up, early with school, and it was tied to church or a member of my church.  People, my pastor, his wife, she taught us.  She taught piano lessons.  And, again, our family didn't have the, the funds to support that, but she recognized my interests and, and she was the kind and what have you, she allowed me to come.  And she taught me too, even though I wasn't one of the paid ones, and paying one, rather.
Speaker 1: She taught you how to play the piano?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I mean, but I was young, and I was just wanting to also do what the others were doing.  But we had that kind of strata in the community too where some parents were able to pay for their kids to have this.  But she was the pastor's wife, and she was offering the piano lessons.  And she knew--and I was in the church group, but I didn't have the means to, to pay for the lessons.  But she still let me come.  I mean it, and I remember that, that I knew that we didn't have money to pay.  But she still taught me piano lessons just like the other kids.  And she, that was something special about her, you know, the way she interfaced with the children.
Story_ID: 21367
Speaker 1: What school did you go to?  What was the name of (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Elementary school, I went Abraham Lincoln Elementary School which was in Berkley, walking distance.  And I do remember my first-grade teacher (laughter), Ms. Eleanor Williams 'cause was like there, I can say that for me, there's been someone along my path for the whole process that sort of saw me and recognized, and pushed me on.  But she was just a caring teacher, and would tell me that I was smart and encourage me, and I wanted to please her and do well.  She was one of the first persons on this academic path that, that insisted that I do my work and do it well.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you interested in as a little girl, growing u?  You're the youngest, right, of a pretty big family--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and so what interested you?
Speaker 2: People, differences.  Really, I--sincere, I was growing up in the church, living in the community, and I, too, have my dad's curiosity about wanting to know and understand things, how things work.  And I, from my earliest remembrances, I just did not understand why God made us different, especially I didn't know why he made some black and some white.  And these were questions that framed my Sunday--my questions to my Sunday school teacher, and I do have a reputation with the teachers being tired of me asking questions about why God did things, okay.  And certainly, I can say to you that my curiosities in school were genuinely around biology, not just biology in general, but biology of people.  There was, I think I was born with a curiosity about what makes us who we are and what makes us different and why.  I was more interested in the philosophical side in terms of "why" than the, you might say hard science of "how."  But I remember in junior high, I was very interested in coming during that consciousness where folk were reading Mao (ph.) and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In junior high school?  Were they doing that--not in junior--
Speaker 2: No, no, that wasn't- Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that wasn't junior high.
Story_ID: 21368
Speaker 1: But it was junior high when I was reading--'cause I think this was when I was reading Florence Kennard (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Fennel (ph.)
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I think he was the one--what I'm trying to get at, I was curious about knowledge, how people know.  How do you know what you know?  And, and my junior high teacher, this was Ms. Hayes, and I was saying to her, "I want to study how you, how do the--how you know what you know, how your mind works".  And people talking about different systems of knowledge and what have you.  And she told me, that's very good.  This is what I'm saying, she told me--no, this was high school.  Ms. Hayes, I thought sure it was Ms. Hayes, but the bottom line is, she says--this was junior high when I first expressed an interest in what I thought was philosophy.  And I was told, Ms. Hayes said, you can enjoy that on the side.  But there are no black philosophers (laughter).
Speaker 2: You were told that straight out, huh?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, there are no black, you're not gonna get a job in philosophy.  You need to think about what you want to study, what you want to do, that you can get a job, and science is really blossoming now.  And, and so you want to study that which you can get, a good chance of getting a good job.  And so, your hobby, you can read and enjoy the philosophy.  But choosing a major.  So it was somewhere just in the transition between junior high and high school during this time, but the choice to focus on biology came out of guidance.  And I thought it, I thought it was Ms. Hayes, but the first person who said, "You can study that, but you can't get a good job.  I don't know any."  And she would say, "I don't know any philosophers that are earning their living, if you will, philosophizing."
Speaker 2: Well, let me go back a little bit.  Now, you were asking a lot of questions in school--
Speaker 1: And in church.
Speaker 2: --about how things, and church, about what God wants people to do and what, why things are the way they are.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 21369
Speaker 1: So, were you making good grades all along?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, the one thing about my history is that's really was my identifier.  I was good in school, you know.  I've pretty much always been good in school.  And that's where I got my recognition too, that teachers recognized that I was, did my work.  My sister, my next sister, well, if you kind of characterize the kids, my brother was the boy, okay.  And he was boy things.  The next sister was a deaf mute, and she had her relationship and interaction.  The sister under her was the pretty one.  She was the lighter skinned one in our makeup, okay.
Speaker 1: Called the pretty one.
Speaker 2: Okay, and she was, yeah, so she was the--if you look at the kids and how you see yourself, she was the pretty one.  I was the smart one, okay, at least in our nuclear family.
Story_ID: 21370
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have--now, you all had a, did you see any nature shows on television or did you have exposure in the community to, like nature, such that would inform you, you know, form an interest in biology, in that sense?
Speaker 2: No, actually, it wouldn't have come from television so much as from school itself.  When I think of television, I remember the kid shows.  I remember, I remember the black and white for sure and the 'Howdy Doody' [NBC broadcasting network, 1947-1960] and others coming during the--and the 'Mickey Mouse Club' [children's variety show that aired on the ABC network from 1955-1960], those.  So I remember, and we just had the one TV and everybody would gather around that.  I remember the TV, but I remember mostly the kid shows like that in terms of what we wanted to see.  I don't remember it being a strong educational stimulus, more entertainment.  In school, I always thought that the questions that I asked were the things that helped shape the path that I had.  Like I said, as far back as I can remember, I had questions about God that I raised earliest in the church and I absolutely remember the Sunday School teacher giving me the kind of thing, you don't ask those things.  You just accept them, you know.  God loves you.  What do you mean, how do you know he loves?  Does he love all these kids?  Why do this and that, you know?  Those were the kinds of questions I wanted to know, and those were the shut down questions from the church side.  But they also fueled the questions in the school arena where I did have, okay, where I did have a chance to ask about what then got shaped as biological differences, okay, and, and chose biology as a major area of study as I went to high school and ultimately onto other areas.
Speaker 1: Now, did you question [pause, mic adjustment]?  Okay, did you ever ask--I know a couple of times you mentioned that somebody lighter was considered prettier and that sort of thing.  Did you ask about, like why that would be?  I mean is that, I mean--was that--
Speaker 2: I definitely wanted to know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a value judgment, number one.  But like why would society value a lighter skin rather than a darker skin, and then why would God make people different colors (laughter) on top of it?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  My question was about why God made white and black, okay, although those were necessarily terms, white people and black people in the context then or maybe we were saying "colored" folk at that time.
Speaker 1: We were saying Negro.
Speaker 2: Okay, but our community reflected the social, the socialization of the good and the bad, the have's and the have not's in that regard.  So this, even in the microcosm--that's why I mentioned the fact that my grandparents representing almost white-looking lady who chose and married an authentic black man (laughter).  I mean even at that time, we would say colored, but you would refer to him as a black man, which gave quite a spectrum in the family.  They had several kids.  And even within the family, yes, our family perpetuated that the lighter-skinned kids were the prettier one.  And people, and just as in school, I mean the same thing in school and in church, that the lighter skin was the closer to what was considered pretty.  And in our family, my sister that was next to me was lighter than me.  She's probably, I mean noticeably lighter than me, but I also, I also thought she was prettier than me, you know, as far as standards.  She also had features more like my mom [Rosa Anna Barton] in terms of, you were asking earlier.  And boys liked her.  I mean she would not have any problem with boys.  She had the captain of the football team (laughter) that was after her.  So, I mean she's very, very attractive, and that was a plus in terms of your socialization in that regard.  However, everyone recognized that, not that, you know, I'm--I wasn't, didn't have any feelings of being ugly, but just she was prettier than I was.  And she was more popular in terms of attractive with boys.  But I was smart.  And that was my edge so to speak, so that's what I played up.  There is a story that's always passed down about Christmas when, you know, of course, you would ask the kids, what you want for Christmas.  Now, my sister, the one that I'm talking about, she wanted dolls.  She loved babies.  I mean she was also like my mom in terms of the homemaker type.  She loved dolls, okay.  What did she want?  She wanted a doll.  So my mom is running all around to find a doll for that particular period.  What did I want?  They joke me about it.  I made it very--I want a cash register.  And my momma tells the story because she had trouble finding that cash register.  Georgia Mae wants a cash register (laughter), you know.  So I was the one, I mean, numbers, figures, what have you, money (laughter).  That was me.  I never did like playing with dolls.  That's a fact.  I was never a doll-baby girl, okay.  I liked books.  I liked reading, and I wanted that cash register.  And that is one of those little stories that's told down because of the difficulty my mom had finding the cash register for me.
Speaker 1: Well, did she find you one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  And I remember that cash register.  You would hit it, and it had play money coming out, and we'd count out.  I remember that cash register very well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you play store with it and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, yes, yes, yes.  And I would count out the money and what have you.  Yes, I remember games with it.  It was a favorite toy, that period of time.
Story_ID: 21371
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started out at Abraham Lincoln School and that's in Berkley [Norfolk, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And then, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Ruffner Junior High.
Speaker 1: Ruffner, I've heard that before.  A lot of people talk--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Ruffner Junior High, and for us--
Speaker 1: Ruffner Junior High School.
Speaker 2: It was across the bridge, and that was a memory of that time too 'cause we would walk that Berkley Bridge, as they would say.
Speaker 1: So that was actually in Norfolk [Virginia], across the bridge.
Speaker 2: On the Norfolk side, yes, across the bridge.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ruffner Junior High School, and then, so in junior high school was there any--now you grew up, now, this is the Civil Rights Movement's going on--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: --all around the South and different places.  Now, did your parents, were they--was your dad [Ulyses Grant Dunston], because he read a lot, was he politically aware of, up on all the--
Speaker 2: No, no, they were not.  Conversations about what's going on in the context of Civil Rights [referring to the African American Civil Rights Movement of 1955-1968] was, I don't recall that being any topic of discussion or consciousness in our everyday life.  And when I started Ruffner [Ruffner Junior High School, Virginia], it was just a larger group of people, but it was still segregated.  It was still segregated.  It was the graduating class, junior high, going to high, when I was going to Booker T [Booker T Washington High School], which was my high school, that's when the bussing occurred.  And some from my junior high were bused to Norview [Norview High School], which was the white school.  And bussing was the issue, where folk would be bussed, but I don't know whether it was because I was in Berkley or what, but--
Speaker 1: I think the Norview 17 case took place in 1957, I think.  Does that sound right?  I think that's '57 [1957].  Now, you would have been how old then in '57?  You would have been--
Speaker 2: From '44 [1944]?
Speaker 1: You were born in '44 [1944], so, yeah--
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen or fourteen.  Yeah, you'd have been starting high school around that time, almost the same age as the people that are in the, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in the--I actually had class members that were bussed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were--
Speaker 2: It was my class.  I knew many of them by name.
Speaker 1: Well, some of 'em walked, I know.  I don't know how many were bused, but I know the ones I talked to actually walked over there or were dropped there by their parents.
Speaker 2: Okay, because you also, on the Norfolk side where you had the white sections and the black sections.  So some of them could walk the, to school and was involved.  But I remembered that as an event, it was persons in my class that were also involved in busing.  Now, I had, I was two years ahead based on age 'cause I, early school.  I skipped a grade, so I was, age wise, ahead of, a couple of years ahead of--
Speaker 1: So when did you graduate from high school then?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school when I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: So this was 1960?
Speaker 2: Sixty, I actually graduated high school '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: '61 [1961], okay.
Speaker 2: '61 [1961], yes.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, you were ahead--
Speaker 2: Yeah', 'cause my birthday is in August, so, um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, now, that--were people in the community talking about that--
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: The Norfolk 17 and what was going on with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was, that was very--in the community, but again, we didn't have a lot of, around the table discussion.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think about the kids going there?  Did you think that you wanted to be one of them or did you think that you were glad you weren't one of them or what?
Speaker 2: I think I was more glad that I wasn't because decisions were being made based on how the routings were, who would go.  I was happy that I wasn't because for one thing, I like my school (laughter) and my teachers.  I liked school, and plus, yes, there's talk in the community and around.  And I wasn't the one who was ready to get out there and be the first to make a point or anything.  I didn't have that kind of consciousness growing up.  And I don't remember that the ones that did go to school, go to the white school, I don't remember them like being so happy that they- (laughter)I don't--now, it'll be interesting what stories they tell as you review them.  But--
Speaker 1: They're not stories of happiness, I'll tell you that.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get the sense that--
Speaker 1: They're not happy stories.
Speaker 2: --that they were happy.  It was an extra tension on top of just being that age, being a young teenager, you know, and friends is important and what have you and consciousness of the time.  My, I have a lot of respect for the ones that were involved, but they were not my day-to-day friends.  They were not my day-to-day; obviously, mine were the ones that were in the school with me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21372
Speaker 1: So Booker T. Washington High School.  Now, you said it was in high school you decided you wanted to be a biologist, is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, even in junior high, I was interested in biology, but certainly as we got to high school now, and you start going into different things, yes, biology was my area of interests.
Speaker 1: Now, was your high school equipped with microscopes and, you know, a lab and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Now, that's good because I think my actually, first exposure with--to answer your question, what I remember about the high school and its equipment and how great it was, was more with physical education than, than the science.  But we had a great math teacher in high school, and it was in high school where I was introduced to the science fair and getting the kids ready to go to the science fair.  And our math teacher was very much involved in that.  But I was in biology, and I was interested in biology, and so I participated, but actually more from the math side.  Math and English, when I think of my teachers that had the largest influence in high school, it would be the English teacher that truly was a typical school mom that insisted on proper English, etiquette and our Math teacher who just loved math and kind of gathered those who were, the high rankers in the class, you know, in the club.  And that's where I first kind of got sensitized to preparing for the science fair.  I'm sure we must have had a microscope, but I don't remember any stories around the microscope or being excited about looking through it and knowing that this is biology, 'cause that wasn't the biology I was interested in.
Speaker 1: Did you dissect animals?
Speaker 2: And I don't recall that much from high school.  Those real hands-on, dissection, microscope things, that started for me in college.  And I did go local because, again, high school, like I said, I just remember the diversity, the diversity of activities that we had in physical education.  That stands out, I mean in high school.  We did all the things.  We did archery, we did fencing, we did the typical, you know, the volleyball and the baseball, the standards.  But we, they also exposed us to golf.  I mean we, it was a broad exposure to the various kinds of things.  And I remember that from high school, especially, when I see so much of that played down in terms of just the broad education today.  For us, it was part of physical, we called it physical education.  And, of course, we had a typical home economics class where you would also learn house skills, but--or you learned trades too, like sewing and knitting.  At least you got exposed to it 'cause you had a little period of time to give you some exposure.  But the academics in terms of math, science, I was interested in biology because I was interested in people.  I was not interested in biology from getting exciting about looking at things under the microscope and studying.  That, that wasn't the part that intrigued me; I don't even remember anything particularly tied with the microscope.
Story_ID: 21373
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any aspirations to become a doctor?
Speaker 2: No, no, I was, in terms of--I was as surprised as my folk in going to college, okay.  My, the aspiration was to go to school, do good in school, graduate, you know, "do good" was, do your homework.  But do that because your highest thing was finishing, finish high school.  Now, it turns out, like I said, because of my activities in school, in high school was the first time--or it wasn't the first time 'cause I was Valedictorian of [Ruffner] junior high [school, Norfolk, Virginia] too.  But in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk], when you got ready to graduate and they start ranking you and looking to try to get scholarship opportunities, that's when the academics really came to a focus for me because I ranked, because of my ranking in the class.  I was fifth, and the ones with the--the top four, I knew them all; they were in class with me.  But they got options for scholarships away, two at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], okay.  One actually, right here at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], okay.  So because of my ranking, and they got scholarships away, the state offered full scholarship.  But it would come to, at least came to me because the others took, had other options.  So I had a chance to get a full state scholarship.  And that was really, it wasn't like I was planning to go to college.  It was--and I do tell this story.  From this point on, it was, every step for me, it was the only thing I had at that point in the process (laughter).  So I, I was finishing high school.  I had done well.  I had ranking in the class that qualified me for a full scholars-- state scholarship.  And I didn't have anything else.  So why not?  It was right here.  So that was--
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have good counseling in high school or any counseling?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean counseling, yes, we had, I remember counseling, but like I said, the counseling was tied around, as it may be some time here, it's more about keeping you out of trouble than necessarily--or if you're having trouble, more so than a forward kind of thing.  Counseling was more if you're having problems and what have you, and I wasn't having problems, as such with class.  So the nature of the counseling didn't really kick into another phase until the ranking and the scoring, and then what do you want to do if you are offered this scholarship.  And, of course, my folk were happy, but the truth is, they were, they were elated that I was just finishing high school and hadn't gotten pregnant, you know, as far as your aspirations for a girl.  And the idea would be that you just get a job, but finish high school.  That was the high-water mark, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, they weren't excited about you being the Valedictorian of middle school or any of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, all of those things.  But it wasn't like they were pushing me for these things.  But as these things came, they were happy, yes.  They were proud.
Story_ID: 21374
Speaker 1: So none of your other siblings went to college?
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the first one, the only one, being the last one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so nobody really knew how to feel about it so much?
Speaker 2: That, the going to college part.  My sister, next to me, finished high school, okay, and got married, okay.  And she finished high school and got married.  My deaf sister, we had--they have a school for the deaf and blind in Hampton [Virginia], okay.  And she went to school there, and, of course, I remember those days where she was, had to get ready, get her ready for school 'cause it was a boarding school.  But it was like through high--take you up through high school. They'd learn a trade and what have you.  And so that, when she finished that, that was school for her.  And, and my brother (laughter), I'm trying to remember.  Did he ever officially finish high school?  I think he may have finally finished, but he was clearly not academic.  He may have failed a couple of times and then may have even dropped out.  But I don't think I remember a graduation cap with him.  So, he went to high school, but I think he dropped out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 1961, you graduated from Booker T. Washington High School [Norfolk, Virginia], and you're going to Norfolk State [University]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which right there in town.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you've got a full scholarship.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: So did they pay your food money and every--
Speaker 2: I was home now, okay.
Speaker 1: So you didn't stay on campus?
Speaker 2: No, no, and they didn't have any campus--well, they had, what?  The YMC [YMCA; The Young Men's Christian Association] there.  For me, I was still at home.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was a new, okay, so the campus--Norfolk State had been a branch of--
Speaker 2: Virginia State [Virginia State University].
Speaker 1: Virginia State, right.
Speaker 2: In fact, it had since changed, but one of my dad's sisters was the one who had actually had at least an entre into when it was called Little State, and it was called the Norfolk Division of Virginia State College.  And she had gone in secretarial kind of work, so--for a couple of years.  But she's the only one before me in the whole family enclave that had gone to, or had finished college.  She did start and did about two years in the community college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, it was because I had the scholarship.  And this was something that I could do (laughter).  I can do school (laughter).
Story_ID: 21375
Speaker 1: So who were some of the professors there who were helpful?
Speaker 2: Dr. Marian Capps (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when you ask about Norfolk State [Norfolk State University], I got two names, three names really, I should give.  Dr. Marian Capps--
Speaker 1: That's C-A-
Speaker 2: C-A-P-P-S, Marian, M-A-R-I-A-N, Delta Sigma Theta [sorority], okay (laughter).  I'll come back to her.  The other two names would be Dr. Paul Brown, biology, chair of the biology department, and Dr. Louis Austin, A-U,--L-O-U-I-S, A-U-S-T-I-N.  Those three are indelible.  Dr. Austin is the one who gave me my first "C" in school, ever (laughter), okay.  And, and I was still certainly as good as anyone else was doing, but he told me he gave me that for a lesson, a learning lesson which was because I could do better.  Now, we had a talk, I had a talk with him.  But he came later in his career.  He came from Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], in fact.  He may have been already knowledgeable of some problems, some health issues he had, but he came to Norfolk State, clearly one of these who wanted to increase the number of blacks in higher education as part of his experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And had come to Norfolk State in that mindset.   Dr. Paul Brown was the chair of the biology department and the one that I interfaced with on a regular basis from an academic point of view.  And Marian Capps was the woman who was, as far as teaching, she taught statistics and actually, the course at that time was accounting, measurement and--testing measurements.  And she introduced the standard deviations and what have you, but the point is, she also had her eye on young women in terms of, she's very active in the sorority and had her heart and her passion, and wanted to start a Delta chapter.  And so she was looking for the smart girls or what have you (laughter).  And so she approached me, and she says, I'm going to start a chapter here, and I want you to pledge Delta.  So the bottom line is the graduate chapter had to start our chapter.  There was no chapter.  So under Dr. Marian Capps' guidance, we formed the first chapter of Delta Sigma Theta on Norfolk State campus.  And I was president.  And Dr. Capps just kind of wanted to make all of the women, finer, the finer women of Delta, okay.  We had to lead things on campus, certainly academics and what have you.  So she really brought that element of college life, if you will, to me.  She had high standards academic for her Delta girls and expected us to perform well, be the leaders, and I, and saw that in me and expected that.  And I wanted to please her.  And, and she was a role model too.  I loved the fact; she had a very nice home on a little waterfront (laughter).  And she would invite us to her house.  She--for little cook out's and things, you know.  She was good; she was a very good role model.  I wanted to find out if by any chance if she's still alive.  I used to keep up with her, but I have not done so recently, and haven't heard whether or not she's still with us or not.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, other than biology, were you involved in other activities on campus besides Delta?  Did you do anything else?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.  Whatever I did was tied to the school.  I'm trying to think now because college was memorable in terms of biology.  We had a tight science group.  Biology was right across the hall from physics, and those were down from chemistry.  And I remember the Andersons, our chemistry teacher.  But Paul Brown carried his own, and he would always joke.  And he, he made a family unit there.  But my interaction was with my fellow students on that science, on the science floor, the physics, the chemistry, the biology, were all right there together.  And I have good, or long-term friends from that core, even today.  I don't know--have you heard the name Julian Earls [also a HistoryMaker] yet?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  So he was there?
Speaker 2: He was there, and he was the handsome guy in physics.  I'm telling you.  All the girls were swooning over Julius. But, but (laughter), what is her name Zeta?  It starts with a "z".
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw his picture of a poster at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration agency] yesterday.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, so he's been here a couple of times to speak, and, but he--I grew up with Julius.  We had, and he was always a gentleman and just a wonderful person.  But that was when we also swooned over the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  Oh, man, when they put on their--wait a minute?  I remember Julius, but ROTC, yeah, that's college (laughter), yeah, 'cause he, yeah.  But [Julian] Earls, and there were others with him too, Winters.  But he was the star of the physics group there.
Story_ID: 21376
Speaker 1: All right, let's talk about--well, we were talking off-camera about Tim Reid [actor and comedian]. And you said you knew him at Norfolk State [University].
Speaker 2: Yes, but I knew Tim because, one, he was one of the known, good-looking men in our little group there.  But he was also a boyfriend of a girlfriend of mine that lived in Berkley.  And she was a very--her whole family, we grew up, we went t church together.  And she was a good friend, and her boyfriend was Tim Reid, okay.  So I never really had any personal, great interaction, but just knew him well, as the good-looking boyfriend of Rita Sykes.  And she was one of the pretty girls too.  She was light-skinned, long hair (laughter), okay.  So in our community, blacks did a good job on defining those characteristics too.  But that's where I know him from.  It's not like I had any real interaction with him outside of just knowing, knowing him.  And I think he would know, perhaps, may recognize my name simply because of, we were at the same time.  But I know him basically through her.
Speaker 1: Now, who else?  Anybody else in the biology department that, or the sciences?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, the ones that I went to school with, Minnie, Minnie Artist.  Her maiden name is Artist and Leroy Stiff.  And they got married, Minnie and Leroy Stiff.  And they both came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] as physicians and they both graduated.  I have since taught their daughter.  And she has graduated, and she's back here on campus.  But we've been historical friends when they would come to Alumni Day.  But they were, we were biology majors together, okay.  This is what I was saying, that community of students at that time.  There was Yvonne Newsome, she was also a smart girl and what have you.  And my understanding is she did go and get her PhD too as well.  But Minnie and Leroy both got their M.D.s.
Speaker 1: That's Stiff, S-T-I-H?
Speaker 2: No, S-T-I-F-F.
Speaker 1: F-F, okay, Stiff.
Speaker 2: Stiff, uh-huh.  And I'm trying to remember, Minnie, Leroy was biology, and Minnie had her eyes on Leroy.  And she was in a--but I think Minnie was chemistry.  I think Minnie was chemistry.  I don't remember her cutting up the dogfish shark with us (laughter).  But she kept her eye on Leroy.  And they're just a wonderful couple, just, and I just treasure them from those days, even till today.  But we had a tight little group there, and there were some other folk.  There was a couple folk in the physics and where I think they went on, one of the girls went on and got her Ph.D. too.  But in biology, it was also Crystal.  Crystal, C-R-Y-S-T-A-L.  Now, Crystal was the one who kind of just got married and went on with her family.  But she was part of our biology group.  And she was--and Yvonne Newsome, Yvonne Newsome.  I'm pretty sure Yvonne went on and go her Ph.D. as well.  But we had a good little biology club, okay.  John Rollins, John Rollins was from Port Smith.  And he too, got his Ph.D.  He was here at Howard for a period of time.  But he left, and he's been, he went with the Patent Office.  And then I think he's retired from there now.  But we had several academics out of that group.  That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Yes, it sounds like a pretty successful group.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 21377
Speaker 1: It was a rich academic.  And it was in that environment that Dr. Austin came to the biology department.  And like I said, we had this little group, and we worked together and what have you.  I'd do what I needed to do to be respectable, but he gave me my first 'C', and I couldn't believe it because I, I knew I did my respectable 'B' work at least (laughter) even though it wasn't my favorite.  The comparative anatomy, that dogfish shark.  But he called, he told me, he said, "Ms. Dunston, I gave you this 'C' because you can do better." (laughter) But in the conversation with him, he was a real down-home kind of person who got me really grounded with doing my, really setting my sights beyond just the level that I was operating.  I had gone to college as we talked about.  So I wasn't thinking about beyond just finishing college and doing--my expectation was that I was in biology.  I would get a nice lab tech job and, and live, get married or whatever.  But marriage was not, I--that wasn't like something that was that high up.  Getting a job was more.  And I, I did want one of those good lab tech jobs for biology.  But Dr. Austin had encouraged me from that 'C', "Do you best.  You know, you can do better than this.  I gave you a 'C' because you can do better than--
Speaker 2: What was Dr. Austin's background?  What was--?
Speaker 1: You know, other than, like I said, I know that he had come from Ohio State [Ohio State University], and he would bring, he was the first one to bring--he's the first one that I remember that brought a white outside teacher.  And whether that was tied to his environment that he had come from, I just don't recall Dr. Paul Brown bringing the outside people.  And if he did, they just, I didn't have the interface enough to just leave a mark.  Dr. Austin brought first, this professor from Michigan [University of Michigan].  And, and it was one of those things where in the question, I basically asked the question, essentially, how does, "How does a single cell become this com--or mini cells this complex?"  And I remember Dr. Nay (sic?) saying he, he said, "That's the question biologists have been asking and want to know."  How does that happen?  But for him, I remember discussions with Dr. Austin and his saying to Dr. Austin, she's very perceptive, you know, she's--and Dr. Austin shared this with me.  And--
Speaker 2: Those were the days before they were talking about mitochondrial and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, way back.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so biology in those days, as I remember, you would memorize a lot of the parts, parts of cells and the body.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but Dr. Austin was a jack-of-all-trades.  Like I was telling you, in high school I appreciated the spectrum of sports and activities, that physical Ed.  Dr. Austin opened the world of biology in terms of--here was a man who took books, but he wanted to make sure we got all the areas of biology.  He taught us invertible biology.  He taught us embryology.  He taught us--I mean and he would get the book and say, you need to know the spectrum, you know, not just--
Speaker 2: So you're saying that he was teaching you information that you didn't have in the books to--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You didn't have the books that he was referring, that he was teaching beyond the books?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, what I meant, it wasn't his specialty.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he got books to give us the breadth of areas in biology, like embryology.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm saying (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  I thought you were asking--
Speaker 2: So he went beyond what the scope of what your classroom curriculum was, I guess, beyond your textbooks.
Speaker 1: I mean he made it part of the class, that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: But he went beyond the textbook is what you're saying?
Speaker 1: No, (laughter) I mentioned the book, meaning that these were areas that were not his specialty of training, okay.  And I'm thinking, what was his specialty (laughter) because he taught everything.  Maybe he was cell biology, let's just say cell biology, but he was one of the three biology teachers, okay.  The other biology teacher was plant biology, and that was Dr. Richardson, and she covered the plant biology.  But Dr. Brown handled the biology majors and taught his area, which is certainly, parasitology, maybe, one of those areas.  But Dr. Austin not only came with whatever his Ph.D. specialty was, but he--what I meant was he would textbooks, for example, embryology.  And he taught the course in embryology based on what was in the textbook.  This is what I'm saying.  It was, as opposed to an area that he had done his Ph.D. work in and teaching out of that.  He, for example, I have the luxury, my degree is in genetics.  Every since, I've been able to lecture out of my area, in my area, rather, because of other people covering the spectrum.  But he was one of these renaissance teachers in the sense that he taught multiple specialties just using the textbook that was available.  That's what I mean by he taught from the textbook.  It wasn't his trained area of specialty, but yet--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --he wanted to make sure that we had a broad breadth of biology.
Story_ID: 21378
Speaker 1: All right, now, when you graduated from Norfolk State [Norfolk State University], what--
Speaker 2: Yes, see, when I graduated from biology, now, I had a B.S. [Bachelor of Science] degree and--
Speaker 1: This is what, 1965?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, exactly, okay.  And I'm thinking that I'm gonna go to New York [New York, New York] and get my good lab tech [technician] job.  So I graduated pretty high in the class, you know, pretty good academics there, grade.  And I went to New York.  My mom, there was an aunt, was living in New York.  And I went there to get a job.  The bottom line is New York at that time was bustling, and there would be jobs in the paper, lots of lab tech jobs, that area, what have you.  But I'll never forget the experience.  Every time I would go to a job that was posted and then I'd go for the job, that job was not available, systematically.  So I even went to the headhunters, you know, to an employment agency, where you sign up.  You put all of your information, and then they give you job that you can go out for.  And, and it, it was just the reality.  Most of the jobs were menial jobs that certainly didn't require my B.S. degree (laughter).  But they were jobs that they were sending me out on, a lot of cleaning type jobs or just menial jobs.
Speaker 1: Well, just, but it was Dr. Austin who got you onto another track though, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was able to--
Speaker 2: After I did not find that job that I was looking for, I came back home dejected after a summer of trying to find a job for a graduate with a BS degree.  And so this was home, and I went to see him, and this was in late August or early, late August, probably.  I had finished, decided that I wasn't going to go to New York to clean, you know, to be cleaning.  And so, I came home dejected and talked to him, and he said, Ms. Dunston, he says, "I see in this science journal that Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Alabama] is advertising Carver fellowships, Carver research fellowships.  It's late, but they're still advertising.  Why don't you apply?  I think you could certainly compete for this."  And, again, this is what I meant.  I had nothing else to do (laughter).  That's exactly what I mean.  You'll see several of these (laughter).  So here I am again, finishing school with nothing else to do other than someone telling me about an academic opportunity.
Speaker 1: So you got a George Washington Carver Research Fellowship--
Speaker 2: Research Foundation Fellowship for full--
Speaker 1: Named for the great George Washington Carver of Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right--
Speaker 1: --the most famous black scientist of all time.
Speaker 2: That's right.  School started in the late part of August, and I applied for the scholarship (laughter).  I think it must have been the first of August, but the bottom line is, I got a full scholarship--.
Story_ID: 21379
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is 1965, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, two-year program.  So I was scheduled to finish there in '67 [1967], but two-year program.  And that's where I started orienting my question towards genetics because by this time, I'd gone through biology dejected with the expertise of biology to get me the job I wanted.  And it certainly wasn't answering the questions that are part of what was interesting in biology.  So by now, I know that the area that's probably close to what I want would be genetics.  And Tuskegee [Tuskegee University] at that time had a professor in the Carver Foundation who was studying genetics.  But it was pigeons, but it was genetics.  And so this was my first focus in a discipline of biology in genetics.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, is this the same, this isn't the same professor from Michigan [University of Michigan] who was at, who visited Norfolk State [Norfolk State University], was it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: This is, okay, they--
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all.  I'm at Tuskegee now.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, but it is a Michigan person that got me to Michigan, but it wasn't the one from, that I met at Norfolk State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was Zoology.  The one at Norfolk State was Zoology, Zoology, Dr. Nance, I think, N-A-N-C-E.  But he, he was Zoology.
Speaker 1: So the one at Tuskegee, this is Dr. Imannoff (ph.)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's the one from Michigan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21380
Speaker 1: But the person who was doing, that I worked with in genetics is Don Shaw, okay.  He was studying DNA, um-hum.  That was big.  And so I did my work with him.  And the story, that part that you have is, in '67 [1967], in the summer of '67 [1967] I still had not completed my biochemistry requirements.  But if I took biochemistry in the summer, I could finish up.  And I had an incentive to finish (laughter) in the summer because when I, my first night at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University], I met the man of my dreams, and I fell in love (laughter)--I didn't fall in love that night.  But we met the first night.  He asked me if he--I was looking for my dorm because this was my first time away from home.  So I wanted the--even though it was graduate school, I wanted the experience of living on campus.  So I had, I was looking for the dorm, and this young man came up.  And he asked me if he could show me to my dorm.  And I, I--he did.  And we, we were friends.  And I say it that way because I met him my first night at Tuskegee.  He was a veterinary student, and we became an item.  And so my whole life at Tuskegee was contexted in really this friendship and relationship, so much so that as far as now graduate school, which I hadn't thought about until I couldn't get a good job (laughter) with my B.S. [Bachelor of Science degree].  When I met him the first night and things were as they are, I just figured from here, you know, I would marry him and literally, the white picket fence.  And he's the veterinarian doctor.  And I'd just, that was what I envisioned.  But that wasn't what was in the plan.
Speaker 2: So you didn't envision having a Ph.D. or anything, in visions?
Speaker 1: No, no, I hadn't thought about it.  I didn't think about the PhD until I got (laughter) the--I'm, I can--it's time to graduate around May.  But I'm not prepared to graduate because I hadn't finished my biochemistry, but if I took both of 'em during the summer, I could finish.  On the other hand, my young man that I had met had already been at Tuskegee four years, 'cause he was in vet med.  And when I met him, he was going into his last two years.  But it was a two-year program for me, okay.  My program was two years and Masters.  He was finishing up the last two years.  And I mention that because even though when I met him, all I knew was our relationship.  There was history, and he was from the Islands.  And so it was graduation time, and (laughter) that's when I find out there's this person back in (laughter) the Islands that's been there all the time who, when he told her he had someone else, she wasn't gonna hear it.  She's been with him all this time.  I'm coming to this graduation, and I'm gonna be with you and what have you.  So it was, it was very difficult.  It was my first; it truly was my first heartbreak.  I, I just didn't know how I was going to make it.  And yet, I'd come this far.
Story_ID: 21381
Speaker 1: So I decided to take the biochemistry lecture and lab in the summer.  And that's where Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] had the transfer--had the program with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor].  And Dr. Immanoff (ph.) came from [University of] Michigan to teach the biochemistry.  And, as fate would have it, and I shared that story with you because the lab was literally the only place on campus that I knew that I could go where I wouldn't have some memories [of her former boyfriend] (laughter).  And anybody I see, we had been an item all this time, so it was just very difficult anywhere outside of that lab.  So it was a haven.  It was a haven for me, and as a consequence, I did the work, and I studied, and I was always--I tried to help others and what have you.  So I'm hiding away from life, trying to deal with this broken heart (laughter), if you will, from my fellow who's soon to be wife at that point had come for graduation to make her claims.  And he claimed that he couldn't do it because their families and blah, blah, blah and what have you.  So, it was a rough time for me personally, and so I threw myself into, what can I think about and do that takes me away?  And that's really what happened.  I did well, and that's when Dr. Ammanoff says, "Have you thought about going for the terminal degree?  And the truth is, no, I hadn't thought about a terminal degree.  Tuskegee didn't offer Ph.D.s.  It wasn't something that was even promoted as part of your next step.  No, I hadn't.  When he said to me, he says, I really think you should.  You're a very good student, and if you would be willing, if you would be willing to go for the Ph.D. degree, I will assist you in getting into Michigan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And see, he asked me for my interest, you know.  He says, you're good in biochemistry, but it's important that you do what you're interested in.  And so I told him I was interested in genetics.  That was what I was doing, but I was interested in human genetics.  And this was kind of one of the first eye openers because he said to me, he says, my office is--I'm in biochemistry in the building.  He gave me the building, he said, but my office is right across the street literally from the medical science, not only medical science, but the Department of Human Genetics.  And he told me, he says, and there are not that many Ph.D. programs in human genetics, a lot of genetics, but not human genetics.  And Michigan is one of the few.  So if you were interested, if you're interested in this, this is one of the few places in the country where you could do a Ph.D. in this.  And if you would be willing to come, I will help you.  And that's, that's how it started.
Story_ID: 21382
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we leave Tuskegee [University] though, I wanted to ask you about two things.  The first thing is the legacy of George Washington Carver.  I assume you had never been to Tuskegee before, but--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --when you got there, I mean what did you think of the Carver Museum [The George Washington Carver Museum] and the stories about [George Washington] Carver and the things he was doing?  I mean as a biologist, I mean it must have--
Speaker 2: You know, that's interesting, but the truth is, I certainly went to the museum, and I certainly heard the stories and was moved by the relationship he had with his science as part of the story; impressed with the fact that this was a research foundation.  And that's what was going on, and got more interested and curious about research because my undergraduate wasn't really focused on research, okay.  So the graduate, the going now to a Masters, which is now your research degree, opened me to research as part of this academic process.  And so I went there with a real naivete, but humbleness with, I'm now in a research foundation.  And we, and my, the folk that I was with, that I was partners in education at that time, there was a respect for research as part of the academic enterprise.  And these were also folk who had done well in their undergraduate schools.  So I'm now getting a further selection of people with academic focus in their orientation.  We were very close.  The two ladies that were in biology that I came with, we shared an actual, a trailer off campus, and part of our living.  Two guys that were also there, they had the other trailer.  We were very close, even to this day.  One of them, John, is chair of the department of biology there at this time.
Speaker 1: At--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: At Michigan?
Speaker 2: No, no, talking Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tuskegee.  I was just saying this was my core group in terms of the academics, but the focus now is on research.  That's the point I'm trying to make.  I moved from course and book focus, if you will, to a research center.  And the impact of Carver's life as a research scientist, bringing that element to the black campus, shall I say, because research was not a big focus, if you will, for undergraduate education.  It was mastering the knowledge at hand in the textbook.  It wasn't focusing you on adding to that knowledge base.  So that was another level of, another arena, another kind of area that widened my academic horizons, so to speak.  That took place there, and it was because of Carver's life and what you got exposed to by being a part of that foundation, a respect for investigation, for study, for adding to the knowledge.  That was, that was key element there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21383
Speaker 1: There's another aspect of Tuskegee [Tuskegee University]--
Speaker 2: And him as a person, but not as the political aspect (laughter) of his, him versus [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois and--
Speaker 1: No, well, [George Washington] Carver, not Carver.  Carver wasn't against DuBois at all.
Speaker 2: No, he was--
Speaker 1: You're talking about Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm getting--I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the scientist, George Washington Carver, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --not Booker T.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I'm sorry.  You're absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I mean he's like a pure scientist.  I mean that's what he was doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Doing biology, so.  So I just wondered with all, you know, giant fruits and vegetables, he's growing, and all the different applications of plant--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He was mostly just tied to the peanut for me.
Speaker 1: Really.  There's so much more about him.
Speaker 2: So much more about him, but in terms of what was impacting me at that time, one, that he was research and that he would go into his lab and that the stories were there, even though I didn't delve into them personally.  But the stories are there of his relationship with God in terms of giving him knowledge that he could use to actually better people, if you will.  But his focus on economics, you're saying that was--he was the researcher.  But there, the stories that he would go in and close the door, and he would talk to God about what the peanut could tell him (laughter).  I mean those were stories that kind of went around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, also, he developed paints and chemicals and foods and all kinds of things out of--
Speaker 2: I'd hear those things, but they weren't like things repeated, repeated that you focused on.
Speaker 1: Colors and I remember there's a museum there with all those things--
Speaker 2: There's a museum, and I did spend some time--
Speaker 1: --and his relationship with Henry Ford--
Speaker 2: --all of the different things.
Speaker 1: --who would buy his, would come down and get the latest discoveries of Carver and make money of them.
Speaker 2: The diversi--the versatility of what he was able to produce from the peanut was a big story, you know.  And the museum was certainly part of everyone's, and just marveling, "Oh, I didn't know the peanut, you could get this from the peanut.", just like you're saying.
Speaker 1: Not just the peanuts, a lot of different things.
Speaker 2: Well, mine was tied to the peanut (laughter).
Story_ID: 21384
Speaker 1: And another scientific experiment that they wanted me to ask about from the outline that took place at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] that has to do with the Tuskegee syphilis experiment that was actually going on when you were there.  And--
Speaker 2: And I was totally unaware of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the information came out in '72 [1972], and kind of reached the public's knowledge around '72 [1972], '73 [1973]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so, but you had no idea that that was going on--
Speaker 2: No, I had no idea of it actually going on at that time.  It was not part of, even though I remember John Andrews Hospital, of course, but not, now--wasn't conscious of that.  And, like I said, I was really confined pretty much academically to the Carver Foundation which has its own little building there with the laboratories.  And the focus was on doing your work.  I was studying pigeon DNA, pigeon--the DNA of pigeons at this time, looking at different species and their patterns there, and that's where my focus was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21385
Speaker 1: Well, the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, this is nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Five [1965].
Speaker 1: --five [1965], okay.
Speaker 2: No, '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: '67 [1967], okay.
Speaker 2: '67 [1967] when I finished.
Speaker 1: All right, so, well, how did you like Ann Arbor and the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved it because I had never been that far South, I mean that far North (laughter), (unclear) is Midwest.  I had not been that far North.  And it gave me a great distance between Tuskegee, my source of heartbreak, and a new life (laughter), okay.  So that's why I say that sincerely.  Dr. Ammanoff (ph.) coming and asking me if I would go for a Ph.D., it was just another opportunity.  And I didn't have any other options.  I certainly wasn't being asked to be married.  And so, again, that's the only option I had, and that was the end of the summer.  What am I gonna do with my life?  Sure, I'm willing to go.  School is something I can do (laughter).  I can do this.  And also that was my experience there in Michigan.  This was during the time, the late, the latter part of the '60s [1960s] was a big move on the undergraduate campus for integrating blacks into mainstreams.  And so, at Michigan, it was the big BAM movement, the Black Action Movement.  But this was largely undergraduate.  This was largely undergrad, and I won't say "largely,"  it was, because my little med sci [science] folk, place where I was, was totally non-involved with any black action, first of all because I was the only black there, okay.  I was their first black.  And it was my first time out of a black environment where I was sensitive now to my blackness.  I mean up to this time, you know, I just--I'm sensitive to my blackness and also the activities going on and the responsibilities now.  Like I attribute it to my junior high and high school colleges who got moved into this environment.  This was much later in my life, but a similar kind of situation where I felt everything I did spoke for my people (laughter), you know.  I was gonna, my whole people, everything I did, it was gonna be, this is what we knew or this is what we didn't know.  So I felt the weight of saving face for black America in everything I did.  And maybe that was a stimulus to do the study and what have you, but I didn't have a lot of other options.  That's what I was there for.  That was the only thing to do, and this was really my focus.  My roommate was from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and she was in the Public Health School.  Now, the Public Health School had more blacks, and that's really where I had some black interface, was through my roommate who was in Public Health School, that also introduced me to some of her friends in the Public Health School.  But my life centered around the medical science school facility which was all white--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --except for the cleaning folk.
Story_ID: 21386
Speaker 1: Now, what was the project, the genetic, the human genetics project like at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: It was the first time, and this is, here I am now, moved into a Ph.D. program.  But the language was such, and like I said, and remember also, I'm really becoming conscious of being black (laughter).  So I'm listening to these teachers, and they're talking genetics.  And, of course, and it's human genetics, so now it's related to humans.  Finally, I'm in an arena that's supposedly gonna answer some of the questions I asked God way back about why he made us different, okay, (laughter) and what's going on here because during my little journey from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], for sure, was my first time away from also my rooted system in terms of church and so I started exploring different belief systems, different religions and, at Tuskegee, but really went into that at Michigan [University of Michigan].  You know, Michigan was when I--transcendental was big, and the Baha'i was there, and folk were exper--I never experimented with any other drug-induced ones, but I was fascinated with the diversity of religions and the opportunities to find out what are some of these other religions saying about these differences.  So it was a rich time for addressing that curiosity.  And I did visit some of the different religious groups there.
Story_ID: 21387
Speaker 1: But in genetics, I just remember sitting in that class [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] being conscious of being black, and they're talking about black genes and white genes and black this gene.  And I honestly believed that there were black genes and white genes.  That's why I'm so sensitized at this point in time, almost thirty, thirty-five years later, still in a mindset of trying to tie genetics of biology to black and white, you know, with this racial construct.  And, and part of, sort of my whole story going out of--I think I've been called and blessed to be where I am, at the time that I am, meaning, genome project and all because if we don't get it right, if we don't get it biologically, we're gonna miss out on the tremendous power that the science has to bring.
Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you, what was the current, the thinking in 1967 about race and genetics?  I mean can you kind of boil it down?
Speaker 1: Just like our (laughter), just like our thinking about society in general, that the--and because we're dealing with medicine, the focus is on disease, okay.  I'm in medicine, which is different from public health.  So the focus is on medicine.  So when you look at it at a population level, and when you look at it through society with a racial construct, the genetics is seen and taught in that way too.  So we have black diseases, white diseases.  Never mind the fact that all blacks don't have it, but because it's more common, it gets the label of that kind of disease.  Sickle cell [anemia], a black disease.  Many blacks have anemia that's not based in a sickle cell.  Some whites have anemia that is based in sickle cell, but because we have this categorization, it carries over in even how we handle our healthcare.  Even to the big studies that were done in the '80s [1980s] about how a physician factors in the person's quote "race" into their diagnosis, into their recommendations for care, based on what's common or generally known, not based on the individual.  See, the big push now in medicine is this whole term "personalized medicine" that's really driven by the knowledge growing in the genetic basis of biology.  But we're still stuck in our old constructs that are really compromising the power of our new technologies and techniques, and that's part of the scholarly work that we have to do in terms of shedding light.  But my point is simply this, that I was interested in human genetics at a time where it was taught as science, but still taught through the lenses of a racists society, racists in terms of constructs, not in--
Speaker 2: Well, give me an example.
Speaker 1: I don't mean racists in terms of anybody treating me differently.
Speaker 2: I understand.  Give me an example of what you mean?
Speaker 1: Just like I, the clearest example is this whole idea that I heard all the time.  Black gene, white gene.  I actually thought black folk had a gene that you could describe as clearly as in blacks.  This is a gene in black folk.  And I'm thinking because you got the black gene and the white gene, that white folk don't have this gene that we call black gene (laughter), okay.  One time, it was so bad, I really expected, at that time, we were looking directly at the gene.  We were looking at the footprints or the, really the expressions, if you will, the footprints, with skin color being one.  But sickle cell being one of your first classic genetic diseases, okay.  That was, that's one of the hallmark, genetic diseases.  And it was the chairman of our department, Dr. Neal, who really was instrumental in tying sickle cell to the malaria environment and actually working out the fact that the presence of a sickle cell gene actually was contributing to the adaptive advantage or the survival of people in an environment where malaria could be a threat to life, okay, working that out.  But my point is, my, I'm in human genetics so my study and what we're looking at is genes related to disease in people, okay.  And because we have this way of looking at people and grouping people, that influences how we communicate, how we interpret, how we see the data.  And so I would hear all the time, black gene, white gene.  Those were common terms, so much so that I really thought that there were genes that were present in blacks that weren't present in whites and genes for whites and that these lined up with what we call black and white.
Story_ID: 21388
Speaker 1: Now, one thing we used to hear in those days was the term "genetically inferior"--
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: --or genetically superior.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Do those terms have any relevance to anything in science?
Speaker 2: Even then, this is--this is what I meant by I'm learning the science in the context of the social structure because this same color grade that we were talking about earlier that influenced what was pretty and what was the good and what was the desired and what was the thing that anybody with their right thinking would aspire to was this as your reference, okay.  That was, that was our socialization.  Black folk thought the lighter skinned were prettier just like white folk was saying whites are prettier than blacks, okay.  We, I, as a community, I felt like we mimic the majority thinking, and we just superimposed it, all the way down to all the organizations we formed, our sororities and all.  We couldn't get in, it was segregated.  We're locked out so we formed our own, okay, our professional organizations.  We couldn't get into American Medical Association.  We formed a National Medical Association.  We formed the National Bar exam because we're professionals.  And we respect the intents of these organizations in terms of what they do in training, learning service and what have you.  But if we're locked out of those, we modeled ours after those.  And that's been in my mind, that's been what I'm calling the socialization.  And so we do more segregating of ourselves based on the "norms" than sometimes they're doing against us.  And that's what I think certainly is reflected in the color code in our community.  I don't think there are any folk that--this whole thing when we started integrating, all the big issues of the mixing on both sides, I mean, yeah, it would get, we had lots of discussion at Michigan about the black guys with the white women and the white women with the black guys and why (laughter), you know.  Was it just because they had been denied before and it was just access or did you deep down really believe and desire this because you really desired it or because it was going to give you some higher image of yourself.  I mean all those kinds of discussions were part of the dynamics of what was going on.  But it was part of this, what I call, self analysis and discovery aspect that was very much a part of the definition of who you are, you know, who am I kind of thing.  That was rooted into some of my early philosophical interests, you know, who am I?  What am I?  Why am I, kind of things were coming back now in the context of life as we were living it.  But I found genetics to be aligned with the phenotype, shall I say.  And that was difficult, but that was the reality.  And then I followed that course, and I fast forward here today, where we got this genome project that's once again, now, we can look directly at this genetic information, look right at it.  We've got the power of the microscope and the power of the technology, and it's saying, the way you look at life is not the way life is constructed.  Now, what you can do, you're going to hold on to your myths and continue with the problems that occur as a consequence of it or are you going to align yourself with what the knowledge is that's coming forth and then reconstruct your world to operate in line here, and I think that's part of some discussions we're having today.
Story_ID: 21389
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your dissertation?  What was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: I studied genetic--and my, at [University of] Michigan, my department had strong and long-term support and funding studying Indians in South America, okay.  So they were part what we kind of frown on today, called Helicopter Scientists in a sense, but indeed, they had a tremendous resource over the years where they collected samples from this Indian group in South American and did all kinds of studies.  So this was a resource, shall I say, in our department.  And I studying a blood variant, a blood-group variant called GC at the time.  But it, I characterized it.  First of all, it was first observed just as a difference in this Indian population.  And my dissertation was on characterizing this, and I characterized it biochemically and immunologically and I guess, you'd say, biologically from, and then tried to relate the differences to the genetic markers that we were using to define the Indian group at that time.  So it was what we were calling immuno-genetic project, looking at a blood-group variant and trying to relate it to its inheritance pattern and what it did biologically.  That was my dissertation project and genetic variation in this XH antigen as it was called.  But I was right next door to the mouse people which was the exciting research group.  But I didn't wanna study rats or mice.  Well, I should say mice because mice were the model, and still are to some extent, for genetic studies.  And Don Treffler (ph.) who's really a lead person in this area was coming out, we were looking at what we call genetic variation in tissue antigens and for the mouse, it just, technically, it's called H2.  But the point was these are genetic differences in individuals' tissues.  The skin is a tissue, okay.  And there are differences that describe one type of genetic mice, another type of genetic mice.  And this is a time looking to see how the mice differ in terms of disease, in terms of anything people wanted to study from behavior to skin graft, but that lab was looking at rejecting tissue because they were trying to basically understand the foundation of graft rejection as a way to move clinical transplantation.  We, it was evident that survival of tissue from one person to another was dependent on genetic relationship.  And it was an immunological basis of the rejection, so trying to understand what are the factors and genetics that lead to compatibility versus non.  And I was interested in that, and I hope from my story, you can appreciate some of why I was interested in that skin grafts rejection.  I'm gonna finally begin to understand why people's colors are different, you know, what implications that may have for health because I was interested in the effect on health.  But they were mice, and I wasn't interested in the differences in mice, although they had white mice and black mice and they had characteristics of the white mice and black mice (laughter), but I was interested in humans.  So I chose to do my dissertation on a human variant.
Story_ID: 21390
Speaker 1: But my intellectual interest in the subject was the immune-genetics of trans, of tissue transplant patients.  But they both fall under what we call immuno-genetics, genetics differences in the immune response between individuals.  And the significance of that is, so when I did finish, when I finished [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], got the degree, the next step is your post-doc [postdoctoral position].  Now, here's where these one choices come again, okay (laughter).  Now, I'm ready--I've been in Michigan five years.  We have a research seminar every week, and we've had one black person to come in my five years.  And that was Robert Murray who was at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] at the time, only black face.  So I'm almost believing the reality that's confirmed, when I go to scientific meetings, the only black.  And I mean it's, it's--and if you see blacks, they're just like me.  They're trailing down and following the mentor.  But the glorious year of 1971, I went to a Federation meeting.  And my advisor was happy because other people that had come through and would try to line up post-docs, there was a gentleman who had come through who was doing immuno-genetics of rats, and he was interested in my joining his lab.  That was the only offer I had.  He's doing rats in Salt Lake City, Utah.  By this time, I want to get some change of scenery in terms of my people interactions, and I don't wanna work with rats, but that's all I had.  And I was expected to do post-doc.  That's just what you do.  But I went to, I went to the Federation meeting.  It was in Atlantic City [New Jersey], fast story, short, I'm in the hotel.  I come down one morning for breakfast, and on the other side of where I'm sitting are two black men.  And they're talking science, they're talking science.  And just fast forward, they saw me sitting there by myself and said, why don't you come over and join us.  I couldn't get myself--, he said, why don't you come over and join us?  Are you in the meeting?  Are you here for the meeting?  Yes, you know.  Oh, why don't you come over and join us, okay.  So I go over, and they're still talking.  One of these guys, oh, he's, they're both beautiful to me, but one is, you know, just really impressive.  And he's at Florida.  The other is at NIH.  But the bottom line is this guy is a virologist at NIH [National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland], and he's coming to Howard with the charge of finding blacks who are research oriented to begin to build research capabilities in microbiology here at Howard University.  And he's, like I said, a virologist, and the other guy, he's an immunologist.  But the point is I joined them, and they were talking about the papers they were presenting at the meeting.  And they were talking science (laughter), I mean.  And, you know, it was, it was nice.  I mean they couldn't appreciate how great it was and what it was, the experience.  Here were black men, you know, at the meeting in their own rights (laughter), you know, talking about their work.  And this guy's gonna come to Howard [University].  And he asked me, of course, what I'm gonna do, and I told him that, you know, I had a post-doc, and maybe the sadness of which I said it (laughter).  But he said, you don't wanna go to Utah (laughter).  I said, you're right.  I don't wanna go, but I don't have any--you don't wanna go to Utah.  You come to Howard with me.  You come to Howard with me, and I will get you a post-doc at NIH.  And there's no post-doc place better than NIH (laughter) for bio-medicine.  You come to me 'cause he was out recruiting.  He just didn't think that he would be finding someone.  And he said, you, if you come to Howard with me and not take that post-doc, you do need a post-doc, that's part of the training, but if you will come to Howard, I will get you a post-doc at NIH.  And we want your career in research to move.  That's the only offer I had, other than that--it was that or Utah and rats.  No brainer for me, you know, but my advisor was furious.
Story_ID: 21391
Speaker 1: I mean here I had moved all the way from, I honestly felt when I first went to Michigan--I've told this story about.  When I first went there, I honestly felt like Michigan was dealing with a situation where, okay, guys, the time has come.  It's gonna come sooner or later.  We're gonna have to have some desegregation, and we're gonna have to have some blacks here to deal.  So it's gonna be now or later and probably--this is the way I felt.  I'm not putting this, I'm just saying this is the way I felt, like who's gonna take the black student?  And they drew straws, (laughter) and I felt like my advisor got the short straw because he's a fantastic--he was a good Jewish man, but I think my gender and my color--although I think with him, gender, at least in what he expressed, was more of a lackluster for me and why it made me feel like I wasn't the typical student that you want to attract in your lab.  I was the student that he somehow ended up having to take, maybe because I said I was interested in immunology and human, you know, and so he--in terms of his work.  So I think that's probably the reality of it.  I'm just saying, when you're with a professor, and there's this other little Jewish boy that was in the lab.  They had such a wonderful relationship.  They talked, they read, they shared things and what have you.  I'd come in the lab and sometimes I mean, when it first started, I don't think I got a hello, you know.  I'd just go to my little place.  And I, when I took a course with him, it was very difficult because [Louis] Austin had given me my first 'C', but this man was the first person to give me a less than satisfactory with absolutely no comments on the paper whatsoever.  And when I mustered up my strength to ask him to--I wanted to learn.  I wanted to do it right.  So I, "What's wrong?  Can you give me guidance?"  He'd tell me to go, he'd send me to another student that he, that got it right and just compare it and I can see what the difference is.  When I had time to have one of my first discussions with him, it was clear that he felt like my being there at Michigan was a waste of time, his and mine.  He really thought on my part, it was a waste of my time.  He even said, you'll probably just get married and have kids and what have you.  So it's like, we're wasting resources.  I mean there's gonna be resources used and things, and I'm just not on that side where we just do a check off.
Story_ID: 21392
Speaker 1: All right, so Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], 1972.  Now, you came to Howard to, you accepted a position at the--
Speaker 2: Now, I first came in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: '71 [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: What I'm saying is I came, but I hadn't defended my dissertation.  I had finished my work because I had met these two gentlemen I was telling you about.  And he had offered me a job.  He was just coming to Howard in the fall of '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Now, who is he, and let's name him.
Speaker 2: Dr. Willie Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Willie Turner.
Speaker 2: Willie Turner, tumor, viral oncologist, viral virologist.  He had come from the National Cancer Institute where he had fought his own battles, but he had taken the challenge of coming to Howard [University] to set up a research program, okay.  And he was out to challenge what he was dealing with all the time, well, we would hire them but we can't find them.  So it was his personal, his--and he tells this story.  He said, "I'm gonna find blacks."  I mean that, he felt (unclear), even so he got flack in time because he was "only hiring blacks." [showing quotes]  So, but he said, I was tired of hearing that the differences are there, and you don't have 'em here.  You don't have 'em there because there are none.  And so, he was looking.  So I might have been, my first and what have you, but here he had a human immuno-geneticists, and immunology is a subpart of microbiology.
Speaker 1: So did he get you a post-doc at--
Speaker 2: Absolutely--
Speaker 1: --NIH [National Institutes of Health]?
Speaker 2: --absolutely.  And better than a regular one because by coming to Howard first, they had just, [U.S.] Congress had just funded Minorities Access to Research Careers [MARC].  And they were trying to capture those blacks who got Ph.D.s, but then stopped after the Ph.D., didn't get--'cause they were saying that the reason you don't have blacks at the top in the research is because they truncate their career.  They don't do the post-doc.  They don't get that, that growth phase that goes along, and that's why you don't have 'em.  So he was a stickler.  You needed the post-doc because it provides certain things, but if you come to Howard first, you will be in position to apply for one of these grants where you have to have a Ph.D., so you check that off first.  But if you are in a position where a Ph.D. and post-doc would be desired, but you only have the Ph.D., then you can qualify for this application to do a post-doc as a faculty member, which was a few more dollars than just a straight going for the post-doc, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he not only that, he was with the Cancer Institute.  He knew I was interested in immunology.  I had studied the genetics in Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], but now microbiology was more focused on the immunology.  So I needed a post-doc that would strengthen my immunology which would be more of what would be utilized in a microbiology program.  So he hooked me, literally hooked me up in the sense that a colleague that he knew from the National Cancer Institute, I've just hired this new faculty member.  She needs a post-doc.  She's interested in immunology.  She's done the genetics, but now she needs the human.  She needs the immunology.  Can you, if we get this scholarship, this fellowship, rather, can she do a post-doc in your lab?  He brought us together from his contacts.  I met Herberman.  This person's name was Ron [Ronald] Herberman.  He was head of the laboratory of immuno-diagnosis.  He was sensitive in the sense that he said, it's not gonna cost him anything because (laughter), I mean the truth is, the fellowship is going to pay, and I'll be working in his lab.  So that happened.  I got a post-doc at the National Cancer Institute as a consequence of one, being a minority faculty member at Howard, okay, and having that position which he gave me, which qualified me for this.  So I went there to NIH in the laboratory of immuno-diagnosis under Dr. Ron Herberman for my post-doctoral training in tumor immunology.  So that's where the cancer kind of comes in too.  And that was, that was put in place, Ron Herberman, Dr. Turner knew him personally and spoke to him about a post-doc lab for his new faculty member.
Story_ID: 21393
Speaker 1: I actually came [to Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia] because Turner came in '71 [1971], started in the fall. But I had, like I said, I finished my work at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor].  I had finished during the summer, but I had not defended my dissertation.  So I came to start teaching as part of the faculty in the fall class.  And I didn't, hadn't moved here.  I was still at Michigan.  So I lived with Dr. Turner.  He had a beautiful home, he and his wife and kids.  But I literally stayed with him for a little block of time where I lectured.  And then I, then he helped me to--where I went back, I finished, you know, to get my things.  But he helped me get my first apartment which was in D.C., an upstairs apartment for a woman who was head of veterinary medicine.  So I got this veterinary medicine (unclear) (laughter), and she was from Tuskegee too.  But anyway, I lived in her home, and my chair helped me get that, my first apartment here.  And, and then in '72 [1972], I formally finished at Michigan and graduated.  So my actual graduation date is '72 [1972] from the University of Michigan.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And again, you know, that was Michigan.  I was finishing.  I had a job at Howard University, but I didn't even, I didn't even go back for the graduation (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you were really excited about being here at Howard, and--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was, yes, I was.  Dr. Turner is good.  He has a talent for recruiter.  He knew how to touch this black girl.  He told me, "You don't want to go to Salt Lake City, not after five years in Ann Arbor.  You come to Washington, D.C."  I think he was the first one that ever used the term, "You need to be home."  This is Chocolate City (laughter).  You need your apartment.  I mean he appealed to all those things.
Speaker 2: When you think about it, in the 1970s, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] was 80 percent black, the population was.
Speaker 1: He, I mean and it was, it was that too.  And here is a community that, that's what I'm saying.  That's what I told you, five years, research, seminars, every week, literally.  And I meet one, and he's from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], okay.  And he's an M.D.  And I'm trying to be Ph.D. and build a career.  So I'm saying to you, when I met these two guys, and they're both Ph.D.s, okay, Willie Turner and the other guy from Florida that I told you that they were talking at breakfast, they're Ph.D.s, and they're talking the talk.  And they're walking the walk, and I hadn't seen anything like this in, in my routine.  And here I come to Howard, he invites me to give a seminar, and I got a whole room full of (laughter) folk like me.  And not only that, I mean this sincerely, I tell you, oh, God.
Story_ID: 21394
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me just kind of walk through your career here at Howard [University].  In '76 [1976], you became the assistant professor in the Department of Oncology at the Howard University College of Medicine.  So that's--
Speaker 2: That was a parallel.  My primary appointment is microbiology.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that was parallel to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, I was wearing multiple hats.  My primary appointment is microbiology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I worked in tumor immunology, and my lab was, was the first lab in the new hospital with Dr. Leffall.  In fact, Dr. Leffall was the co-principal on my first NIH [National Institutes of Health] R01 grant.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. LaSalle Leffall, surgeon--
Speaker 2: Dr. LaSalle Leffall, the surgeon renowned.  He, my project was to collect surgical specimens and look at immune difference in the region of the surgery compared to systemic 'cause a lot of times we base things on what you get from the blood.  And, and so my project was to look at the immune, so my point in mentioning that was with Dr. Leffall, I literally went to the surgical suite.  You can't do that in the same manner now.  I went to the surgical suite and gowned down and gowned up and I collected samples.  Of course, we had to have consent, but my point was this was so on-the-front lines, shall I say.  And the lab was the first lab in the hospital that was assigned to the surgery department, was the lab that I was able to be the first investigator in.  So, not only did I get my first R01 on looking at local immunity to tumor in colon cancer, but Leffall was the chair of the department and also a supporter of my research.  And those were really great days of energize for research and moving 'cause I thought I was, I thought I was doing something when I got that grant.  And I had to--and it was a new lab.  And I was in charge of buying everything from wipettes to laminar flow hoods.  And, of course, I had to train everyone.  I had students, I had technical people, (unclear) and what have you.  And it's a new facility.  So I'm bringing in people, setting up tests and what have you.  And I'm thinking I'm making great progress (laughter).  It's a three-year grant.  At the end of the second year, I've got protocols in place.  I'm collecting samples, I'm doing essays.  My students are trained.  They're generating data.  We're--, but now, you've got to turn your progress in for the continuation in the third year.  And I go in telling them how I have moved from a completely empty lab to a fully-functional, and what have you, and they look at that--I was so naive, and it was naive, I was so naive that I even titled the project the same and excited about--, I'm churning out data.  Now, as we continue now, I'll be able to now address what I had intended from the beginning.  And that's something, of course, you teach right at the start now.  But bottom line was, it was a "no, no."  You don't, you don't expect to get funded for the same thing that, they're, they're gonna say, we already gave you a couple hundred thousand dollars to answer this question.  What do you mean, you know?  No.  And so the progress, again, and you haven't published anything.  Look, I've been teaching.  I've been training.  I've been setting up labs.  I've been trying to get data to publish.  But the rules are that you've been funded.  You need to have some deliverables in terms of answers to the question, and they weren't there.  And so my grant did not get funded.  I only had one grant.  When my grant didn't get funded, it meant that everything I put in place was jeopardized 'cause I--, the monies to support the students, the money for the technician and what have you.  You're, there's no buffering capacity.  I'm not in a situation where I get my grant as part of a larger grant that's part of a group, that allows you to have that time to, one, write on things are already done, but you don't write about 'em until your first progress report (laughter), kind of thing.  But everybody knows, but bottom line is, I was devastated.  I didn't get renewal of that grant.  And what do I do now?  I've got everybody around here all excited about tumor immunology.  Everybody wanted to work with you, so all of what goes with that.  But I also had an appointment in oncology.  That's what you see there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --oncology, had appointment also in dermatology.  I've always had an appointment in genetics when I came.  But genetics was part of the graduate school and not the [Howard University] College of Medicine.  So you may see some multiple appointments, and it was because genetics is fundamental.
Story_ID: 21395
Speaker 1: Now, in '79 [1979], you were, you became a member of the genetics, Genetic Basis of Disease Review Committee of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the NIH [National Institutes of Health].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.  I mean I had my PhD.  I'm on the faculty.  NIH is also starving to find blacks to put on these review committees.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a question I was gonna ask.  Are there any other blacks studying in genetics?
Speaker 2: Not while I was on there, on that committee, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was their check-off at that time (laughter).
Speaker 1: So the only black person in the country studying this?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No, no.  And that's a difference.  Studying and having the credentials are different, okay.  I would go to the meetings, and we had blacks studying, but they were heads of labs in many cases, and the ones that were, the couple of people who were really doing great work and leaders in this area, they were both, they were MDs, okay.  They were MDs.  And a lot of the human work, obviously, research is done with MDs, but--
Speaker 1: Did you come across the work of James Bowman, Dr. James Bowman from Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum, yes, 'cause he was right there, contemporary with Dr. Murray.  They published a book together on the diseases in people of African dissent.  And so I was aware of him at the time.  I think, I think he is an M.D. too, but--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, but I know Murray was an M.D.  But my point is, so the difference is, the M.D.s that are studying, I mean the folk that study aren't necessarily research as their first level of priority.  So I'm talking about people who are on these review committees.  If, many of them are M.D.s because it's NIH, but they're also research.  They are folk who went more to the research aspect than the patient care aspect, okay.  You can kind of make that choice.  So NIH is physician scientists.  And, but in terms of when you start refining it down to human geneticists, which is what we're talking about, the whole time I was at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor], there was one other that came in while I was there, another black woman.  And quite honestly, I might be mistaken, but I don't think they've graduated any since our era.  It could be checked out, but, and keep in mind too there aren't that many Ph.D.s in human.  And Wisconsin, I think Seattle [Washington], maybe St. Louis [Missouri], but there--I was told that you could count the programs on your hand that had Ph.D.s in human genetics.  So I'm talking about that category.  You have black, you had blacks, many blacks working in technical capacities and very good, such that you see them at meetings.  They are not the head of their labs, and they aren't calling the shots on what research is gonna be done.  And they aren't receiving the money to do the research (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're part of a team that is productive and receiving the money, and they get to work and they get to be part of that scientific team.  But, but I don't see any major growth in numbers in terms of the--Howard is singular in terms of having a degree program in genetics and human genetics.  And Howard has turned out more blacks, and this is where I'm coming to you.  Howard, with Dr. Murray in partnership with Dr. Headings who just passed just last week who came from Michigan, we overlapped at Michigan.  He was leaving Michigan in '71 [1971] to actually come to Howard.  And he set up with Dr. Murray the degree program in human genetics.  And this program has released more Ph.D.s in genetics with diversity.  I don't know how many, but it's--so there are, so I wanted to say there are minority, blacks, particularly, but we have diversity.  We always have diversity at Howard, but there are more, there are blacks with Ph.D.s, but the majority of them or a major portion have come from the program at Howard.
Story_ID: 21396
Speaker 1: So kind of us walk us through.  What have you been doing at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], you know, since you came on board here?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came to Howard, we didn't have a Ph.D. program, and my chair came with that charge.  And I came in the glory days when it was in a growth phase.  And he literally, and not only myself for human genetics, but he brought parasitologists, cell biologists, immunologists, and virologists, mycologists, all black, with Ph.D.s.  And it just, so it was a time where the department really was gearing up and supported to get a first-rate Ph.D. program.  So one of the first things we did, we said, if we're going to do research, we've got to have a quality Ph.D. program because the system is one where you need those students to actually work with you.  That's the way the system is set up.  They actually get their degree, but they are hands to work, because the teaching load was then, and now still is more than my peers have to contend with, okay.  When I first came, I was teaching, we were teaching the medical, the dental, we had to teach the labs, give the lectures, and it was time consuming.  And although they want you to do research, it wasn't in place of, it was in addition to (laughter), okay.  So, but you're young and you're energetic, and you can do all things because all things are possible, remember?  That's my slogan (laughter), and I really believe all things are possible.  But at any rate, so if one of the first things was establishing the Ph.D. program in microbiology in the [Howard University] College of Medicine here--
Speaker 1: And when was that established?
Speaker 2: We worked on that--, I came in '72 [1972], and we, I think the first--, I think maybe about '75 [1975] maybe.  But our first students, our first students included, our first, one of our first students was a person you just interviewed here.  That should have come out.  I don't know if it came out.  Agnes Day [also a HistoryMaker]--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: --was one of the first Ph.D. graduates from this department.  And that first group, true to form, they got the best of what all of us had in our diversity.  And the department acquired a reputation because of it because all of us, as researchers, were, were interested in making sure the student was strong in our area.  After all, the degree was micro[biology], which had to cover all the areas.  And I mention that to say, I think Agnes' program was something like eight years.  I don't know what she said.  But our department got deaned because usually seven years is the limit, you know, in training.  But because we had majors in all of our areas of expertise, that they had to cover in coursework before they even get to research.  Also, we were setting up our labs and so the point is, inordinately, unacceptably long program for a Ph.D.  The school came down, you cannot have students eight and nine years to get a degree.  I don't care what kind of Cadillacs, you're trying to turn out or BMWs or whatever.  You've got to bring this program, and everybody's arguing, but they've got to take this, they gotta take this, blah, blah, blah.  But the Ph.D. program was one and the graduates we have had from that and where they are now, okay.  Our first graduates also included Dean Warren Ashe who was actually, became dean for research.  He came at Howard to be, as part of the team that the dean of the college at that time, Marion Mann, was bringing in to build research, included an office for research.  And that was another person who was at NIH [National Institutes of Health], virologist, been in a laboratory, published, presented at meetings, but didn't have the credentials that gave him the stature in the large community other than knowing him for his work.  So the opportunity presented itself, and he was able to finish his PhD here.  But other students, I mean they're everywhere now.  I mean government, industry, academia.  We have several students, a couple of chairs of departments at other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  I have the pleasure that one of my first Ph.D. students just was promoted to a full professor here at Howard.  So that's kind of a full cycle 'cause she's had her students and her own research and what have you.  But our students, you look at our roster, and that's the kind of testament right now to the Ph.D. program.
Story_ID: 21397
Speaker 1: The other thing was I always had a passion for human variation.  And so when I tied that immunogenetics to tumor immunology, when you ask about my career, I've always been interested in research.  And I thank Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] because in spite of the demand for teaching that was always here, I always had the freedom to pursue to whatever energies I had, to develop and build a career.  And because it also coincides with a national consciousness, other great disparities and support for research at black schools, historically, we were teaching and serving schools to develop your professionals and to teach.  But research, there were no major investments of dollars to build a research on black campuses.  And so we, I was part of that era for Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  As a consequence, I was eligible to apply for funds for my research that came through congressionally mandated programs.  Like I told you, the MARC [Minorities Access to Research Careers], I was one of their first recipients of that post-doctoral degree.  That was a post-doctoral degree.  And since then, I have had some support from some source ever since I've been here.  And I've always had students.  I've always had students over all the years.  I had major funding from the research centers and minority institutions program.  Now, this was a program that came into being to build infrastructure, research infrastructure.  And so when that program came in, in the '80s [1980s], I said, if there's any area of research that we, as a people, need to be in, it's genetics.  I mean it's a bias, but it's genetics (laughter), you know, understanding what role genetics plays in the diseases that we wanna better understand so we can treat them more effectively.  And so I wrote to build a Human Immunogenetics Lab as a core lab for that program.  And our program was funded, and for more than ten years, I served as the director of our Human Immunogenetics Lab.
Story_ID: 21398
Speaker 1: Now, it was that lab [Human Immunogenetics Laboratory at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia] which was in the surgery department, the same place where I had my research grant.  But it was that lab that also hooked me up with Dr. Clyde Calendar across the hall who was also a surgeon, but a transplant surgeon.  Now, he was having his tissue typing contracted out.  And, in fact, George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.].  He set up the transplant program at Howard, looking at the situation with blacks needing transplants.  So he set up the program.  He was having tissue typing done at George Washington.  And I said, look, the same genes that they tissue type for are the genes that I'm studying in terms of immune regulation.  This tissue antigens, HLA [human leukocyte antigen].  That's what we match for donor and recipient.  So with his support and interest, I applied for and got--had the personnel to get certification through the clinical labs to do tissue typing on site at Howard in our lab.  And that's, of course, a certified program, and you have to be certified.  So here we have the ideal example where, what your lab does can provide a service.  But at the same time, it's material to do the research, to ask the questions, what role this difference plays, this difference played.  And it also put me in partnership with Georgetown who were, they were building their immunogenetics lab.  They had a person that came from Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] who, who had been studying black tissue antigens, but that's the way it was called even then.  But it's really tissue antigens in black people.  But the bottom line is she moved here, and she needed an access to resources to continue what she already had.  Plus, she had major reference resources for tissue typing.  I'm at Howard, wanting to get into it and have access to resources.  So we partnered, got a major contract from the National Institutes of Health, their allergy and infectious disease [National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)] there funded our transplant work.  Major funding to collect resources that could help us to better define the tissue antigens in the African American population, 'cause the data showed we--the reagents that we had--we would tissue type a white person.  And many times you could get the tissue type with a black.  It wasn't, it was not uncommon to get a blank.  Now, we know biologically they had something, but our reference panel was not broad enough to capture the diversity of genetics in the population.  It captured that which we most shared with the majority population 'cause the reagents that we used for tissue typing were antibodies that had been collected largely from women, multiple births, multiparous as we say, who have formed antibodies against the tissue antigens as a normal consequence of the birth process 'cause these antigens are very variable.  And so most of the time, the child will have different antigens that they inherit from the mother or from the father.  And the mother is carrying 'em when there's birth.  You know, she recognizes these as foreign-mix antibodies, and these antibodies can be collected from her blood and used to tissue type, just like we collect antibodies for infectious diseases.
Speaker 2: Well, what year was it that you all did this?
Speaker 1: These were, this period was the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: 80s [1980s]
Speaker 1: Now, we got the funding for the, for, to have an onsite lab.  We had the funding for--that was '85 [1985], okay.  But prior to that, I had initiated the collaboration with Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] to collect reagents.  That would have been in the late, that would have been in the late, very late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], like '79 [1979], '80 [1980], '81 [1981], around that time is where the support is largely coming from a contract from NIH to collect reagents where a partnership with Georgetown made that functional because they had references to be able to identify.  I could collect the samples, but if you can't determine what specificities they have.  But she had panels of references that we could use.  So we worked together and published together a lot in the early--in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] on defining the tissue antigens in the African American population.  It also fed right into the big issues in transplant that Dr. [Clyde] Calendar, and the transplant community was having with more blacks on the waiting list and blacks often rejecting their grafts.  And then that began to look like a racial issue because of the disparity, again.  But what it really reflected was lack of comparable knowledge about the genetics underlying this phenomenon of transplant because we didn't have the full appreciation.  But the transplant and HLA [human leukocyte antigen] sensitized me to today, moving forward, because now the difference is, we have the whole genome that codes for all biology, and we're trying to understand the biology of all diseases and the tools that we use is genetic variation, and we use variation in the genome as a probe, not as the cause of disease, but a way to navigate to know where you are in the genome.  We can--
Speaker 2: Now, I wanna interfere right here just to make a couple of markers here.  1999 you received the award for Outstanding Achievement in Immuno-genetics and Continuing Commitment to Improving Health in the Black Community, presented by the--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --Delaware Valley Transplant Consortium in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then in 1990, the Human Genome Project is launched, which you just referred to.
Story_ID: 21399
Speaker 1: Okay, you were just mentioning, referencing Dr. [Clyde] Calendar, and that 1989 award [for Outstanding Achievement in Immunogenetics and Continuing Commitment to Improving Health in the Black Community, from the Delaware Valley Transplant Consortium] in a result of--
Speaker 2: Was the combination of work that we'd been doing over the past--
Speaker 1: Ten years worth of work, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was in '85 [1985] that we actually got the Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] Lab funded through NIH [National Institutes of Health] funding for human immunogenetics and clinical histocompatibility, okay.  Well, actually, the NIH funding was for the research component which was just the immunogenetics lab.  But because the, the genes that we were studying in research were the same gene products that were being matched for in transplant, on a separate arm, I got certification for the lab to do tissue typing, okay.  That was, that's, so then the lab became immunogenetics and clinical histocompatibility.  But the histocompatibility is a service, if you will, of tissue typing for the transplant program.  So here you have to be very discreet and separate about your equipment because you've got to pass the Clinical Laboratories Act, and you're, you know, you've certified your people, your equipment and everything because this is patient care and you're billing for those services.  So it meant that we could do our own tissue typing as opposed to Dr. Calendar having to send that to George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.] for them to tissue type.  And so we started collaborating with them on the work rather than having them to do our, do that tissue typing.
Story_ID: 21400
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask you about this.  Now, I wanna ask you about the role that Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] played, that you all here at Howard played in the Human Genome Project beginning in 1990?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, building up to 1990 also I had done another, and this is how I kept my--I was able to, I have been able to keep my research active because of the physical location of NIH [National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland], beginning with the post-doc.  And then I was going back periodically to reboot, to realign.  So during the opportunity to develop the immunogenetics lab, I did another visiting investigator stint at NIH with the [National] Cancer Institute [NCI].  But this time, I was looking at--my interest in human immunogenetics was growing--actually, one before that was the NK, when the NCI moved to Frederick [Maryland] and I was there.  But let me say this, Howard, how we got tied to the genome project, the genome project was perking up to officially start in 1990, okay, as a formal fifteen-year project.  When it was first envisioned, formally starting in 1990 to be a fifteen-year project to complete sequencing of the genome.  Now, in the late '80s [1980s] there, we were sensitive from HLA [human leukocyte antigen], okay.  Another change that was occurring was Howard had recruited George Bonney who is a statistical geneticist who had come out of New Orleans [Louisiana] with a big statistical group there.  He was recruited to this same program that, I had the immunogenetics lab [Human Immunogenetics Laboratory, Howard University].  He came to head our bio-statistics lab.  And I mention him because he's coming now in the, in the early, mid-80s [1980s], I don't know exactly.  But the point is, he's coming to head statistical, the statistics core, and we, he's part of this RCMI [Research Centers in Minority Institutions] program.  And he and I meet, and we talk, and he tells me, Georgia, HLA, which is what I'm studying, this human antigen, he's saying that your work here is foundational for the big project that's really on the way, and we're talking big project--he's saying this, the human genome project.  I didn't know about the human genome project before he came because he's now coming out of the group that's doing the planning of the statistics for this work, how we're gonna analyze this data.  That's the group he's coming out of.  But he tells me, we need to have a genetics resource here that's part of the genome project.  He also, he's not--, he's Ghanaian.  And he was in touch with the French folk that were big on human genetic polymorphism institute there [Paris, France] called CEPH, the Center for the Study of Human Polymorphisms.  The bottom line is, he introduces me to his colleagues, tells them about my work in HLA, but saying that I need to be thinking of having something comparable to their study of polymorphisms.  Actually, we go to Paris to look at their set up and to really meet these folks.  So George kind of introduced me to the community that was planning and working with plans for the genome project.  So we write a grant from Howard to have a genome resource at Howard, a resource for genomic studies at Howard.  At that time, we called it GRAAP, Genomic Research in African American Pedigrees, okay, GRAAP was the name.  We, all excited because George is saying, you've gotta have, you're gonna have to come to us to have resources of black 'cause at that time, and true enough, all of the resources that the folk gearing up for the genome project working with all of these resources are from white populations.  This was a heady time, but suffice it to say, our grant was not even close to being funded.
Story_ID: 21401
Speaker 1: It was not really, and what they told us was essentially, I'll put it to you [referencing the grant application to fund a a resource-base for genomic studies at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]. This is George's language, "This genome project is the big arena.  This is not your arena.  You need to go over here to this program that we've set aside for research in black schools.  This is where you need to go and get your money for what you want to do because this is real science in this pool of money for the [Human] Genome Project, okay.  These are your Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] labs, your Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] labs.  These are the labs that's going to do the Genome Project.  But you can go over here to RCMI [Research Centers in Minority Institutions] and Minority Access to [Research] Careers [MARC] and (unclear) and get some money for what you want to do."  That's what happened to the effort to get the money for the core lab, but in the meantime, George makes the point--this is how he makes the point.  "Georgia, they can do the genome project with all whites.  That's a fact because the reality is any human can serve as a reference for a human, another human.  And it doesn't matter where you get the samples if you're going to establish a reference for the human genome.  But once you get this reference, you're not gonna be able to do anything about interpreting and reading it unless you understand how variation is distributed, okay."  That's real.  So what happened was I went to NIH [National Institutes of Health] this time--this is the early '90s [1990s].  I think Francis [Collins] came in 1993, okay.  But the BRCA1, the first breast cancer gene had been reported.  And we had been collecting samples from breast cancer patients at Howard [University].  So the Genome Project had another opportunity, they called it VIP, but it was for visiting, it was a visiting investigative professorship [VIP].  And you had to be in an, at a, you had to have a senior status, senior scientist status, and you had to have your own resources.  So that's, an iteration of going to NIH.  I applied for that, and I was part of their first VIP program, and I brought our resources to look at the genetics of breast cancer.
Story_ID: 21402
Speaker 1: But the very first day [on the Visiting Investigative Professorship (VIP) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH)]--I tell this story.  This is one of those stories, I tell this story today.  I had already been accepted to study the genetics of breast cancer [as part of the Human Genome Project].  But as part of the protocol of the day, when I went out to visit the lab and what have you, I was introduced, I had on the agenda for the day to meet the director.  And at this time, Francis Collins, had just been called in to take over from [James] Watson [as head of the Human Genome Project].  And the story is that at the end of the day, I'm waiting just to do a cordial acknowledgement and be able to say I met the director of the center.  And Francis Collins comes in with his, with his motorcycle helmet under his arm, and he had a reputation.  He drove a motorcycle and what have you.  And he comes in, and he's very down-to-earth and what have you.  And the man has done his homework.  It's nice to meet you and what have you.  I know that you're interested in the genetics of African Americans.  How'd you like to do a project with me?  Now, this is the director (laughter) of the Genome Institute.  But Francis had done a medical missions, missionary stint in Nigeria [West Africa].  And he was already studying the genetics of diabetes, and they had a big study going on in Finland where they're looking at diabetes in Finland.  And he offered me, he says, you're interested in the genetics of African people.  I'm interested in the diabetes, the genetics of diabetes in African people because when I was in Nigeria, I saw people with diabetes, but they were not fat.  They were not obese.  A big problem trying to study the genetics, even now, of diabetes, which is common in our population, is the complications of the diabetes of obesity and trying to sort that out.  So he said simply that, I would like to offer an opportunity to form a partnership where we look at Type 2 diabetes in West African populations.  That's going to give you the foundation genetics for understanding African Americans.  And I think it might be a more homogeneous African, a more homogeneous diabetes population genetically, okay.  And that's when we started planning for the collaboration with what we called Africa-America diabetes mellitus, not African American.  This was to represent a partnership between Africa and America, and we were in charge of following the NIH protocol of putting out an RFA from physicians who were interested in working with us at Howard to study the genetics, to use the tools that were emerging with the genome project, to better understand the biology of disease.  So this was, actually, this is occurring in the '90s [1990s] now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's '97 [1997], I think.
Speaker 1: This is occurring in the '90s [1990s], but I'm, and I had gone to NIH--this is what I wanted to say, the thing that hooked me to the [Human] Genome Project was when I went to NIH really to study the genetics of breast cancer, met Francis who offered the opportunity to get samples from African populations that's gonna help us to be able to use these resources from the genome project to better understand the genetics of disease in this population.  And out of that partnership, that was also heavily funded or primarily funded by the Office of Research on Minority Health, John Ruffin comes into it, congressionally mandated again on Office for Research on Minority Health.  It subsequently became the National Center for Health and Health Disparities.  And then with the recent passage of the [President Barack] Obama Reform, Health Reform, it was elevated to the National Institute.  So it moved from an office and a director to a center, now to an institute.  But he funded this project because his charge of his, at his agency was to build a capacity for research in minority health.  That's their charge.  And so he was supporting my desires to have a genetics research base at Howard to look at diseases that were disproportionate in populations and diabetes was one.  So, from that partnership, we established, we got major funding to really support the first round of physical, of resources for this, where we're sitting now.  Initially, we got funding from the National Center for Research Resources at NIH to renovate this sixth floor, what we're on now.  This was the, this was a animals wing for the cancer center.  And then at that time, there was money for construction.  And we wanted to have a visible presence for the genetics focus that we are building here at Howard.
Story_ID: 21403
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1997.  I know that exactly.  And, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: And Dr. Rick Kittles [geneticist] comes in that same year according to this [interview outline].
Speaker 2: Well, he, again, see, this is coming out now.  I'm at, on sabbatical, essentially, at NIH [National Institutes of Health], with the Genome Institute at this time, okay, that program that I was telling you about, visiting investigative professor, professorship.  But, and then I hook up with Francis [Collin's; head of the Human Genome Project] who's interested in looking at the genetics of disease in a population.  Diabetes was our international collaboration.  But a big problem also emerging was prostate cancer genetics because another young, sharp, black guy that was at the NIH with Francis Collins in the cancer genetics group is John Carpten.  He's since, he's at Trans Genomics now in Arizona [Translational Genomics research Institute (TGen), Phoenix, Arizona], but still sharp.  I just recommended him this year for an award at the Genetics Society.  I think he'll get it.  He's really sharp.  But he was, and this was a partnership with [Johns] Hopkins [University/Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], looking at the genetics of prostate cancer.  Hopkins had done this study of families of ninety-nine--think it was ninety--in the '90s [1990s], of ninety-nine families or something on that order.  And two of the families were black, two in their study.  And they found an association of the prostate cancer with a marker on chromosome 1, and they got excited because only two black families, but both of them had the marker.  So their thinking, maybe this marker is high frequency in blacks with prostate cancer.  So they were receptive then to, we need to have this center at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] now that's already involved with getting the African samples.  We need to get them involved with recruiting African American families now that's going to be able to, we can use this knowledge coming from genomics for prostate cancer, which also is higher frequency in black males.  So again, with funding from John Ruffin to support the science of collection and characterization of DNA, we start what's a national study now, called the African American Hereditary Prostate Cancer Study.  And we had a network.
Story_ID: 21404
Speaker 1: There's a whole history with that, but I mention that because Rick Kittles was just finishing up his Ph.D. at NIAAA [National Institute for Alchohol Abuse and Alcoholism] when we are planning this project, okay.  He's fresh, bright, really bright.  Everybody's impressed with him.  He's at NIAAA, but finishing up his Ph.D., but very conscious of how genetics relates to anthropology.  So he had an interest in molecular anthropology as well as how it relates to disease, but a real consciousness to look at how this genetics is being related to diseases in our population.  So with Francis Collins, we say, we need to recruit Rick Kittles to really bring the latest technologies that's he's working with, obviously, in his training, to this project on prostate cancer.  So, and I said, with Francis Collins because it was a hard sell.  He was at NIAAA, getting his Ph.D. from George Washington [University, Washington D.C.], and programs have plans for how they measure their success on their students, if you will.  Rick is being recruited, look, we're starting something new at Howard.  We need state-of-the-art methodologies and techniques and folk who are really going to be a part of this move.  He kind of had a passion as a young black man to really want to have his part in this.  But I say that for him because it was a hard decision 'cause your peers--just like, when--we jumped over it, but when I told my advisor I was coming to Howard, after we had gone through his not even hardly speaking to me till me becoming the first student, I'm told, that he had an actual finishing kind of party at his home, okay.  I mean when we started, I was gonna be a waste of everybody's time by the way I felt.  But by staying in, and there were many ups and some downs, but I stayed in, and I, and, you know, not the best degree, but acceptable, credible degree. And we worked through our, but as he saw that I was sticking and what have you, the relationship changed.  So by the time I finished, I'm accepted.  And so he's looking forward, I guess, to acknowledging this success.  And when I told him I was coming to Howard--, you just don't do that.  I mean you don't do that.  That's suicide.  That's, it's suicide, you know.  There's no, your career, you know, you're gonna lose everything you've got going.  Rick, at this point, is the same kind of thing.  This man was being recruited by the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a post-doc when he finished here.  And so all of your peers are saying, University of Chicago, research.  This is where you go.  You know, he had probably others too, but that was one of the prominent ones.  And we wanted him to--and so Francis said to him what my chair said to me.  If you come and help us head and get this molecular genetics component set up, state-of-the-art for the genomics, we will get you post-doc at NIH, okay.  Sounds, almost the same kind of thing, and so you're not gonna lose.  No, we're gonna make sure, although you're not following the traditional path, you're not going to lose because it's to our advantage too that you have your check offs.  And that's how we recruited him out of what we were doing here, his own desire to be a part of that, and believing he could make a difference.
Story_ID: 21405
Speaker 1: But he [geneticist Rick Kittles] is really good and very bright.  And he hit the ground running.  He wrote grants, and he's right on the top.  And he presents well.  So he got grant funding from DOD [Department of Defense].  And then he had this, monies that were coming in for this project.  And then he had the in-house monies.  In other words, young career, very, a lot hit on, what have you, but such that he had students, he had lab, he had things just popping, that when it came to a decision of whether you go and do the post-doc now, it was, it's almost like he's kind of gotten ahead of what the post-doc is to add in there 'cause he's already literally in charge of a lab.  He's already publishing on his work area.  He's already in an area to drill down in.  So, he was moving on that front, and he was very attractive and very good and being highly recruited, and Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] did not have a tenure track position for him.  We brought him in on the research grant.  And by the time we go through all that's required to get a tenure track, when that's not there, he had, he was being sought by many, and his career was at a point where he could make choices otherwise.  So I think we really lost him because his career was on a faster pace than the institutional change.  So he went on to, as I said, to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] at that point.  But, yes, he was part of the dynamism of getting this component.  And with his leaving in 2007, that triggered then my stepping down from the chair of microbiology to actually step into the molecular genetics because that was, that had been the motivation and my HLA [human leukocyte antigen] polymorphism had been the molecular genetics foundation for a molecular genetics front that's now going to be based on these polymorphisms across the whole genome.  I mean essentially, the gen--, the whole genome project is HLA writ large, because the variation I'm studying in HLA, which is called HLA polymorphism, we get to be able to map the genome because we find these polymorphisms distributed across the genome that we can use to get our orientation and grounded in where we are.  And so the polymorphism, that's an essential characteristic of the whole genome is what we use to navigate and know where we are in genome land, if you will (laughter).  And that's what we need to know 'cause we're looking for, we're looking for genes of interest.  And we use these signals and sign posts to let us know where we are.  And so that kind of, just to move forward, but that was speaking to when Rick [Kittles] came, how he came, at the stage he came, and even his moving on at that point.
Story_ID: 21406
Speaker 1: So you, now, you've been the department chair, I mean you still are, you are the department chair here [Department of Microbiology, Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: You're not?
Speaker 2: No, Agnes [Day, also a HistoryMaker], the one you just interviewed--
Speaker 1: Oh, she is the chair now, okay.
Speaker 2: --she moved in after I stepped out, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right--
Speaker 2: I came to kind of give some stabilization to the molecular genetics program, and all this time I've basically had to pick up what Rick [Kittles, geneticist] left, that he wasn't able to take with him.  But I, because of the parallel areas, in terms of I'm interested in variation and how you use it in disease mapping as well.  So it took some reorienting, but he had a grant that I was able--NIH [National Institutes for Health] approved--that I was able to take over and try to finish up some things that he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, it says in--
Speaker 2: And now, the latest grant that I submitted this, earlier this year, grows out of what's really my interest which is regulation of the genome.  But that's through a partnership now with our physics, physicists because this is a partnership with theoretical physicists where I'm interested in looking at the genome sequence, but in terms of how is it regulated, and that's a big area now, what we call epi-genomics.  And that's gene expression.  So, yeah, we got the same genes, but how they're turned on and off is dependent on the context and the environment that you're in.  And so these health disparities have forced us to recognize, it's not just the sequence.  And so you're not gonna be able to just find a bad gene that's in black folk that explains why they got this disease, okay, (laughter).  It's not gonna be that simple, okay.  But there is a kind of tendency in medicine to want to blame the gene or blame the victim.  That's why you even talk about finding the asthma gene, the hypertension gene because it's almost like, if you've got a bad gene and then we don't have anything to do with your health problems (laughter) as a society.
Speaker 1: So it's come to that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I mean that's what I'm saying.  I mean I'm sure you pick up the paper and you see, we found--I mean there was a period there where you couldn't pick up a paper without finding a new gene for some problem 'cause that was the way the technology allowed you to do that.  But these genes were not being the cause of the disease.  They're involved in the biology of the disease.  That's where we are now.  And we have to, we can't deny the context within which the gene is doing what it does, is a clear and significant contributor to how the gene is expressed.  And we're finding that environment can vary all the way from what you eat to how you think and what you believe.  All of these get transformed internally, essentially, into energy.  I think that's the connection I have with the physics.  We look at this genome as a thermodynamic entity, you know, structured in the same laws that govern the universe.  And that's what the data, you know, are leading to, that to understand how this is regulated, you're gonna have to understand what's going on inside of a person.  Much of our science has focused on measuring to the detail, what's outside.  And to some extent, I do think it's part of this same cultural context or socialization process that we started talking about from the beginning when I was talking about the color thing, you know.  The society would not want to think that it is the reason for the differences.  It would be better if there's something wrong with the person that makes them have the disease or have the problem.  But when the data is saying, hey, you all got the same set of working parts, but how they work can't be separated from the context within which they have to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21407
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me, when you look back over everything you've done here at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], what today would you think constitutes the things you've done that, constitute your legacy?
Speaker 2: Establishing the National Human Genome Center at Howard [University].  I don't think we, as a community, in both local and the larger, fully appreciate or have appreciated fully the significance of African people in unfolding or telling human history from the genome perspective.  I often say that the genome story of human history, that's what it is, the genome human origins, migrations, adaptations.  And I believe this last phase is liberation.  And it's all in the variation.  We can show from the genome, there's no question, humans, all populations can show a base from Africa.  The data are clear.  And over different periods of time, moving out, just like in the farming communities, you know.  You grow up and you go off and you take your little plot of land.  Humankind moved out with its own subset of the variation, that's foundation, and continued to grow and develop in new environments.  Those, the new environments are reflected in adaptations that become sequence variation that we see.  It's recorded in the genome.  So we have the history of the origins, the migrations, the adaptations.  And now we're dealing with questions of identity that force us to recognize not only are the differences biological and environment, but the environment inside.  And we're really having to deal with what role does culture play in the problems we're trying to understand.  And you can't deal with culture without dealing with what people believe is real.  And so we're having to apply our tools to understanding how this exquisite organ we call the brain, how it works in relationship to regulate and orchestrate the body's system.  And we're going to have to deal with people believe, based on information that is provided.  So you have to look at sources of information.  You go back to the source.  And when you begin to ask, what's the source of the information as to how valid 'cause these bodies are so constructed that our genome asks us no question about whether something is real or not.  We tell it what the environment is, and then it gives us a response that's compatible with life and survival.  It, it makes no judgment.  If you say I'm threatened, I got to get out of here, it's gonna turn the system on that works in what we call "fight or flight."  It's gonna give you what you need to either stand there and fight or what you need to get out of there as quick as you can.  And you can't have both systems for growth and development turned on at the same time as fight and flight.  So whatever environment you're saying, you're going to get a response that's best for you in that environment.  And we're understanding that we have both systems, and it's what we believe is real is what determines what's operating and learning the mechanisms under that.  So this question of identity, this question of who we think we are, who we say we are and how that relates to our behavior.  Good, excellent studies show that the biggest risk factor in this group of diseases we call health disparities is behavior, choices that people make in situations.  And you cannot separate that from how you see yourself in the environment because the body is designed to maintain homeostasis, to maintain harmony of systems that work to maintain a balance.  And what we're finding is that the choices that people make can't be separated from the context in which they live and the options that they have to maintain balance.  Good studies in animals show that your rank, in social animals, monkeys, showing that the rank in the society influences access to resources which influences what behaviors people make to maintain that balance.  It's human to maintain the balance.  The options for how you maintain it is socially related.
Speaker 1: Um--
Speaker 2: So the genome center's presence here, that's what I'm saying, at this point in time for, and the beauty of the diversity in African people is a powerful tool for genetic studies because diversity becomes a way we see, whether you're looking at the variation in the genome or the diversity in people, we are able to see what's there because there's diversity.  If there's no diversity for all practical, there's nothing to compare.  You don't see it.  So I believe, back to my childhood story of God, why'd you make us different, you know?  Why are some black and some white?  Perhaps a partial answer to that that's coming from my science now, is so you could know how much I really do love you, so much that how I made you to operate, how I made you.  You could not know yourself if I didn't put the differences in.  And the differences are such that even to the genome, each person is unique.  Each person is unique.  And to discover your own uniqueness that's reflective of just how exquisite you are, how else could I help you discover who and what you are and that you are and an expression of my love except you have the diversity.
Story_ID: 21408
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That out of science, I think I come with a generation--each generation has its own continuing contribution to a complete story, if you will.  And I think that out of our history of Civil Rights and people, in my generation, we are, cover the spectrum now in terms of professions in everything, everything essentially.  And I, in my case, the capacity to use science as a tool for self discovery and understanding and solving the problems that we have through knowledge.  I, I grew up in the church, as I told you, and many of the scriptures that I learned as a child just bible studies are real to me now.  My people perished for lack of knowledge.  Genome came in to bring for me a whole new knowledge base for understanding life.  And I've learned nothing about the genome that's not consistent with what I learned about life in Sunday school.  God loves us.  The best life is when you are serving, and you're giving because we're each made to serve one another that the whole can be healthy.  We look at our body.  No cell makes this special thing for itself.  It makes and then gives, and when each cell is doing it, the whole body works.  I mean maybe from the science we can see truths that are as fundamental as what we learned in, in my case, in Sunday school.  One person wrote and said, in kindergarten.  But those principles of loving and caring and that we're one, and that we're related, the genome comes in and makes, gives us science to say, look, you're each uniquely made to express the wonder of life.  You each, you can't be here without something to give.  You couldn't be here without something to give.  To discover that, to give it, that's like Heaven.  So maybe it is a time for black folk to help bring Heaven on Earth through our own liberation about life, who we are, how we relate one to another, in ways that frees us, releases us from the diseases that the body expresses as a consequence of trying to give us a reality in line with all this false stuff.  We tell it, it's real, you know.  It's made to follow what we say and believe as the law.  It makes no judgment, and so we chose to believe, I'm sick, I'm tired, I'm angry, I'm under siege and what have you.  It's almost, the thing about your genome, God, how do I meet this person?  How do I (laughter), I mean that might be taking it far, but my point is we have this genome that has been here from the beginning.  To me, it's an example of life.  It's another example of life, from the beginning.  All of us come into being by this genome, one from the mother, one from the father.  And when you get fertilization, the program starts again, but you're unique 'cause even though you may have the exact same sequence, the laws of physics say you can't occupy the same space at the same time.  And environment and position, even in the embryo, the program that I was at (unclear), every cell that's forming, and it divides, it's got a different environment to nutrients, to, to other factors that operate at the cell level, all of which is being fed to an evolving system that ultimately unfolds and expresses as the whole individual.  So what I want to leave an enriched or more comprehensive understanding of who we are, what we are, the same questions I wanted to ask as a child, how we operate, what makes for the differences and to free us from thinking that the differences are ways by which we distinguish ourselves and rank ourselves and decide who's good and who's bad, and what's desired and what's not desired.  And then a whole life of trying to give the person what someone outside says you need without even knowing that you already have everything you need to be here.
Story_ID: 21409
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me something about your family.  Now, you, do you have children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No children?
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: Who do you consider your family?
Speaker 2: My nuclear family, yes.  I was the one who went to school and was always in school so I treasure the time that I was kind of like the support for my mother [Rosa Anna Barton] and father [Ulyses Grant Dunston].  But my other sister actually was the caretaker.  She was the homemaker so she had the time.  I was still working.  But I also, very close to my deaf mute sister who is still living at home and try to care with her.  But I can truly say that I have my set of friends, some long term, that have been a part of my life, that work in concert with my life in terms of special friends.  But, but my life is largely centered, time wise around the work arena, the work arena.  And there really is, it sounds trite, but there is a joy in seeing students come into their confidence of their knowledge and ability to solve--the thing I just want everyone to know that you're made to solve a problem, you know (laughter).  None of us come here happenstance.  You, your being here is just as much the order that we see and study in one cell becoming these trillions of cells, all placed properly for what we describe as our self.  The order doesn't stop with the boundaries of our capacity to measure and see.  Each person is unique.  You are equipped.  There's nothing more empowering than self discovery to me, and knowing what you have to give, and then finding an arena to give that and see that help someone else.  That's what solving a problem is.  I think you get known by the problems you solve.  So it's kind of nice to know, I'm already made to solve a problem.  Let me just try to put 'em together (laughter), the problem with my capacity.  So this whole idea of who we are and what is life?  Maybe it's philosophical (unclear) and maybe there, I don't know who the black philosophers are writing about this.  I mean I still haven't pursued that as a discipline, but there's a lot of thought going on because of the ethical, legal and social implications of what the science is saying.  I mean we're still dealing with the fact that the science says, hey, look, first you've got to get rid of this idea that you're grouped into these racial groups.  We still deal with not having a knowledge-based decision making in that regard.  We still have requirements because of different agenda.  One, within the community that's trying to deal with issues that have occurred because of race, saying, Georgia, what do you mean, no races?  But I'm saying, somehow we've gotta find a way to, to deal with the facts that's coming, but we've got to uncouple paradigms that don't serve us now as we try to understand the biology.  So it's how genomics, as a science is coming now to us to address the same kinds of problems we've been dealing with.  But it requires a new way of thinking, a new way of thinking.  And to think that you're living at the time where there would be a transformation in how we think and then the whole world that opens up to us when we begin to understand how our system works in terms of its capacity to give us experience comparable with what we believe.  That's why I love the theme, "All things are possible if thou canst believe."  Believing comes first.  That's the way the system is set up.  You've got see it inside before you can experience it outside.  So we begin to ask, "What's the relationship between the experiences we're having and the beliefs that we hold?"
Story_ID: 21410
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything we have not discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?  I have one more question.
Speaker 2: No, let's go for it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, this is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would think that it ties in with what I've been trying to share all along.  I would like to be remembered as really playing a part in awakening, is a word that's used in some categories, but opening our consciousness, increasing our awareness of what it is to be human; to take, through the experiences that we have as a people, to use what, from an external was, to solve your own problem, but to find out that the issues are so fundamental to human identity that to solve our problems, is to solve the global problems, if you will.  I think problems we're having on many levels are fundamentally a question of identity, how you define yourself, what you believe to be real.  And so if we can use our best science now to understand what's the relationship between what we believe and what we experience, to me that is the ultimate in self empowerment because as is often said, it's going to be so much cheaper--I'll use that language, or less expensive to change a thought than to change a gene.  So if we see the relationship between the self taught, what we're telling our bodies is reality because it's just gonna respond according to that, that I can actually think about what I think about and what I say as things, as is said.  I mean these are energy patterns.  Physics tells us everything has its own vibration.  When we begin to use the science to give us an appreciation of where our real power is, it's self control.  And you can have what you desire if you can control how you use your own energies, of thinking, of speaking, focus, these are focused.  So I think to be a, to be, to have some role in this human evolution, every stage of human liberation--that's what I call the genome.  First, the origins, then the migrations out of Africa, then adaptations to the global diversity, and now liberation from, that rests with our advances in neuroscience and understanding how the brain works as an expression of our minds and bringing the mind and body together as functional parts of a whole.  The genome says you're one whole.  It's all in the one to really understand the relationship between what the genome says is our larger identity.  So when you ask the question that kind of rooted in my early beginnings and my time that I came out, the genome comes to make us knowledgeable of being whole persons, whole persons.  And the first thing it says is that most of your identity is not in the part of you that you can see and measure and touch and feel and, and that you call life.  You are nested in life, but a life that's so much more expansive than what you can see, but to minimize or to restrict yourself to this is to cut yourself off from this, this entity that you are, what it is to be human.  What it is to be human means that you are cut--that you are this whole person, depending on your language, spirit, soul, body, and I'd like to think that to minimize one, to deny one does not eliminate it (laughter).  So the genome is about life.  It's about, the human genome is about human life, and how we're each intimately connected to it, integrated in it, a part of it and that the growth and discovery is through the diversity.  That's genome deep (laughter) in terms of variation.  But to discover life and how we are integrated in it and natural expressions of it, that is as beautiful as any sunset or any starry night.  It's the life that we each express.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
