Story_ID: 335733
Speaker 1: My name is Tracey Lewis, I'm the interviewer today.  And our videographer is Matthew Hickey, and we are here in Miami [Florida] with--
Speaker 2: Albert E. Dotson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Albert Dotson, Jr.]
Speaker 1: And can you spell your last name for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, D-O-T-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Dotson, can you tell us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 9th, 1960.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're a young thing.  And--
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Make sure that's on tape.
Speaker 1: And we are here in Miami.  I'm still getting used to, so am I in Biscayne Bay, or, okay.  I am in Miami.  And can you tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: What type of attorney are you?
Speaker 2: I focus on two areas, land use and zoning and government procurement.  And in that vein, we represent developers who are seeking government approvals for the properties that they're looking to develop.  And with respect--with government procurement, you know the government buys goods and services, all types of goods and services and we represent clients that are seeking to do business with government.
Story_ID: 335734
Speaker 1: Here's our top five icebreaker questions.  Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Huh, you're the first man I've heard to say red, that's cool.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  Sweet potato pie.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Your favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation spot, anyplace I'm with my family.
Speaker 1: That's so sweet.  Favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year.  In Miami [Florida], my favorite time of year is January.
Speaker 1: Now what is Miami like in January?
Speaker 2: Miami, let me state it in this context.  During the summer, Miami's a great place to be, extremely humid and very hot.  I was born in the Northwest, or the Midwest, and lived in the Northeast for a period of time.  So the change of seasons we don't get down here, but I do miss it.  In January, maybe February, you get cool weather.  For those who live down here, it's cold 'cause it's in the fifties or sixties.  But it is a change in the season down here.  It's refreshing.
Speaker 1: I can understand that.  Do you have a favorite saying?  Something that people may know you by or was passed down?
Speaker 2: I'll respond to the second thing you said, passed down.  You make the difference.  That's a saying and we may get into this a little bit later, but it's a saying that my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] had placed on a little plastic coin that he used to carry in his pocket.  Whenever he spoke to people, he'd always remind them that they made the difference, and would give them one.  And if you ask about a saying that's been handed down, that surely is one of them.
Story_ID: 335735
Speaker 1: Let's start with your dad.  Tell us his name and what year he was born.
Speaker 2: Albert E. Dotson, Sr. [Albert Dotson, Sr.], born I believe in 1938.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about his childhood?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot.  I do know that he moved from Memphis, he and his family moved from Memphis to Detroit, Michigan.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you know how old he was?
Speaker 2: He was young.  I'd probably say between zero and ten, all right, when he moved.  So he grew up for the most part in Detroit.  And he was part of a single family, single-parent household for some of his life until his mother [Alberta Rowland] remarried.  And he has two brothers, and they are about ten or eleven years apart.  So they sort of grew up as different families in that regard.  But there's a lot about him that I'd love to get into when you tell me the time is right.
Speaker 1: The time, this is the time.  So yeah, we're talking about him.
Speaker 2: We'll just talk about him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He--when he moved to Detroit, he and my grandmother lived in an area off of Seven Mile Road, and nowadays you hear more about Detroit and how it's broken up into miles.  Everyone in Detroit sort of references their birthplace by what mile they live closest to.  But he lived on Seven Mile.  And his uncle, R.D. Dotson, the R.D. has no meaning other than R.D.  R.D. was really like his father to him.  He--and my Aunt Alice [Alice Dotson] also was married to R.D. Dotson.  My father would stay with them from time to time while my grandmother was working.  But they grew up on Seven Mile Road, Seven Mile and Lumpkin, near Lumpkin Street in Detroit.  He, after finishing high school, began working as a stock boy for Sears, Roebuck and Company [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  He started school at the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan].  And his original thought was that he was going to be pre-med.  He did not finish college.  He continued to work with Sears.  And if I can fast forward a little bit and then I'll come back.  He ended up staying with Sears for about thirty years, retiring after we moved here to Miami [Florida].  And he was working with Sears at that time.  But his childhood was such that, at least again to my knowledge, that he was very involved in church.  He attended Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, which was in Hamtramck [Michigan], the city in which he went to high school, he went to Hamtramck High [Hamtramck High School, Hamtramck, Michigan].  Hamtramck at that time was primarily a--the majority population in Hamtramck were Polish immigrants.  So he learned some Polish.  And I think this one phrase that he learned that he hasn't forgotten and I hear it all the time whenever he wants to show me how bilingual he is.  He, as I mentioned, very involved in church.  That's where he met my mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson].
Story_ID: 335736
Speaker 1: But back to Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  You know the nineteen years at Sears were--he [Dotson's father, Albert Dotson, Sr.] started at Sears at nineteen and working for thirty years as a stock boy.  He ended up moving up through Sears, and at that time Sears and Roebuck was the retail store.  I mean it was the catalog store.  Everything you wanted to buy, an appliance in your home, tools for your house, you bought it at Sears.  He ended up moving through Sears, Roebuck and Company, became the first African American in Sears' history to achieve a number of positions within Sears, ultimately becoming a store manager, which again at that time in Sears' history was a extremely significant position.  That did not occur in Detroit [Michigan].  He did receive several, meet several plateaus within Sears while in Detroit, division manager, department manager, assistant manager.  Those types of positions.  He worked at the Highland Park [Michigan] store, which was right on Woodward Avenue in Detroit.  And we eventually--he eventually met my mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson].  And he met her at the church, Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, in Hamtramck [Michigan].  They married each other, and a little over a year later, I was born.  But my father--I share that part of his upbringing and some of the accomplishments because it's really significant when you talk about who I am.  I mean, looking at him and how he significantly achieved, in a time where that level of achievement was rare, unheard of for sure, at least in that industry with that company.  And in communities where he was doing a lot of things for the first time.  We moved from Detroit to Chicago [Illinois] eventually.  Sears was headquartered in Chicago.  And we moved there as part of him being transferred with Sears.  But before we left there, what was, what should be shared, is the family life that really began at that same church in Hamtramck.  Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church was the little brown church on Caniff [Street], 1740 Caniff, I remember the address.  We as a family attended Corinthian the entire time we were there.  I was the--I am the oldest child, having been born a year after their marriage.  And then a year thereafter my sister Toya [Toya Dotson Green] was born, and a year thereafter my sister LaTessa [LaTessa Dotson Hall] was born.  Six years later my brother Jonathan [Jonathan Dotson] was born, and, excuse me, seven years later my brother Jonathan was born.  And then three years after that, my sister Christa [Christa Dotson Dean] was born.
Speaker 2: Christa?
Speaker 1: Christa, Christ with an A on the end.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So there's a ten year spread between my youngest sibling and I.  But we all were born and lived in Detroit.
Story_ID: 335737
Speaker 1: We moved, I moved three times in Detroit [Michigan].  We first lived with my grandparents.  My mother's [Earlene Puryear Dotson] parents.
Speaker 2: What were their names?
Speaker 1: My grandfather is Earl Lamar Puryear [Earl Puryear], P-U-R-Y-E-A-R.  And his wife, my grandmother, Parmie, P-A-R-M-I-E, Colbert Puryear [Parmie Colbert Puryear].  And we lived with my grandparents, my mother's parents.  My sister [Toya Dotson Green] and I and my parents, for two years of my life.  And it's important to note too, the interaction between us and my grandparents.  My grandfather was a--was in the law enforcement business, and in fact, was the first African American in the State of Michigan to have a license to open up a private patrol service, with guns and the whole nine yards, and the power to arrest.  And in fact had the contract, he was the security company for Motown [Motown Records, Detroit, Michigan].  And as a child, I didn't really appreciate the significance of it.  He was my grandfather.  He was the person who we went to when we wanted to go to the corner store.  He had this change purse that he kept about this big, it always had change in it.  It seemed to have an endless supply of change.  We'd run down to the store and grab his--make sure we bought his favorite candy, which was little squirrels, caramel squirrels.  But he--a tall man in stature.  I think he's the person from whom I get my height.  And he was a very funny man.  Always joking.  Used to always joke about my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.], which was always great for the grandchildren to watch that interaction.  He--and again as I fast forward later on, the significance of those interactions would become crystal clear.  But my grandfather and my grandmother were a very loving people.  And I mean to the time that they died.  I will tell you that I never felt wanted, I never wanted love because it was always, always there.  The--I remember one time James Brown for example, came to the house.  I didn't know who James Brown was, he actually spent the night at our house because my father met him when he was on the job.  'Cause my father worked for a short period of time with my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As an officer, which gave my grandfather double rights to boss him around, since he was both an employee and married to his daughter.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he never missed an opportunity to do that, especially in our presence.  But, you know, those kinds of things happened, and as a child you didn't really appreciate the import of it until much later.
Speaker 2: James Brown.  What do you remember about James Brown being at your house?
Speaker 1: You know what?  I remember him knocking on the door, and I think I remember he had on a black outfit, thin man at the time.  And obviously very young.  And he came in, my father said, you know, somebody who's needed a place to stay, he was in town.  Told him he could stay with us.  And that's all I remember, you know.  He made--I don't know what he did, did he sing while he was there?  I have no clue.  Did he hum in his sleep?  I have no idea.  Did he have a cape?  I wish I could say he did.  But I just remember that happening.  And I remember later on my parents were explaining sort of who that was.  All we wanted to do was go outside and play.  All right, James Brown is here, great.  See you later.
Speaker 2: You didn't get to do his hair or anything like that?
Speaker 1: No, none of those things occurred.
Story_ID: 335738
Speaker 1: When we moved three times, as I mentioned I moved three times in Detroit [Michigan].  We moved from my [maternal] grandparents' [Parmie Colbert Puryear and Earl Puryear] house to a street also off of Seven Mile Road where my father's [Albert Dotson, Sr.] parents lived.  They lived on Lumpkin [Street].
Speaker 2: And your father's parents' names.
Speaker 1: Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Rowland is my grandmother, Alberta Dotson Rowland [Alberta Rowland].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my grandfather, Fred Rowland.  And Alberta is--my father's named after my grandmother, and I'm named after my father.  That's how we got our name.  We moved to Fleming Street right off of Seven Mile Road in Detroit, which is one block away from my other grandparents.  And so would actually walk to my other grandparents' house and my grandmother and grandfather used to love to go fishing all the time.  My father's parents, my grandfather worked for Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], and had worked for Chrysler forever.  I think that was the only job he had.  As many in the African American community in Detroit, at that time, had either lifelong or generational long jobs in the automobile industry.  But we used to love to go fishing.  We'd go fishing and usually catch absolutely nothing.  But it was just fun to do that.
Speaker 2: Where would you fish?
Speaker 1: In the Detroit River.  And we probably fished in a number of different places, but I remember the Detroit River only because the first time I ever caught a fish, now as most fish tales go, I can tell you the fish was this big.  But because we had it taxidermied, I know it was only this big.  But was a great experience.  My grandmother and grandfather helped me wheel it in.  My sisters were there.  And we used to love that experience.  We got to know my father's parents a lot better when we moved to Fleming.  We then moved one more time in Detroit.  And again, as I go forward, you'll understand why I emphasize the fact that we moved those three times.  But we stayed throughout the time we were in Detroit, our friends pretty much remained the same.  We gained new friends at different schools, but we always attended the same church [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, Hamtramck, Michigan].  And my parents were very active in church.  It was a church that was very conducive to having children involved in what was going on.  There were programs and, and activities for us to do.  And to this day, I have friends that I've had since birth by virtue of my membership in that church.  Having moved away at the age of twelve, between twelve and thirteen, and so you would think that you know, there wasn't enough time to achieve the type of bonds that you achieve to have a lifelong friend.  But we have in part because many of the people that attended the church, their parents grew up with my parents.  And my parents got married and many of their parents were in my parents' wedding.  So we've got--it just continued on.  And we've all been very supportive and helpful of each other throughout our lives.
Story_ID: 335739
Speaker 1: When we moved the third time, my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] then got transferred to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Working at--still working with Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].
Speaker 1: Still working with Sears.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We moved to Chicago and we moved twice in Chicago, initially living on Lake Shore Drive.
Speaker 2: Oh really, where?
Speaker 1: Now that address I don't remember.  It was an apartment building.
Speaker 2: North or South Lake Shore Drive?
Speaker 1: It was probably North Lake Shore.  But I can't be sure about that.  I just know it was Lake Shore Drive 'cause I used to remember Lake Shore Drive for some reason.  It was right down the street from a Walgreens 'cause we used to walk there all the time.  So it's closer to where the museums--where are the museums?
Speaker 2: You--well let's see, now there's a Field Museum [The Field Museum, Chicago, Illinois] and then there's the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois].  That's in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, we weren't in Hyde Park.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're probably close--well there's also Shedd Aquarium [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: I was too young.  We were there maybe a month or two.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a very short period of time.  And I can't--'cause my father was with Sears at 69th [sic. 63rd Street] and Halsted [Street], where that Sears was located.  And we ended up moving to a place, Homewood, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At that time there weren't many African American families in Homewood, Illinois.  And in fact, at the school we attended, there--at one point my sisters [Toya Dotson Green and LaTessa Dotson Hall], whom I'm very close in age to, and I, were of the five African Americans that attended the school.  So that only means there was two others that weren't in our family.  Then I went to the junior high school [James Hart School, Homewood, Illinois].  There was only three of us in the school.  Which brought about a very interesting dynamic.  It was the first time I remember encountering overt racism as a child.  And before I share that story with you, one of the things that my parents made sure of is that they wanted us to be remained grounded.  They wanted us to remember and always know who we are, and it was about--when we moved there it was about the time that Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] was starting up.  And all--the meetings were always held on Saturday morning.  And it was held at--I can't remember the location.  It may come to me as--
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: It was in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, on--it's on, it's almost in Hyde Park on--not Drexel [Avenue].  Yes it's still the same place it's always been.
Speaker 1: It's an auditorium.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we would go--I mean, it was right at the time it was starting.  And my parents had us there, we went every Saturday morning.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Thomas N. Todd when he was there, Dr. Willie Barrow [HistoryMaker Reverend Willie T. Barrow], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  I mean all of these people were ingrained in us as children because we were at Operation PUSH meetings every Saturday morning.  And you can imagine children Saturday morning, the cartoons are coming on.
Speaker 2: You missed 'em all.
Speaker 1: But you know what?  You know, it was a very visionary step on our parents' part to make sure despite where we lived, that we knew who we were and are.  And to make sure that we did that in such a way that we did not rebel from the exposure they were trying to give us, the lessons they were trying to teach us.  So we're out in Homewood, Illinois.  Every Saturday morning we're going to Operation PUSH meetings.  I'm probably eleven or twelve years old at this time, attending Churchill Elementary School [Winston Churchill Elementary School, Homewood, Illinois] directly across the street from our house.  The first day of school, and again having moved three times, I sort of began to understand how to make friends and how to adapt to situations that were brand new.  And that was very helpful coming into the Homewood environment.  I remember it like it was yesterday.  I can almost tell you exactly what I was wearing.  And it was a recess period for school and it--the two persons were picking teams to be on their softball team during recess.  And I was the last one picked by the two teams.  And at the time I really attributed it to nobody knew me.  And I--the reason I was the last one picked is there were two of us left.  And the one young man who was getting ready to pick, and I--the one young man who was getting ready to pick, whose name I don't recall.  And even if I did, I probably shouldn't say it.
Speaker 2: It's okay.
Speaker 1: Said that you know what?  You know, we only got two people left and I'm not--that nigger's not gone be on my team.  And I just looked.  And I didn't know how to respond, but I really wasn't given a chance to respond because almost instantaneously some of the other kids looked at him, and said, "How dare you say that?"  We were all relatively young, and the other guy selected me.  And these were people I did not know.  They--my first at-bat.  I ended up hitting a double.  There was somebody on base.  I think I must have hit that ball as hard as I possibly could.  Maybe I saw his face on the ball, I don't remember, but it's a possibility.  And I felt so proud at that moment, it was like a vindication that--and everybody was jumping and screaming.  And from that moment on, he was so marginalized in the school itself.  And I had virtually no problem, no overt problems from that moment on, the three years that we lived in Chicago with the same group of friends.
Story_ID: 335740
Speaker 1: Let me just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --catch up on a couple of names.  Names of your schools when you lived in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: In Detroit, my first elementary school was Mason Elementary [Stevens T. Mason Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  And the principal was Mrs. Bueller [ph.].  And then we went to Hampton junior high [Emma Stark Hampton School, Detroit, Michigan], and I was in Hampton when we moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--when we moved to Chicago, I went to Churchill Elementary [Winston Churchill Elementary School, Homewood, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was that in Homewood [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Homewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the grade differences--the way they were split up.  And then I think only one year at Churchill.  Then I went to James Hart junior high [James Hart School, Homewood, Illinois] in--
Speaker 1: Was that H-A-R-T?
Speaker 2: H-A-R-T, correct.  While in Chicago, and we got to know--because my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] when he moved to Chicago was the store manager at 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street].  I said 69th [Street] and Halsted earlier, 63rd and Halsted was the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] store.  And the fact that he was the first African American ever to have that position, we got to know people like Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and others.  And there--the--I'm sure there were pressures that led Sears to bring my father in to be the store manager to--and a store in a predominantly black neighborhood.  And those pressures led to him moving to that store.  And again, as I've mentioned earlier, he had not gone beyond a high school education.  And he had worked his way up from a stock boy with Sears, literally.  And that again brings with it interesting challenges which I'll get to later on.  We then moved from Detroit [Michigan], excuse me, from Chicago to Atlanta [Georgia].  And we lived in Atlanta for three years.  At first--and we only lived in one place, in East Point, Georgia on Fern Valley Drive.  And we went to Headland High School [East Point, Georgia].
Speaker 1: H-E-A-D?
Speaker 2: L-A-N-D, correct.  And we went there, excuse me, no, no, no.  We went to Dodson Drive Elementary [Dodson Drive Elementary School, East Point, Georgia], D-O-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Dodson, okay.
Speaker 2: And then there was no junior high in Atlanta.  So we went from Dodson Drive to Headland High School.  We then--the educational systems were a little different in Atlanta.  And in fact they were a lot easier and less challenging than the schools we had come from in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Was that an all-black school or--
Speaker 2: It was a mixed.  It was not--it wasn't the same ratio as Chicago for sure.  I'm telling you East Point at that time may have--in that area may have been predominantly Caucasian.  But it wasn't to the point where, you know we were--there was only a handful of us.  And the same thing with Dodson Drive Elementary.  I mean, it was a fairly good mix.  We then left the public schools and went to Woodward Academy [College Park, Georgia], a private school in Atlanta.  And because Woodward Academy went from I think pre-K [kindergarten] to twelve, all five of us attended Woodward Academy--
Story_ID: 335741
Speaker 1: Now what was that like having, you know, especially with the ten-year difference between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was amazing, and I've got my baby sister [Christa Dotson Dean] going to the same school with me.  And you had to wear uniforms.  We all got in the car together.  Actually we carpooled with another black family that lived right around the block from us.  They had three children, all three going.  And not the same span.  I think their oldest may have been, maybe five years my junior at the time.  But--and I don't know how we did it to this day.  I couldn't recreate this, but the--it was a carpool.  My mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson] would pick us up from school and Mrs. Jones [ph.] would take us to school.  She had a Volkswagen Beetle.
Speaker 1: With eight kids.
Speaker 2: Eight, and we all--and again at that time there were no car seats, no, no required seatbelts.  So we were all stuck in there.  And how we were stuck in there, I just don't know.
Speaker 1: You guys should have done an ad for VW [Volkswagen].
Speaker 2: It was amazing.
Speaker 1: And you still, you still have long legs, so it must have been okay.
Speaker 2: I got the front seat.  I was the eldest.  And how they handled it in the back was really not my problem.  But we stayed in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean, we stayed in Atlanta [Georgia] for three years.  And again, having moved around three times in Detroit, having moved into Chicago [Illinois], having had these changes in locales, helped me again, to develop an ability to meet people, acclimate myself to different environments.  We while in Detroit, excuse me I keep saying Detroit.  While in Atlanta, I had the fortune because again my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] was moved there I think in response to a request, demands and protests.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what store he was at [for Sears, Roebuck and Co.]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  He was at the West End [West End Mall; The Mall West End, Atlanta, Georgia] store.  West End, right near--
Speaker 1: Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman, all of those schools--
Story_ID: 335742
Speaker 1: Okay, now we're in Atlanta [Georgia].  What year is this?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta, what years were these?  Seventy-three [1973] to '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: So, just put things in historical perspective, when did Maynard Jackson become mayor?
Speaker 2: During that timeframe.  And in fact I will integrate that into sort of the history there.
Speaker 1: So your dad [Albert Dotson, Sr.] is appointed manager of the West End Mall [The Mall West End, Atlanta, Georgia] Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], which is right by the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: That is correct.  That is correct.  And we lived in East Point [Georgia] at the time.  Now being in Atlanta at that time, some people would say that you're an outsider in Atlanta, it's gonna be difficult to crack the Atlanta social scene or socioeconomic scene, whatever scene you wanna attribute that to.  But I can tell you that I'm a living testimony to the fact that having both parents, neither of them attending any AU school, not growing up in Atlanta, we were welcomed very warmly in the community.  We got to know a number of people, including the King family and the Abernathy family.  We actually attended a church that you might remember, Mount Moriah [Mount Moriah Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], which is right across the street from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Reverend Creecy, Howard W. Creecy [Howard W. Creecy, Sr.] was the pastor.  I think his son [Howard W. Creecy, Jr.] now pastors the church in Atlanta.  And getting to know the King family and Abernathy was very interesting.  We used to play, Dexter [Dexter King] and Ralph Abernathy, Jr. [Ralph David Abernathy III] and I used to play basketball all the time.  'Cause it was right at the time where Reverend Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was changing churches.  They had just bought a brand new church, and the church had a gym.  And Ralph used to always get the keys.  And we'd always go in there and play basketball all the time.  So you know it was just an interaction and getting to know people that--yes there was a historic context to it, but these were just real people.  I'm just--again, just sort of like James Brown coming to the house [in Detroit, Michigan], yeah, just playing and interacting with these friends of mine.  And Coretta Scott King to this day--and the last time I saw her, she still remembers this.  I don't know whether it's true or not, but every time we see each other, this is the story she reminds me of, is that we got to know her in-laws very well, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] parents [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr. and Alberta Williams King].  And one time the Kings, Coretta Scott King, she had an issue with a washing machine.  And she was talking to her father-in-law.  And he said, "Just get Dotson on the phone," talking about my father, "and he'll take care of it."  She said, "I called the store, I told 'em who I was, your father got on the phone, and next thing I know, I got people coming out of the woodwork, coming to my house to fix this washing machine."  And she used to love to tell that story.  And it obviously made an impression on her.  And we have this picture going back to Mama King and Daddy King, of a day when they were at our house for dinner.  It was the day before she was killed, she was shot at the church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, by a--like someone who was mentally ill.
Speaker 2: Right, and she was at the piano or the organ at the time.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And again, that made, obviously, a huge impression on me, having to get to know these people and they were again, just regular people to me.  And to have that happen to somebody that not only is a historic figure, but someone that you just know on a regular basis.
Story_ID: 335743
Speaker 1: We also got to meet Walt Bellamy, who at that time was the center for the Atlanta Hawks.  And we met Walt Bellamy because he knew people who lived in Homewood, Illinois.  And when he got traded to Atlanta, I forget what team he got traded from, he didn't know a lot of people.  He talked to his friend in Homewood, Illinois, said, why don't you call my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.], he lives there.  So he got to know me and my parents and just so happened it was his turn on the Atlanta Hawks to select or recommend someone to ball boy for the Atlanta Hawks.  And not knowing anybody else, he recommended me.  My parents, and again, there are certain things that happen in your life that you remember like it was yesterday.  I come home from school and I was playing basketball at that time in Atlanta for Woodward Academy [College Park, Georgia].  I can't tell you I was all that good, but--
Speaker 2: Were you about as tall now?  I mean then as you are now?
Speaker 1: I was tall for my age, but I was a little shorter than I am today.  The--I came home.  My parents said, "Albert [HistoryMaker Albert Dotson, Jr.], we have some good news for you."  And I said, "Well what is it?"  They said that Walt Bellamy called and they made all this drama, and said that he's recommended you to be ball boy for the Atlanta Hawks.  At that moment I think, least I remember it, as a pregnant pause 'cause all I'm thinking is he's recommended me, what a great honor.  Didn't think I was gonna be selected.  And then they said, "And you've been selected."  Now I've lost it.  I've lost it as a child.  I just completely lost it.  And then my mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson] tells me, and they're gonna pay you.  I said, "Wait a minute.  They're gonna pay me to go downtown to be ball boy for the Atlanta Hawks, okay this is clearly a joke."  Well a long story short, I did do that for three years, three seasons, ball boy for the Atlanta Hawks.  It taught me that I did not wanna be a professional basketball player the rest of my life.
Speaker 2: Now, what did you see when you were there?
Speaker 1: Well as a child, what you see on television is just when they play the game.  As a person who is behind the scenes, you learn and see the business of basketball.  And you learn how difficult it is.  As a ball boy, I remember Lou Hudson for example, getting a shot in his knee because of an injury.  And you see them going through that.  You see people get traded.  And how that disrupts their lives and some of them are angry about it and some of them are not.  You see the interaction between the inner--the private interaction between coach and player.  And sort of how that works.  I mean it was great.  I met a lot of people.  I remember my very first game, interestingly enough, was a exhibition game between the Atlanta Hawks and the Detroit Pistons.  Excuse me, Atlanta Hawks and the, the New York Knicks.  And the reason I say Detroit was because it was the very first and maybe the only rain--only game that was not played because of rain.  And the reason it wasn't played because of rain, Atlanta had just built the Omni [Omni Coliseum, Atlanta, Georgia].  And the Omni had a leak in the roof.  And the water was coming down on the court, and the game could not be played.  And what happened, because no one--it had not been experienced before, they were determining how they were going to handle this.  Were they gone try to fix it, were they gonna play with it, play around it.  The players sat in the locker room.  So I got to spend time--'cause when you're a ball boy for a team, you're a ball boy for both the visiting team and the home team.  And I got a chance to just sit and talk to Dave DeBusschere who was from Detroit.  And that's how we made the connection.  Bill Bradley, Walt Frazier--
Speaker 2: Senator.
Speaker 1: Senator Bill Bradley.  That's right, presidential candidate Bill Bradley.  Willis Reed.  These are the people I'm just talking to, and they were just the most gracious people.  And I really, I mean Walt Frazier, he--every time they came in town, I started collecting shoes, and had them all sign it 'cause if a shoe didn't fit right or--and this was back before the major shoe contracts.  But I started--they would throw them away and I'd get them to sign it.  My mother was like, "Would you stop bringing these stinky shoes home?"  And you know there was--it was before people were really into memorabilia.  But--
Speaker 2: Tell me she didn't throw them all out.
Speaker 1: No, I still have them.  I still have them to this day.  Most of them, anyway.  But Walt Frazier used to always bring me stuff signed.  And he was just a great human being.  And I started developing those same types of relationships with teams that would come in because if you're the ball boy, you're on the bench.  For the most part, you get to meet those who don't play much 'cause they're on the bench too.  And you're just talking and they wanna talk to you and it's a lot easier for them to converse with people they know and you know, have a relationship with.  But that made an indelible mark in me, as well, having that experience.
Story_ID: 335744
Speaker 1: There were a few other things that happened in Atlanta [Georgia] that were significant too.  That's when I first began to work.  I had the ball boy job [with the Atlanta Hawks], which quite frankly really wasn't a job, at least in my mind, but I got paid for it anyway.  I had a paper route and I used to cut lawns in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Now what paper did you deliver?
Speaker 1: At the time, East Point [Georgia] had its own sort of regional paper.  It wasn't the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, but what would happen is they would deliver the paper.  And at that time the paperboys actually put the paper sections together, wrapped them, put 'em in plastic, and then you know, you carried them on your bike or what have--it was usually your bike or you walked.  And you delivered the paper.  And you got paid like ten cents a paper or something like that.  And then during Christmas, the neighbors if they wanted to could give you a tip.  And that was great.  I used to walk around with my little lawnmower and cut lawns and I did that.  And I enjoyed it.  And I know it's a strange thing to say, but it just was great.  I enjoyed it.  We again began attending SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] meetings at the time.
Speaker 2: With Reverend Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery]?
Speaker 1: Well, Reverend Lowery was there.  And there were a number of people involved with SCLC around that time 'cause Reverend Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was still alive at the time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we got to know Reverend Lowery pretty well, but not as well as some of the other people.  In part because those who had children our ages were the ones that my parents [Earlene Puryear Dotson and Albert Dotson, Sr.] spent a lot of time with 'cause we spent a lot of time with them, playing with them.  We left Atlanta, and I almost stayed.  I was playing basketball, I had finally come into my own at Woodward Academy [College Park, Georgia].
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: I was sixteen, so I was a sophomore in high school.  And you're just about to develop your friendships and relationships and I'm like, "Wait a minute, I don't wanna go."  Woodward was a boarding school.  We had students from all over so I could actually stay.  And I came very close to staying.  I made the right decision for sure, to go with my family to Miami [Florida].  But we had this discussion and struggle.  Once we moved to Miami, we lived in two places.  We lived in Miami Lakes [Florida] for a short period of time 'cause my father was then the manager of the Westland store [for Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Westland Mall store in Hialeah, Florida.  Miami Lakes and Hialeah border each other.  And we only lived for a short period of time until they found a home in a school district that they wanted to move into.  And we eventually moved to where my parents presently live, which is in what is now Palmetto Bay, Florida, but it's just a municipality within Miami-Dade County [Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, when we first moved here I was in high school.  I was--I came down at the end of our sophomore year, we moved during the summer.  And so I started as a junior at Palmetto High School [Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  And my sisters and brothers all went to school that were feeder schools into Palmetto, and all of us graduated from that public school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: While at Palmetto, I played basketball.  It was at a time when there was no professional team.
Story_ID: 335745
Speaker 1: I just realized that we didn't talk about the political happenings in Atlanta [Georgia]--and then we'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Again, let's go back to that 'cause I think that's important.  I mentioned Reverend Creecy [Howard W. Creecy, Sr.] and the church [Mount Moriah Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] for a reason.  At that time, Reverend Creecy lived right across the street from a gentleman by the name of Maynard Jackson and Bunnie Jackson [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom].  And when he ran for mayor, it was a big deal in Miami [Florida]--in Atlanta.  And we got to know him because we'd always go by and visit the Creecys again, who had children our age.  So not only was he our pastor, but they were friends and Candice [ph.]--they were all great friends of ours.  And we would go over and Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]--we got to know the Jacksons, he's running for mayor.  I remember after he won, every time we went over to the house there was always a police car out in front of Maynard Jackson's house.  And that's how we always knew, you know, that he's still the mayor 'cause that police car sat there 24/7.  But it was again, as a 11, 12, 13 year old, or 13, 14, 15 year old while in Atlanta, I can't tell you that I fully appreciated the import of his election, but I can tell you I marveled at what I could gather from how, how proud he made everyone as a result of his elec- I mean everybody seemed to walk a little bit taller by virtue of his election.  And he was clearly focused on making sure that the people who elected him, those who were walking around standing a little bit taller, benefited from his being elected mayor of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now your life at Woodward [Woodward Academy, College Park, Georgia] which if my recollection serves me right, was a majority white school.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And a private school.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: At that--so how were your interactions with your fellow students at Woodward?
Speaker 2: Great.  I mean I had very good friends, black, white.  Again, don't remember any overt racism.  I do remember though one thing happening in an English class where we were reading 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry]. And we were reading parts of it out loud.  And I was reading on that particular day, one of the characters.  And as I was reading it, the teacher stopped, said, "Al [HistoryMaker Albert Dotson, Jr.]," or Albert, "you know, you need to sound more black."  And I immediately said to him, "What does that mean?"  And again, it was more of a reflex than--I didn't really think through that statement.  But it was a reflex, and I was like I am--I mean I'm black and I'm reading it.  And that's the way I'm reading it.  That did happen at Woodward.  And that was the only--I mean it was such an ignorant statement that it did stick out in my mind.  I'm glad you reminded me to go back to that.  But one of the Aaron daughters, [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron's daughters, Dorinda Aaron [Dorinda Aaron Bowen], attended Woodward.  And it was a situation.  There were two--there were several public schools in Atlanta.  One was Westminster [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], still there, Woodward Academy, they were rivals with each other.  And the more down-to-earth people--at least this was the perception, attended Woodward Academy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--again I can just say other than that one incident, I don't remember anything, you know, not being accepted, not participating.  Maybe there were things happening I didn't know about and if I didn't know about it, then I can't tell you about it.  So--
Speaker 1: That makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 335746
Speaker 1: What about like in terms of like say shopping downtown at Rich's [Atlanta, Georgia].  'Cause I know Atlanta was really changing then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  Well one thing I should share with you that as a child, even through the time period that we're talking about today, every summer we would always go on a trip as a family.  And it was always in the car.  And I remember the first time we actually flew on a plane, I'll tell you about that in a second.  But we used to always go in a car.  And I never knew why there were certain hotels or motels that we didn't stay at, especially as a very young child.  And my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] would always get out of the car, he'd always go check the hotel, always come back and tell my mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson], it's a place we can stay, or a place we should not stay.  And this was the time we drove to the South, we drove to the North, we drove to the West Coast, we went, and we went all over the place.  And we always drove as a family.  And those were some great, great trips.  I mean there's things that happened, we don't have time to go through all of it.  But there was some great memories from that.  But later on we were told that some of the decisions that were being made were based on the safety concerns or whether my father felt that it was a place that was going to be accepting of African Americans.  Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] was also a major player in our ability to stay certain places because there were some times where we couldn't stay somewhere, and the fact that my father was with Sears, he would get someone on the phone from the local community who's with Sears who would vouch for him, and we'd be able to stay there.  It was a--and I never knew why he used to talk about Sears so much, but that was why.  I mean it really unfortunately was the validation that he needed from time to time that we could go places and do certain things.  But well, we did that.
Story_ID: 335747
Speaker 1: So you're sixteen, you begrudgingly come to Miami [Florida].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now I guess--well you're not in school with all of your siblings at the same place any longer.
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 1: So--which is kind of good when you're a teenager.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So what--how was transitioning to yet another high school [Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida] in the middle of high school at that?
Speaker 2: The transition went well.  Again, it was--but it was an interesting observation when I first came here.  It was so visibly segregated, which is what I did not see.  When I say visibly segregated, clearly living in Homewood [Illinois] with three--it's kind of hard to segregate three people.  But--or really understand what segregation is with only three of us.  When we came here, you had all the blacks were in certain classes, and all the whites were in certain classes.  And the honors classes were in the air conditioned part of the school, and the classes where it seemed like more so the blacks were in, were in portables which were outside and not air conditioned.  And I don't know--maybe everybody else saw this, but it just hit me like a rock.  Because I was taking honors classes and I was doing certain things that had me in classrooms where there were no or very few black students.  And that just, that unnerved me, actually unnerved me.  And I had mentioned before we went back that I was playing basketball here at a time where Miami did not have a professional basketball team, nor did the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] have a college basketball team.  So high school basketball was it when it came to publicity.  So if you were playing well in basketball, you became like a star down here throughout--and it was only because there's nothing else to cover that time of year.  'Cause clearly there was no hockey going on in Miami at the time.
Speaker 1: Probably not.
Speaker 2: So I was playing basketball, and I was the captain of the team and got to know a lot of people.  And I looked at this as an opportunity for bridging some of these gaps 'cause there was like a social club called the Aristocrats that were--was a black social club.  And there were these white social clubs.  And I wouldn't--they didn't call themselves the black club and the white club, but that's what was clearly there.  And I made it a point to join both.  And I--and I just felt it was important to make a statement.  And not only make a statement in words, which I did, but make a statement in deeds, which I tried to do, and to continue bridging those gaps.  Now was it a great social change that occurred as a result of that effort?  Of course not.  But it was raising an awareness within the school.  It was within--especially my black colleagues 'cause I wanted them to always feel that I didn't think I was better 'cause I was in the air conditioned part of the school, or they should feel not as good because they weren't in the air conditioned part of the school.  And same thing with my white counterparts.  I made it a concerted effort to always intertwine the two worlds that were visibly separate at the time.
Speaker 1: So what year is this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].  So Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] president [sic.].
Speaker 2: That's correct.  It's the first time and last time that I believe it actually snowed in Miami.  We actually had snow flurries in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Are you kidding?
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what else was happening here in Miami around--
Speaker 2: In Miami, Miami was predominantly considered in the general community as a white and Jewish community.  And elderly groups, elderly persons in both groups, all lived in Miami Beach [Florida].  South Beach [Miami Beach, Florida], North Beach [Miami Beach, Florida], Mid-Beach [Miami Beach, Florida].  And I remember, I have a very good friend I played basketball with at the time, who I had no idea was Hispanic.  I don't think he ever said a word in Spanish the entire time we were together.  And I don't remember anybody even talking about Cuba the entire time I was going through school.  And it was when there was a difference between black, Jewish and Caucasian.  Those were the three ethnicities in Miami.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: And when--I'll never forget a number of my Jewish friends, we used to laugh about that.  They saw the merging of Jewish and white.  They used to laugh about that.  They said, "Now we're regular white people."  Because you--and you interjected the Hispanic factor.  And that became another--and then growing minority or group to be reckoned with within Miami.  I swore when we moved here, by the way, and then I graduated, that I would never come back to Miami.  And obviously I've been back ever since, but I'll explain that in a minute.  But it was because of what I saw was clearly--I thought it was a backwards society.  And the visible segregation that existed.  A community that to me was an elderly one with nothing really going on, at least that's my perception in high school.
Story_ID: 335748
Speaker 1: And I never really gave Miami [Florida] a chance 'cause I really-- I played basketball, ran track, I focused on academics, you know.  I had--I worked at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] during the summers.  And I still cut grass for a little change.  And there were no paper routes here in Miami.  But I did enjoy that, and while playing basketball, it was my senior year [at Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  And remember neither of my parents [Earlene Puryear Dotson and Albert Dotson, Sr.] up to that point, had graduated from college.  I don't ever remember, and I have a fairly good memory, I don't ever remember thinking, am I supposed to go to college when this is over?  Either they instilled it in us in such a way that was so subtle, or it just happened, but you know the key was you know, yeah you're gonna go on to something else after you graduate from high school.  But I never knew how, what, you know how to prepare, what the next steps were.  You just sort of worked your way through it.  Well a basketball game that I had, we were playing our arch rival, Killian High School [Miami Killian Senior High School, Miami, Florida] at the time.  It was my best game ever.  I hit a basket at the buzzer to send us into overtime.  And the points in overtime to win the game.  A person who was at that game was a guy by the name of Robert Josefsberg [Robert C. Josefsberg].  His daughter Amy Josefsberg [Amy Josefsberg Ederi], attended Palmetto High School.  And it was, I think it was the first basketball game he'd even come to.  And he had attended Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire].  He calls Dartmouth and says, "There's this young man who is a fairly good student, who plays basketball.  You guys should probably consider him."  He was interviewing for Dartmouth down here, not for athletics 'cause at the time, and I think still to this day, Ivy League schools don't have athletic scholarships.  He was looking for good students, and he is a great human being, great human being.  So I get a call from Dartmouth.  However, Dartmouth also was the first school that I received anything in the mail from after I took my PSAT.  And again, get all this stuff in the mail to take my PSAT and the scores come through.  And I don't know.  I'm thinking Clemson High School--Clemson University [Clemson, South Carolina] because playing basketball, Clemson invited me to attend their summer camp.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tree Rollins [Wayne Monte Rollins] was the center for Clemson at the time.  And I go to Clemson with all these paws all over the streets.  And I'm thinking, I'm going to Clemson, or going to play basketball in college.  It's the only thing I'm thinking.  I ain't thinking academics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna say, what were your aspirations for yourself at that time?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I mean, I will tell you that for the most part it was--I was just doing what I did.  And what I was doing at the time, playing basketball, fairly successful in that, was a good student.  So I figured I'd go to college and interestingly enough, in Atlanta [Georgia] we were--excuse me, we were in Miami.  But a magazine started called Black Family magazine.  And the editor of that magazine was a neighbor of ours when we lived in Atlanta.  And she did a feature story on our family and asked me that same question.  And I had to come up with an answer because we're being interviewed.  And I said, "A corporate attorney," which is what I probably am doing now.  So I may have parroted that a few times, if you would have asked me that question, but I can't tell you that that was something that--
Speaker 2: Not really thinking about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not really thinking about it at the time.  Well I go to visit Dartmouth and so the rest is history.  I loved it.  I was more, it was more interesting me that they were interested in me as a student first than as an athlete.  And my parents were told going back to political climate, by a former basketball coach at the same high school, when he found out I was going to Dartmouth, "Please tell your son he is making a mistake.  He's not going to make it at an Ivy League school.  He needs to play basketball."
Story_ID: 335749
Speaker 1: This coach--is this a coach at Palmetto [Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is a--this was a former basketball coach, but he was working as an assistant athletic director at the school.  And he was sharing with my parents [Earlene Puryear Dotson and Albert Dotson, Sr.] how bad the decision I was making, because the only way I'm going to succeed is if I continue to play basketball.  Needless to say, my parents, they didn't kill him, but the thought had crossed their mind I'm sure.  But they said, "No, we think Albert's [HistoryMaker Albert Dotson, Jr.] making the right decision, and he's smart enough to make the right decision."  They just sort of laughed at their--I'm gonna fast forward a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I had a chance to intern with Janet Reno while I was still in college.  And this is when she was the state attorney here in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And she had given me an opportunity that was very unique.  But one of the things that happened while I was there is that that same coach happened to have been selected for jury duty and saw me there.  And my parents would share the story with me.  And I took the time to share with him how well things were going at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and the fact that Janet Reno had brought me in as a special assistant to work with her, to go home to share that with my parents who made sure that I shared every detail of the look on his face when I did that.
Speaker 1: Which was jaw how far down?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I almost tripped over it.  That's all I can say.  But it--but I will tell you not having had, not having known what to do and having someone like Bob Josefsberg [Robert C. Josefsberg] step in, talk to me about college, talk to me about Dartmouth College in particular, having visited the school, made a major, major, major impact.  And I'm going to rewind for a second to bring us completely current and to sort of tie it all together to this point in my life.  My grandparents on both sides really taught me ingenuity.  They taught me the importance of family, they taught me how to love.  They really did.  My parents, as I watched that my father--every place we moved, he got significantly involved in the community, in community organizations and from the, you know, watching what happened with Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] to chambers of commerce and other organizations, and that was really a part of who he was and who we became.  The churches that we attended, being significantly involved because from Corinthian [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, Hamtramck, Michigan] all the way through to Atlanta [Georgia] where we attended Mount Moriah [Mount Moriah Baptist Church], to Miami where we were members of Glendale [Glendale Missionary Baptist Church, Miami, Florida], all of the pastors had children our age.  So not only did we attend the church, we became more ingrained in church life simply because of our relationships with our pastor.  And those are the kinds of--that's the kind of foundation that was laid for me, and I'm very blessed to have had that foundation.  So now it's off to Dartmouth College.  I'm the first child, first person in my family ever to attend a four year institution.  And I am going to the Northeast.  Now--
Speaker 1: It's about as far from Miami as--
Speaker 2: Oh, as far as you can go.  And you know my parents--I know they'd made a lot of sacrifices for us as children.  I mean, they're sending us to private schools, and my mother didn't work for the most part until we moved here.  So it was my father's income that put us all through school and my mother's management of it.  You know, I know we went to many a rummage sale, we went--she made every penny count in ways that we never felt like we wanted for anything, ever.  And never felt like, oh my God, the Joneses have X and we didn't have Y.  And it wasn't as though we were competing, we just--they made us feel very comfortable in our skin and that was very, very important.
Story_ID: 335750
Speaker 1: Was going to Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and my fa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] is the one who's designated to take me up there.  And so we're--all these tears take place here, we go to Dartmouth College.
Speaker 2: Did you drive or--
Speaker 1: We flew to Boston [Massachusetts] I believe, and drove thereafter.
Speaker 2: Up to White River.
Speaker 1: White River Junction [Vermont], very good, yes.  And Hanover, New Hampshire.  White River Junction is in Vermont and right across the river from Hanover, New Hampshire.  We get to Hanover, and we get there, and we go to my dorm.  And my father and I move my stuff in.  And so he assumes what's going to happen is he's gonna move my stuff in, I'm gonna go back to the hotel with him.  And he will tell this story like it was yesterday to him.  I'm like, "Okay Dad, I'll see you later."  And he lost it.  He could not believe that I'm telling him to go and I'm gonna be okay.  And it was just an interesting exchange between father and son.  And--
Speaker 2: What do you remember about his expression at that time, or--
Speaker 1: Another jaw dropping event.  He said, tears came down, and I don't think in my presence but as he walked away.  He was a dutiful father and he stayed overnight and then drove back the next day to Boston and back to Miami [Florida].  But he said his little heart was hurt that his son did that.  But again--
Speaker 2: Did you even have any idea?
Speaker 1: Not at all, not at all.  In part because again, we had moved around so much making--going to new environments was not something that was new to me.  And I felt comfortable in just a new place.  So things were--I was at Dartmouth for four years and I graduated from Dartmouth.  While there, and going back to the political climate, that freshman year was known, that winter of that freshman year was known as the winter of discontent at Dartmouth because it was the first time that classes were cancelled for a reason other than weather.  And then weather, it took, you know, tons of snow to fall for even weather to cancel classes.  What happened was, as part of the continuing struggle to get Dartmouth to divest from companies that were invested in or present in South Africa, there were constant protests.  And our freshman class, we were to be focused on our books, we were a very active freshman class and we were just as involved in what was going on.  And there was a demonstration around winter carnival that was placed at the African American Society [Afro-American Society], the AfroAm, that was destroyed by some of the students.  And there was a decision made by the black students at the time, that we're not taking it anymore.  And they began to--we marched down to the Green, which was the center of campus, and the--I don't remember what structure it was that year, but the winter carnival structure was changed by those of us there.  And there was a big demonstration that occurred, in part because of the lack of respect that we believed was taking place.  And the fact that the school was not listening to our belief that it should divest from companies that are invested in or working in South Africa.  Classes were cancelled and the dean and president [John George Kemeny] of the school believed there was a need to have a discussion about this issue, and a discussion was had.  The--it was my first foray into--I mean personally active in a group setting of peers in something that was focused on combating racism, even in South Africa.  So that was--it was again another eye opening experience for me.  Again, I made lifelong friends there even though Dartmouth was predominantly white and still is to this day.  Because Hanover is such a small community, if you really wanted to interact with people who are like minded or had like experiences, there were going to be people on that campus, period, 'cause the general community, it didn't exist.  I mean it was Dartmouth in Hanover.
Story_ID: 335751
Speaker 1: I pledged Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] my freshman year.  Again, because my parents [Earlene Puryear Dotson and Albert Dotson, Sr.] did not go to college, I had no idea what I was getting myself into.  And without divulging too many fraternal secrets, I will tell you that--
Speaker 2: Just the secret handshake.
Speaker 1: No.  I will tell you that if I had seen what pledging was about and then had to make the decision, I can't tell you what decision I would make.  But having started it, I finished it.  And there were twelve of us that actually crossed.  We had started with a much larger line.  But again it was a great experience for my freshman year.  So I spent four years at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] as--for the most part, as an Alpha on campus.  I became the president of our fraternity my senior year.  That year our chapter was named chapter of the year.  And the, I think the New England chapters of Alpha was one region, and the northeastern region, and we went for chapter of the year nationwide, and I was named Alpha brother of the year in those same two categories, to run for brother of the year nationwide.
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to interject in there for a moment because Dartmouth has an interesting fraternity history captured of course in 'Animal House.'
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: By some former Dartmouth alumni.  Now when you were there, what was the male/female ratio?  Because wasn't Dartmouth one of the last (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three to one.
Speaker 2: One of the last few to accept women.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: So, so three guys for every woman.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: And the minority student population, what was--
Speaker 1: Five percent, roughly, roughly.  Five to seven percent if my memory serves me correct.  And at that time when I first joined Alpha Phi Alpha, we did not have a fraternity house.  And the 'Animal House' experience was foreign to us, except that to an extent we experienced it with the white fraternities because we didn't have a fraternity house.  I was not a big social drinker.  Drank at the legal age when it was appropriate at the time when I was at Dartmouth.
Speaker 2: Of course, no laws violated.
Speaker 1: Of course.  At least not on tape for sure.  But it was--you know clearly we saw it and we experienced it, but it wasn't something that Alpha Phi Alpha itself had bought into.  In part because we didn't have the physical building to do it.  But yes we did see some of what you saw in 'Animal House.'  It was a bit exaggerated, but not much.  But my senior year we decided that we were gonna get a fraternity house, and we struggled through the process to do it and eventually we did.  My senior winter we had the Alpha Phi Alpha house.
Speaker 2: Now I know a little bit about Dartmouth, so like I know there's like the black student house that's--where you go past the Green and you go a little further back.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: But I can't remember where the--
Speaker 1: Fraternity row is?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Frat row is about a block before you get to the Afro-American, or AAM, we used to call it, Afro-American Society house.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the Alpha house was not--was two blocks, I'll just say, if you use north, south, east or west, two blocks north of the AAM, the Afro-American house.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were not on frat row.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And again, it was an opportunity to distinguish ourselves and to become more scholarly as a fraternity.  Yes, we had parties, but I was--again at least my year as president, my senior year, I really wanted to distinguish Alpha Phi Alpha in a way that was different than the stereotype of a fraternity.  And we began that process to do that.
Speaker 2: Now how many other black fraternities and sororities?
Speaker 1: There were no others at the time.
Speaker 2: So just Alpha--not even Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or--
Speaker 1: There were no other black fraternal organizations when I first came to Dartmouth.  My senior year, the president went to a group of a guys who wanted to start Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  And a lot of my fraternity brothers were very against it, you know, this was our--I said, "You know what?  There's nothing wrong with providing."  So we eventually agreed to help them.  And we helped the Kappas come on campus.  And shortly thereafter, the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], the Deltas started and now they have a full complement of historically black fraternal organizations.
Speaker 2: So you were one of the first members of Alpha on--
Speaker 1: No, the Alpha campus, the Alpha fraternity had been there almost ten years by my senior year.  So there were a number of people who had been Alphas, but it was the only one on campus.  I helped start the Kappas and the others on campus.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was just important to have more diversity, give people an outlet, and for us not to be walking around thinking that this--we own it 'cause eventually it was gonna happen, and why not be a part of it as opposed to being obstructionists in that regard.  So we did, we did help them get started.
Story_ID: 335752
Speaker 1: In your academic life, what was your major?  Any mentors?
Speaker 2: My major was economics and history.  And the--I had a number of mentors there.  One was a gentleman by the name of Jerry Nunnally, Jerry E. Nunnally.  Jerry was in the corporate development, the development office at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  And he and his family lived in Hanover [New Hampshire].  And I remember Jerry pulling me aside, time to time, he became the fraternity advisor [for Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  My--under my presidency I think it was, so it was my senior year.  And so we became very close.  And to this day I still email him from time to time and I have followed his career.  And I had a number of other black faculty who were there, including a dean of freshman, a dean in the freshman's office.  Her name was Jennifer Joseph.  The only reason I mention her name again to fast forward, I recently represented Concessions International [Atlanta, Georgia], which is an affiliate of H.J. Russell and Company [Atlanta, Georgia], [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell's company.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, another HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Right, in their efforts to expand their presence and move into South Florida at the Miami International Airport [Miami, Florida] as a concession.  And the president of Concessions International is Anthony Joseph, Jennifer Joseph's son.  And it wasn't until we, you know, we're talking and he was talking about where he grew up, he grew up in Hanover, that's where his parents were.  And I said, "You've got to be--you're not," and absolutely.
Speaker 1: Can't be.
Speaker 2: Things coming full circle.  But Dartmouth was a great--I played basketball my freshman year.  Didn't play thereafter.  In part because Dartmouth had then and has now what is called the Dartmouth Plan, which only requires you to be on campus your first three semes- first three quarters, at that time, it became semesters later, of freshman year, and thereafter you could design your campus life by exchange programs.  Foreign exchange programs, exchange programs with the various schools, internships that you wanted to do, and I mean, you could literally not be on campus ever again after your freshman year, and some people actually did that.
Story_ID: 335753
Speaker 1: My sophomore year [at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], I took advantage of our foreign exchange program and went to Spain and studied at the Universidad de Granada [University of Granada, Granada, Spain], and at that time you lived with a Spanish family that spoke no English.  Interestingly enough, the Spanish family I had only requested black males.
Speaker 2: Wait, stop.
Speaker 1: They said that, they said they only wanted black males and so almost all the black guys who went to Spain stayed with this family.  To this day I don't know why, but that was their request.  And they had--they were great human beings.  We had a great time.  I had--
Speaker 2: Wait, how did they decide that they only wanted black male college students (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.  I had no idea, but that's what it was.  My father, my Spanish father had a store, had a grocery store.  A Spanish mother, as all Spanish mothers, stayed home.  I had one brother who was about--a little bit--a year or two older than me.  And had two sisters who were about my age.  So we used to hang out all the time, my brothers and sisters.  'Cause they were about the same age as I was with my sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Older brother, two sisters about the same age.  So it was a great connection and when I was there, they were my age.  So we used to hang out; I had a great time.
Speaker 2: Of the whole year?
Speaker 1: This was just for a semester.
Speaker 2: Semester, okay.
Speaker 1: At that time.  And it was a great experience.  I will tell you that I learned a lot in and out of class.  I learned at the time--I was like a celebrity over there.  Not because of anything that I did, but because most people were shorter, so you stuck out like a sore thumb being taller.  And it was at the time when 'Roots' had come out in Europe.  And--
Speaker 2: That's, yeah 'cause that's '76 [1976] here, but what year was this--
Speaker 1: This was '77 [1977], '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, '76 [1976], this was '78 [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980], I'm sorry, '79 [1979], '80 [1980].  And in Spanish.  So 'Roots,' they had just seen 'Roots' and I don't know whether this was the reason or not.  I didn't know then whether this was the reason, I know now that it's not.  But black Americans were people that they loved.  They loved black Americans, disdained black Africans.  In part because of the history of the Moors having ruled over Spain.  And you saw the Moorish architecture and influence over the society while we were there.
Speaker 2: Because you were in Granada [Spain], okay.
Speaker 1: I was in Granada, which was in the southern part of Spain.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I mean it was amazing the difference in the way they treated black Africans and black Americans.  And they did not like, they--I don't wanna generalize, but my impression was, based on the experiences that I had, they did not like white Americans.  And I think that had a lot to do more with 'Roots' than with anything else at the time.  The white American part.  I don't think--there wasn't a real historical component to that to my knowledge.  But I learned a lot, enjoyed my Spanish family.  Enjoyed--my mother was so funny, is so funny, she was great. And she was--all she did was stayed in the home, washed, cleaned and cooked.  She went outside one time to my knowledge the entire time I was there.  You could tell she had no sun.  And I mean these were white Spaniards.  They weren't black Spaniards.  And it was just great.  It was a great experience.  I loved that.  I traveled to Africa.  My first time.  Traveled to Africa, went to Morocco.  Went through and passed the Rock of Gibraltar [Gibraltar] and then went into Saguia [Saguia el-Hamra, Western Sahara], which at that time I think, still now is a Spanish colony [sic.] on the continent of Africa.  And as you come into Saguia, you then walk across the border into an African country.  And I--whether it was purely psychological, which it may have been and probably was, I felt different the moment I stepped across the Spanish province or Spanish colony, and into Morocco.  I really felt a connection.  Again, it may have been purely psychological, but it was like I had arrived home.  It was an amazing experience that happened.  And it was great.  I went back twice, and most of my counterparts went north into other parts of Spain and into Europe.  But every time we had a break, and there were several, they had--it was two breaks, or a long weekend, I traveled into Africa.
Speaker 2: Now, you still stay in touch with your Spanish family?
Speaker 1: I did originally for a period of time.  I wrote them and they--and I had told them I was going to--and they said no one ever does.  And I said of course I am, and of course I did for a short period of time, then I stopped.  But from time to time, I would write them and they would write me and they'd send me pictures and what was going on.  My sister Ima [ph.], no, Fabi [ph.] became a nurse.  Ima, I'm not sure what she ended up doing.  Or my brother--I got pictures of he and his family later on.  But it was, it was just like--they treated me like I was their son.
Speaker 2: Their long lost black son.
Speaker 1: That's right, the long lost male son from the states.  But we did have a good time, and I learned a lot about cultures and learned a lot about the African influence on the rest of the world too by just the travel and seeing what had happened and what had gone on.
Story_ID: 335754
Speaker 1: How did you decide--I mean these are all wonderful experiences.  History and economics is your major.  Where does law school play into this?
Speaker 2: It's a perfect segue because under the Dartmouth Plan, my junior year, Bob Josefsberg [Robert C. Josefsberg], who's a lawyer from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], says to me, "You know, Al [HistoryMaker Albert Dotson, Jr.], you know we're losing.  There aren't many blacks that are coming back to Miami [Florida]."  He said, "And I really want you to give Miami a chance."  I said, "Mr. Josefsberg, I don't think so, but if that's what you want me to do, I'll be happy to do that."  He said, "Why don't you do one of your Dartmouth Plan semesters, do it here in Miami.  I'm gonna set up interviews for you with someone in business."  I met with someone who was at Florida Power and Light [Florida Power and Light Company].  I'm got set up with someone in banking.  I met someone who was with Southeast Bank [Southeast Bank N.A., Miami, Florida].  I set up an interview with someone in law.  I met Janet Reno.  And I think it was one other area that he set up interviews for me to meet these people.  And I came back, had these interviews and he said, "Okay, where would you like to go?"  And I said, "You know what?  I'd like to try Janet Reno."  And I ended up working in the state attorney's office.
Speaker 1: Now can you describe a little bit about Janet?  I mean people know her now, you know, as attorney general under President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  But what was her reputation like here in Miami then?
Speaker 2: The timing was very interesting.  She was very popular, but it was also right after the McDuffie riots.
Speaker 1: The McDuffie--
Speaker 2: The McDuffie riots were riots that took place in Miami after a gentleman, whose last name was McDuffie [Arthur McDuffie], was riding on a motorcycle and was beaten and killed by the police.  And there was a lot of discussion about the racism that existed within the police department and in the criminal justice system.  And she was over the prosecutorial component of the criminal justice system.  And I remember the police officers got off.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I felt it was a great opportunity to work for Janet Reno.  And she gave me a project, the results of which I will not be discussing.  But she gave me a project, among other things, to look at how defendants were treated, black defendants were treated, and how--whether there was a disparate treatment in the way her office had begun to treat them from the prosecutorial side in the sentences that they were requesting or the charges that they were bringing, et cetera.  And I got to know her as someone who was brutally honest, but compassionate.  Non-compromising in her beliefs and her ethics, and someone who allowed me access to just about everything.  And she said, "What I want you to do is, I want you to go to the misdemeanor section.  I'm gonna put you together with this person and that person.  You're gonna go and sort of see how the court system works.  And then I'm gonna let you come to the felony division, and I'm gonna put you with this person and that person."  And it was like I was a lawyer, and I'm drafting documents.  I mean I was doing some things that lawyer--that people who don't have law degrees should not be doing.  And I learned a whole lot about the legal system.  And she brought me into her confidence in a number of different situations.  And she allowed me to be honest with her based on my observations.
Speaker 1: Now what made--what do you think is in you that brought that out in her?  I mean because you're a college student.
Speaker 2: I'm a college student, exactly.
Speaker 1: You're a kid.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have a moustache then?
Speaker 2: I hope I did not.  No I did not, no I didn't.
Speaker 1: So you looked pretty young.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't know the answer to that question, I really don't.  Bob Josefsberg, I remember sitting in a meeting where we were discussing a very sensitive issue in which he happened to be involved in providing her with advice and counsel.  And I got called in to, you know, take notes.  And I was with Bob Josefsberg because he happened to come to the office and I saw him and I walked in with him.  And she continued to have this conversation and she said to Bob, she said, you know, "This is a very sensitive conversation.  I hope you, you can vouch for Mr. Dotson."  He said, "Absolutely I can."  And that was the end of it.  He vouched for me, and I think that had a lot to do with what took place.  But I experienced a lot in the state attorney's office during that summer that ultimately led me to come back and explore the legal field.  But it wasn't that experience that made me say I'm going to be a lawyer, though.  'Cause when I graduated from Dartmouth, I didn't go right to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked for Xerox Corporation, much to my parents' [Earlene Puryear Dotson and Albert Dotson, Sr.] chagrin.  Because they felt as though if I was gonna graduate from college and I took off any time, I'd never go on and continue my education.  They felt I needed to go right through.  And I worked for Xerox in Buffalo, New York.  And--
Speaker 1: So still away from home.
Speaker 2: Still away from home.  I won't bore you with all the details.  But Xerox was a great experience for me; I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: How many--
Speaker 2: I was there two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so '85 [1985].
Story_ID: 335755
Speaker 1: I graduated in '82 [1982] from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  And spent time at Xerox [Xerox Corporation] in Buffalo, New York.  And in 1983 I'm thinking of postgraduate education.  And I decided I wanna go to law school.  I can't tell you that it was a decision based on some lofty goals at the time.  I can tell you that I decided law in part because of my experience with Janet Reno.  In part because of, you know, Bob Josefsberg's [Robert C. Josefsberg] influence.  But I just felt--something in me felt that that was the right place for me to be.  But I can't tell you exactly what that was.  So I began applying to schools.  And I applied to a number of schools.  And it came down to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], UVA [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] as the schools I was considering in part because I felt I'd end up somewhere in the Southeast, definitely not Miami [Florida].  Not coming to Miami.  But I was going to keep my options open by attending what are called regional schools.  So I'd go anywhere in that region and go to a top school.  I applied to Vanderbilt, interviewed, went down there to meet the people there, in large part because my sister [Toya Dotson Green] happened to be in Nashville [Tennessee] attending Meharry Dental School [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee].  So that's the only reason Vanderbilt even crossed my radar screen.  Well I ended up getting a full scholarship to attend Vanderbilt, and I decided as a student who'll be paying for his own education, full scholarship was a good thing.  And I attended Vanderbilt.  Now Vanderbilt was an interesting place.
Speaker 2: So you're there from eighty--
Speaker 1: Four [1984] to '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a lot like Homewood, Illinois, the campus of Vanderbilt.  I was one of four African Americans if I recall correctly, in my class.
Speaker 2: In your first year classes?
Speaker 1: First year class.
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: We had 90--I think--it's either 90 or 180.  There were either sections of 90, two sections of 90 or two sections of 45.  Either way, it's not an insignificant disparity.  The campus at Vanderbilt had an interesting history that I think has even moved forward beyond '87 [1987] if my information is correct.  Where at least one of the fraternities would hang in effigy a black mannequin or a mannequin of a black figure as part of their celebration.  And I would say that, you know, I know this is probably not the right thing to say, my kids will probably never get a chance to go to Vanderbilt after I say this, but it's the truth.  I used to say to people, "Hitler [Adolf Hitler] would have loved Vanderbilt 'cause the Aryan race, blonde hair, blue eyes, that's what you saw there."  And it didn't necessarily mean that that was the mentality that existed, but it was clearly, I mean it was like everybody had blonde hair and blue eyes.
Speaker 2: Now you were just in New Hampshire, so it's not like you're unused to seeing--
Speaker 1: That's correct.  It was an amazing, it was an amazing--this again was mostly the undergraduate.  The graduate schools, even though we were--there were a few of us there, the people were a lot more open minded, or at least appeared to be, than those who were part of the undergraduate campus.  Especially given some of the things that we heard went on, and you're focused on law school.  Quite frankly, I had very little time to interact.  And I swear I interacted maybe five times with the undergraduates at school 'cause you're focused on studying.  And you know being a student who had been out for a while, I'm really focused on getting through this, and I'm not there to play.
Story_ID: 335756
Speaker 1: I ended up staying at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] all three years, where I graduated from, and really enjoyed Nashville [Tennessee] to some extent 'cause I really liked jazz.  And unbeknownst to me at the time, a lot of jazz clubs in Nashville, and a lot more than I expected.  I did not get into country music, but yes I did go to the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee] at least once.
Speaker 2: That's a good place.
Speaker 1: To say I did it.  To say I did it.  But I enjoyed--you know I went over to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] all the time with my sister [Toya Dotson Green], I was her guinea pig most of the time.  And I was a willing one.
Speaker 2: You have beautiful teeth.
Speaker 1: Oh, well.  So we--at Vanderbilt became the president of the black lawyers association [National Black Law Students Association], student lawyers association as a second year, which--and then was in that position for two years at Vanderbilt.  I remember the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] explosion occurred while there.
Speaker 2: That's '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: I don't remember whether there were any significant events that occurred that impacted us in law school.  But I do remember the Challenger if only because it--everything just seemed to stop when that, when that occurred.  Not many things happen in that regard.  I did start something at Vanderbilt that I think continues to this day.  We got together with the women's lawyers association [Women Law Students Association], and we brought in national speakers to speak on issues that were controversial, and we wanted to bring people from both sides of the issue.
Story_ID: 335757
Speaker 1: The first topic that we decided to approach was affirmative action.  And we brought someone in from the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] and--who had one view.  And we brought people in who were judges and people in the legal profession to discuss affirmative action.  And it was a really no holds barred discussion, which was very--it was great to have that dialogue.  And we've cont- I think the black lawyers- black lawyers student association, or black student lawyers association [National Black Law Students Association] and the women lawyers student association [Women Law Students Association] continue that partnership to this day.  Graduated from Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee].  And my--what was interesting is when you go to law school, one of the biggest things law students try to do is get a job over the summer.  Well before I even went to Vanderbilt, the summer of '84 [1984] I went back up to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  A friend of mine was graduating from Dartmouth, and I was there and I ran into Bob Josefsberg [Robert C. Josefsberg], whose daughter [Amy Josefsberg Ederi] was graduating from Dartmouth that same year.  And we were walking through the lines of the graduates, and I say, "How're you doing," he says, "How are things going?"  I said, "Great, going to law school."  He said, "You're kidding?"  He was so elated.  He said, "You need a job."  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Well, you got it.  Your first summer, you're working with our firm."  And that firm is a premier litigation firm, was then and is now here in Miami [Florida].  And my first year I didn't have to worry about the interview process 'cause I already had a job with Bob Josefsberg and I hadn't started, I hadn't started one day of law school.  And he just--amazing, absolutely amazing.
Speaker 2: He's an angel.
Speaker 1: Absolutely he is.  And there are clearly many people in my life, many people from coaches to barbers to just people who I talk to.  I remember a custodian at Palmetto High School [Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  I mean, people who would stop and just talk to me, who were mentors.  Only because we're focused, you know, on the law, have I mentioned him more than once.  But there were a number of people who fit that role model component in my life.  But I just think it's significant because he wasn't and isn't African American.  Just somebody who cared about people and recognized disparities and I mean had the conversation with me that we need more young black people to come back to Miami, period.  So I came and had my job, at my job my first summer.  Did that, and then toward the end of my first summer he said, "Okay now, our firm, you know, do great things.  But we don't, we aren't looking to expand.  So what I want you to do, I'm gonna set up interviews with these four law firms and you're gonna meet with so-and-so.  And then you decide, you know, they'll decide whether they wanna hire you or not.  And then you decide where you wanna go."
Story_ID: 335758
Speaker 1: Well, they were the four major firms in Miami [Florida].  And I interviewed.  Before I even left to go back to my second year [at Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], I had an offer from all four to come back at the end of my second year to clerk with them.  So again, going back to campus to study law not worrying about what my job was gonna be.  Ended up working at one of those firms and taking a job from one of them, with one of them.  It was Fine Jacobson Schwartz Nash Block and England [Miami, Florida].  At that time, most of the Jewish lawyers had formed their own firms 'cause they could not become members of the majority firms.  And that had changed by the time I had graduated, but the firm that I was with was predominantly Jewish, at least the partners were.  And the practice of law started in 1987 for me.  Came to Miami.  Miami still had some of the very same challenges that I had observed as a high school student [at Miami Palmetto Senior High School, Miami, Florida].  And at that time in society, there was a lot of discussion about black males, young black males and their plight in education.
Speaker 2: Right, 'cause you'd been gone for about ten years now.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And matter of fact, most people here didn't know my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] had an older son.  When I came back here, they said, "That's not your name."  I know--no that's my father.  Because it'd been--I'd only been here for two years, two years of high school, in which I'm in a particularly closed community, in high school, with my high school friends, not really getting out.  And then here I come back ten years later, and they knew my younger brother [Jonathan Dotson] and my youngest sister [Christa Dotson Dean], but clearly not me 'cause I just wasn't here.  And when I was here, I was coming back for holidays, it's all family.  So I come back here to practice with Fine Jacobson.  And I go into the real estate and corporate departments.  And it was a great, great practice.  I--there was one other black lawyer at the firm at the time, and they had other black lawyers who had worked with them before I joined.  But I began to get more involved in sort of Miami, and sort of the social and socioeconomic climate, and some political leanings as well.  Got together with a group of guys and said, "You know, you know we need to do something about the plight of black males."  And we were talking.  And we didn't know what we were going to do.  The group of ten of us who met.  And we all sat at this table, around the table and sort of talked about why we were there.  Why we thought it was important.  And it was not a discussion about 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] at the time, it's just us doing something as a collective group.  And as we came out of that discussion, we all agreed that we needed to, we needed to collectively approach this issue.  And we eventually decided that the 100 Black Men group was a great model, or a great vehicle through which we could channel our collective efforts.  And we started 100 Black Men of South Florida.
Story_ID: 335759
Speaker 1: I wanna jump in here.  Can you give a little background on the history of 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  100 Black Men was actually started as a entity in 1963 in New York [New York].  It grew out of naturally the civil rights struggle and movement.  But the real focus of the group at that time, which were one hundred men in New York, was the criminal system and the injustice that African Americans were experiencing in the criminal justice system.  And there was a desire to focus too on economic equality amongst persons of African descent and the general population.  The concept of the one hundred grew as a member moved to a different locale.  The second chapter was in New Jersey.  And primarily out of the Newark [New Jersey] area.  And that person who helped start that chapter then moved to California, to Los Angeles [California] and started a chapter there.  A chapter sprung up in Atlanta [Georgia] and Indianapolis [Indiana] and Alton, Illinois, in Suffolk County, New York, and another chapter started in California in the Oakland [California] area.  But we ended up with nine organizations, all 100 Black Men of the geographic region.  And eventually decided that they should come together, approximately twenty years ago in October of 1996 [sic.], to form 100 Black Men of America.  And those chapters then were the beginning of what we know now as 100 Black Men of America that is now as of today 105 chapters and a global organization, having chapters in the African continent, the Caribbean basin, and Europe and in the continental United States.
Speaker 1: Now let's see, you were born just three years before the first organization began.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So, but today you are the chairman.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Of this nation, or worldwide organization.  Now how did that come to be?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in the room when they voted.  When we started 100 Black Men of South Florida, I was the founding president.  And we did not initially decide whether--that we were going to join the 100 Black Men of America because at that time the New York chapter, the New York organization was not a part of 100 Black Men of America.  The--all the organizations except New York joined.  New York eventually joined.  But the reason I became aware of it, I have a--have a college friend who was a member of the New York organization.  I spoke to Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown], a--at that time he was the president of the New York chapter, he's a Tuskegee Airman.  And we were talking about us starting and he said, "Look, you don't have to follow our model.  You know we were around before there was a 100 Black Men of America."  And we had people like David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], you know these were all founders of the 100 Black Men, the New York group.  And they said, "You gotta make the decision for yourself whether you wanna join or not."  So after we formed, I then traveled to the first annual conference that I attended, I believe it was in New Jersey at that time.  And got to meet what I thought were an--they were an amazing group of men.  They came, they were about doing business.  It wasn't about egos.  They were talking about how they were helping kids in their community.  And really focused on the business of the 100.  And these were men who were very accomplished in their communities.  And you know, I was sort of in awe as a, as the young buck in the room, as to what they were doing.  And so as the president of our chapter, I then went to the next conference.  And I started volunteering to help do things.  And eventually there was an election and I was elected secretary of 100 Black Men of America.  This was in 1994, in Nashville, Tennessee of all places.  In Opryland [Opryland Hotel; Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee], that's where we had the--Opryland Hotel.
Speaker 1: There at Opryland.
Speaker 2: At that time Opryland hadn't moved to its larger current location.  And we were--a group of us were elected to office in 1994.  And I stayed in that position for two years.  And then in--where were we--in 1996, here in Miami [Florida].  Had the convention here in Miami.  I convinced them to have the convention here, it was our tenth anniversary of 100 Black Men of America.  And I think I said earlier that we started in 1996, if the tape may prove me wrong, but it was 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That we were formed, in October 1986.  In 1996, we had the convention here and I was elected vice president of 100 Black Men.  It just hard work in the organization.  And I stayed vice president for eight years, or vice chairman, we changed the title to chairman.  And then was elected without opposition to chairman of the board of the 100 two years ago.
Speaker 1: And how long does your tenure last?
Speaker 2: It lasts for two years.  Well we have two year terms, but no term limits.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could, you could be reelected.
Speaker 2: No--I guess theoretically that's possible.
Story_ID: 335760
Speaker 1: In looking here in your office, you have so many awards and accolades.  But it seems like 100 [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], as I'm noticing your pin, may be the jewel in your crown. Why is that the thing that's important to you?
Speaker 2: Well whatever other organization I'm a member of, I am a black man no matter which group I join.  And I recognize that.  And I really feel, if you go back through as I shared some of the things my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] did, my parents did, my grandparents did.  We didn't have the luxury of even thinking that we could not give back to a community.  We didn't, we didn't--it never was even part of our psyche to even think that.  And the fact that I'm a part of a group that rolls up its sleeves, actively gets involved.  We don't sit around having meetings talking about policy and all--we do that, but that's not who we are.  We're a group of men who are focused on doing something.  That absolutely appealed to me.  And I enjoy the other things that I do.  And they are important, and they have important components of society that they intend to impact.  But this impacts people who look like me.  People who I have a special affinity for.  Working with people who are like minded and like me.  And I don't apologize for it.  I don't think there's any reason to apologize for it.  The fact that we have the name that we have, it just--it tells people who we are.  It's not anti this or anti that.  It's really focused on helping young people achieve whatever it is they want to achieve, and providing them with the opportunities, the role models that they can emulate.  The educational opportunities through scholarships, and other things that we do to be able to afford to go to college, understanding that it's important to have a healthy life and healthy lifestyle because--and if you don't have health, it's gonna be very difficult for you to achieve academically or achieve period, or live for that matter.  And then economic development is another focus of ours.  And we try to focus on that because to be a full self-sustaining, self-sufficient member of our society, you gotta recognize the economic component of that.  So teaching financial literacy to the young people that we mentor, up to providing economic opportunities for our members, or minority businesses, to participate with our partners, that's all a part of what we do.  And we do it with a vision toward being beacons of leadership within the communities that we serve.  I mean, leveraging our leadership positions, leveraging the resources that we have for the benefit of our community so that everyone that we impact can become a self-sufficient stakeholder.  It's not just about us.  It's about the people that we serve.  So I will tell you that I have a passion for it.  It's a passion that was nurtured throughout my life.  It's a passion that I will continue to have regardless of the position that I hold.  It's an organization that I suspect is un- will take its unique position of being a group of black men that cuts across fraternal organizations, cuts across religious affiliation, cuts across geographic boundaries, cuts across cultures.  And what better way, what better vehicle that is focused on youth primarily to begin to develop linkages between men of African descent, no matter where they are.  Whether it's in South America, whether it's in the Caribbean, whether it's on the African continent, whether it's in Europe.  Some of the travels that I've had have shown me that the struggles are very similar.  The issues are very similar.  The solutions too may be very similar.  And shame on us if we don't share information, if we don't share best practices, if we don't share with each other how we can go about changing society so that we become co-equal participants in the world.
Story_ID: 335761
Speaker 1: You are an equity partner here [Bilzin, Sumberg, Baena, Price and Axelrod LLP, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: But you're just forty-six years old.  When did you make partner?
Speaker 2: Well I've been a partner, I've been with four law firms, but primarily with the same group.  We've moved from firm to firm.  And I became a partner at my prior firm [Eckert Seamans Cherin & Mellott LLC] and I joined this firm as a partner in '98 [1998].  So I was a partner at thirty-eight and I think I became a partner at thirty-seven, if my memory serves me correct, at my prior firm, immediately preceding firm.
Speaker 1: So you're all about making history, you know.  You're not waiting for it to be made, you're like, people just have to suck up your dust.
Speaker 2: Well no.  And I've said this before.  And I will say it again (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 335762
Speaker 1: Your statement to me was whether or not I'm making history.  And my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] made history.  And he created a very wide wake that I'm being--I'm fortunate enough to travel in.  And his wake benefitted more than just me, more than our family.  He did a lot for a lot of people.  And that's history making.  I'm afforded the opportunity to have lived with him and watched him as a role model, and to be able to do certain things.  And I will tell you, whenever people say stuff like that, think about those who came before us who gave their lives some of them, or whose lives were threatened, many of them who made history.  And sometimes I think when people make that statement or take on the--and not this is by no means a reflection on what we're doing here today.  But I--when you look at those who are real history makers, you know those are the people I look to, who I say they clearly are making history.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.  I suppose that what they did had to occur and now as you said, you know, you're wave number two of creating even greater opportunities and different opportunities.  Not always having to be the first, but now how do we build upon--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Those who have gone before us.  So your previous law firm position, so you started off at one firm.
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: And your area of concentration was--
Speaker 1: Land use and zoning and at that--at the other firm, the first firm [Fine Jacobson Schwartz Nash Block and England, Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Right, when you first started.
Speaker 1: It was corporate and real estate transactions.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was something that you were interested in or just it was an opportunity that opened up and said, I'll try it?
Speaker 1: Actually during the summers when I worked at that firm, I got to know the people in those departments, the work seemed interesting.  And they actually asked me if was interested in being a litigator.  And because it was my belief at the time that there weren't any of us on the money making side, that they asked me to go to litigation to talk and to preach in court--was not where I was going to be pigeonholed.  So it was an act of defiance in part.  And I ended up going into real estate transactional work and it was the best thing I ever did.
Speaker 2: Now can you say a little bit about what your current practice is because I definitely notice everything here on the walls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  My current practice [at Bilzin, Sumberg, Baena, Price and Axelrod LLP, Miami, Florida], I do represent a lot of developers who are seeking to develop all types of projects.  Right now in this market you're talking about mixed-use projects that include a residential component, maybe a hotel component, a retail component, all in one building.  And Miami's [Miami, Florida] at a point where it used to be a horizontal community where there were very few high-rises.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And now Miami's going vertical, and it's been referred to as the Manhattanization of Miami.  And we represent a lot of developers.  And that just brings out a whole new type of real estate transactional work, as well as land use and zoning approvals.  I also--that had led me to represent clients that were seeking to do business with government, going through the procurement process.  And that was a process that included state and local and federal procurement.  So I represented clients that have done business with the [U.S.] Department of Defense, to clients who are doing business with Miami-Dade County [Florida].
Speaker 2: That I would assume is necessarily a more complex process dealing with state, local and federal government than just private-to-private.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely because there are multiple--private-to-private usually the issue is price.  You decide--you match quality and you're talking about price.  In government there are multiple policies that are adopted from time to time that may drive a decision on who to hire and when to hire them.  So you've got to navigate through that, understand those public policies that you've got to address.  Some of them are designed to make sure there's inclusion in the process.  There are policies that are adopted from time to time that make the process a little bit more cumbersome than it need be and you're navigating through that.  And then you just again, making sure that whatever the laws are that govern public procurement, that your client understands them and can follow them.
Story_ID: 335124
Speaker 1: Navigating the rugged terrain of government procurement.  So are you--you're the go-to guy in Miami-Dade County [Florida] if somebody is hoping to make a transaction like that happen?  Would you say you're like one of the top people in the legal field for that?
Speaker 2: Well first I wanna thank you for being my public relations manager and I hope that this tape is shown all over Dade County.  Of course I am.  There, there are several people in the field here.  And Miami [Florida] is a diverse community with a lot of diverse policies that you've got to navigate.  So there are a lot of people who are involved in this practice.
Speaker 1: Orange Bowl Committee, how--you're the president of the '06 [2006], '07 [2007] Orange Bowl Committee.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well the Orange Bowl Committee is seventy-three years old.  And it started--its membership used to be all white males.  And the Orange Bowl Committee's primary focus was not on--primary focus is to, or was to put on a college postseason game, football game, and to generate tourism here in South Florida.  The Orange Bowl Committee has since grown, seventy-three years later, a more diverse group of people, that we have a sailing regatta, a basketball tournament, we have a youth football league that has ten thousand young people that are participating in it.  We have scholarship banquets that we do.  We have a number of activities that go on year round.  It is a major operation, and the Orange Bowl, the Orange Bowl is part of the Bowl Championship Series [BCS], which only includes four bowls in the country, the Rose Bowl, the Fiesta Bowl, the Sugar Bowl and the Orange Bowl.  So it is--it's a major undertaking.  And I got involved back in '93 [1993], I believe, was the year I was voted onto the Orange Bowl Committee.  It's an interesting process to get on.  And I am only the second African American to be the president of the Orange Bowl Committee.
Speaker 1: In its seventy-three year history.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  The first one just happened to be my father [Albert Dotson, Sr.].  He was the first.
Speaker 1: There we go, okay.
Speaker 2: And the--it is a great institution, the Orange Bowl Committee.  And there's a lot of travel involved.  You--the post-college football season and the relationship it has with the bowls is an ever evolving animal.  It used to be that all the bowls played their games and at the end, the sportswriters and the coaches would decide who the number one team is in the nation.  To a point where we now have four bowls where they select their teams from a ranking that includes a computer that determines who the number one and number two, and those two teams play at the end of the season.  So you know, managing all of that along with the millions of dollars you've got to raise to put that on, and to manage the staff, and to manage all the other activities that we do, is, it's just a major corporation, it really is.
Speaker 1: And that's your responsibility for your tenure or is it just a single year?
Speaker 2: Yes, you are--you run for or are elected to a vice president slot, second vice president.  Then you automatically become first vice president, and then president-elect, and then president.  So you're in the queue for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you serve on the board also as immediate past president.  So you're really in it for five years.  But during the year that I'm president, yes, that is, that's my job, including this first issue--this is the year where the new television partner is FOX.  The--we have a new arrangement with the Bowl Championship Series, the BCS.  So there are a lot of things that are happening for the first time, my year, lucky me.  That you know, you have to manage and understand.
Story_ID: 335125
Speaker 1: Now how do you juggle two non-everyday job positions that require not only just so much time, but you know, devotion and skill and passion to them as well, in addition to helping your clients navigate the rocky terrain of government procurement, et cetera, et cetera.
Speaker 2: That's right.  As the only person that can do that and do it well in Miami [Florida].  Don't forget that part.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, I forgot.
Speaker 2: Okay.  There's a couple of ways in which that is made possible.  First, you've got to have a supportive employer that understands the importance of giving back to the community and Bilzin and Sumberg [Bilzin, Sumberg, Baena, Price and Axelrod LLP, Miami, Florida] is clearly one of those types of employers here.  Two, you've got to have good people that work with you.  Either elected as part of your team, or as part of the paid staff.  If you don't have a good team, it's--or you don't work together as a good team, that's gonna demand much more time than if you have a great team that is working with you.  And you've got to have great support, a supportive environment, and great support mechanisms that are a part of your sphere of influence and a part of the people with whom you work, including your personal assistant here, my secretary, to my family.  I mean, all of them have to be, have to be supportive.  But one thing I try to do in everything that I'm doing is include everyone.  When I travel, if I can travel with my family, if it works, I take them with me.  If I've got something that I'm doing, I include them in it.  So that they too become a part of what I'm doing and it's not something daddy's doing or we don't understand why daddy's gone.  You know, they're traveling with me.  And even if it costs me a little bit more to do that, I'd rather do that than to miss opportunities to interact and develop the bonds that I have.  So it's multi-layering as opposed to having these things happen concurrently and not having them intersect.  Because of my practice, I use opportunities when I travel to let people know what I'm doing so to the extent that I can be of benefit to them here or elsewhere.  They know the firm and my personal capabilities.  When I'm out and talking about the 100 Black Men of America [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], it may be to a sponsor of Orange Bowl or to someone that has a connection with Orange Bowl.  You've got to find the intersections.  And if you're looking for intersections, it allows you to multitask and it becomes less a cliche in a way that you--in the way that you operate.  So I'm always looking for intersections.
Story_ID: 335126
Speaker 1: In five, ten years when--wait, how old is Albert III [Albert Dotson, III]?
Speaker 2: Albert III is seven, he'll be eight this year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you take him off to college and he says, "Dad, I'll see you later," and you turn and you wipe away a tear, what is it that you hope to leave him--in his travels and his journey?  And what lessons do you think your life can teach others?
Speaker 2: You know I've been, as I mentioned earlier, blessed in a number of ways.  I can't say that I sat down and mapped out this plan, this master plan for myself, and we're just following that map that was laid out.  That was done by someone clearly more greater, it was God's input.  I have also said that I have been very blessed to have an earthly father [Albert Dotson, Sr.] who I had as a role model and a mother [Earlene Puryear Dotson] who is--people don't understand.  They think my competitive nature comes from my father, but it's really my mother and we play backgammon like it's no tomorrow, or Scrabble and we can't stand to lose to each other.  And those are lessons that I was able to apply as I moved forward.  I just hope that my son, when Albert III is going to college, and yes I'm rubbing that tear from my eye.  And my father is looking at the poetic justice that will have occurred, laughing at me I am sure.  When that happens, I wanna make sure that he has--I've given him a peek forward, so he can see, Albert, these are some of the pitfalls that daddy experienced.  These are some of the hurdles that daddy had to jump over.  These are some of the challenges that I was confronted with, and this is how daddy dealt with them.  You may not deal with them the same way, but I just want you to know this is what I did and what I had to deal with so that when you confront them, you will know what you're doing.  But as you do that, you know, as you jump over these hurdles and tackle these challenges, you've got to always look behind you and around you and see who you can bring with you.  Because if you're doing it by yourself, one, you're more likely than not going to--you're more likely than not going to be unsuccessful.  And you're going to really miss the opportunity to make life better for Albert IV because that's really what it's all about.  And it's not solely focused on my lineage is that we're trying to do this.  It's that we're doing this for a community of people.  I'm a firm believer, and this may be completely naive and idealistic, but I truly believe that society will be better, much better, the more we give people opportunities to excel in whatever it is they want to do without creating artificial barriers.  And I want Albert III to have one less barrier, or two less barriers that he has to deal with and recognize that he's gotta knock down some barriers for some other people as he moves forward.  And also I will tell him to pass daddy the handkerchief as I walk away from him.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's so beautiful.  Well I know that you have to go so I wanna thank you for a very insightful and educating, educating, if that's a word, interview.  I've enjoyed it greatly.
Speaker 2: Well it's been my pleasure.  It's been my pleasure.  Thank you very much (simultaneous).
