Story_ID: 667247
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Daryl Cumber Dance.  Daryl, D-A-R-Y-L, Cumber, C-U-M-B-E-R, and Dance, D-A-N-C-E.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 17th, 1938, born in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired, professor emerita.  I taught mainly literature and folklore in English departments in a few universities.
Speaker 1: And you worked for many years--well, here in Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth and University of Richmond--
Speaker 2: That's right.  I actually started my career teaching at Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia].  Then, shortly after that, I went to Virginia State College then, now Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia].  I left Virginia State and did my Ph.D. and taught at Virginia State one year after that.  Then, I went to Virginia Commonwealth University for twenty years and then the University of Richmond for twenty years with a few visiting years in between, one year at the University of California in Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], one research year at the University of the West Indies in Jamaica [Kingston, Jamaica], and one research year at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What?  Oh, today's date?  Seven--the seventh, December 7, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time and you don't have to give your address, just--
Speaker 2: Yes, we're here in Henrico, Virginia [Henrico County, Virginia], just outside of Richmond.
Story_ID: 667248
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People Magazine-ish type questions that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is--they're kind of a warm up.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have (laughter) several favorite foods.  I suppose I'd say seafood is my favorite and shrimp, crab.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  I enjoy the change of seasons and so with each new season, I feel excited, happy, pleased, look forward to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Again, I've enjoyed many.  I--this summer, I went to Italy and, and, you know, I, I loved that.  I went to Greece; that was exciting.  I love the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: She who laughs lasts.  In other words, laughter keeps you here.  That lasts is L-A-S-T-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Oh, all right (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She who laughs lasts, L-A-S-T-S (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 667249
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Allen Cumber] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Veronica Bell Cumber.  It originally was Sallie Veronica Bell Cumber.  When she married, she dropped the Sallie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story as to why she--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you marry, you have to drop something because you have another name there and three names is what people expect, so her legal name became Veronica Bell Cumber.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1911 in Stanton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what--
Speaker 2: We can--we can sit here for a couple of days talking about family because I've done a family history and I grew up with excitement about this family.  We know her family arrived in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] in the 1600s.  I'm not able to make absolute connections until the 1700s because records in Charles City were taken during the war there, but I'm reasonably confident of some of the people in the 1600s who were a member of her family.  Her family was a free black family and the earliest absolute documentation is the early 1700s, one Elizabeth Brown.  And from that point, I could trace my line through her son, Abraham [Abraham Brown], his son, Abraham [Abraham Brown], his daughter, Polly [Polly Brown], her son Crawford [Crawford Brown], her--his daughter, Sidney [Sidney Brown] who is my great-grandmother, and then Sallie [Sallie Brown Bell] who is my grandmother, and then Veronica.  So, I can trace it through several generations.  And they have a very interesting history.  The firsts in this family are amazing.  So--
Speaker 1: What are some of them?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, with Elizabeth, the one with whom we started in the early 1700s, for some reason, she apprenticed her sons kind of indentured for a brief period.  It may be--sometimes, women were forced to do that if they were not married and that I'm not able to determine sometimes because of poverty.  But at any rate, they were indentured until they were young men, and there were three of them.  One of them was my great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.  And evidently, they were--came out of that indentured period with a little bit of money and so my great-great-great-great-grandfather bought a big piece of land, which later became Ruthville.  At the time, it was just referred to as the land where the freed blacks lived, and began his family.  And this family, one of the interesting things about them is that they fought in the Revolutionary War.  They were involved in, though not as soldiers, in the Civil War, and in almost every war, there has been some member of the family who was involved.  In 1810, they established one of the earliest black churches in the country, not the earliest, but it probably is one of the first in the South and maybe the only one in the South established by the blacks themselves.  Most black churches in the South, as you probably know, grew out of blacks who had worshipped at white churches and then the white churches gave them some land and oversaw the development of their church.  In this case, the land was given by members of the black community and for some reason, that black community represented itself in the church organization back there in 1810.  Now, they did, like most black churches have to have a white minister, but when they write about it, they say he really came according to the law merely to be in attendance. And--
Speaker 1: Now, what's the name of this church?
Speaker 2: Elam Baptist Church [Charles City County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Elam Baptist Church, okay.
Speaker 2: And they have also in this family somebody who would've been a great great uncle, was one of the first legally recognized ordained black ministers.  And, incidentally, when, when the Freedmen's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands] came to Charles City after the Civil War, they found him already teaches classes there in Elam Baptist Church, and there's no question he'd been teaching for years, and there's no question also within the community itself, their legends of churches, but it had to be done without--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the public knowing about it at the time.  One of the early black lawyers who, who--in Virginia is a member of this family, and it was he who gave the name to that little community there that's now called Ruthville, Virginia.  They built schools themselves.  The Freedmen Bureau's reports indicated nothing that they did, but they simply came and they gave a report of what was going on.  The blacks had built--there were actually three schools that they built independently themselves and, finally, the last one was turned over to the county.
Story_ID: 667250
Speaker 1: But, the Freedmen Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands] talks about the fact that they were not getting support from the white community there in Charles City, but that the people were doing this and they were doing that, and they had their own teachers, and they went off, many of them to even study at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and other large universities.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, we go back a little bit, but you said Ruthville [Virginia] was founded in the 1700s or?
Speaker 1: No.  The community was established, but the name Ruthville was not given to it until much later.  This young man who I mentioned was a lawyer, petitioned to get a black post office in the community and in asking for the post office, he indicated that the name of the post office should be Ruth, R-U-T-H, Will, W-I-L-L because he was in love with my great great great aunt, whose name was Ruth [Ruth Brown Hucles] and his name was William, William Brown.  But when the papers went in and came back, the name that was there was not Ruth Will, but Ruthville, so the community's name became Ruthville much later.
Speaker 2: So, did it have a name before that or?
Speaker 1: It, it was something that indicated free black or black--Freetown or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember different names like Freedonia and Freetown and--
Speaker 1: Yes.  It--
Speaker 2: --you know, from various places around the country.  But--now, this is a history that--
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Charles City County, Virginia, yes.
Speaker 2: This is a history that's starting to emerge, independent black towns that weren't discussed that much, you know, until just--I mean, in--especially in the--I mean, pre--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Civil War and in the North.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  But, this was not an incorporated town.  It was really just the community in Charles City.  But, as you know, the community is developed often separately.  My home where I grew up was really sort of on the edge of the community.  The next--people next door to us were white, but from my home on down and much of that land that when I grew up many of the people were living on was a part of original land brought--bought, purchased by the original Abraham Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In--in seven--in the 1700s.
Speaker 1: In the 1700s--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --this purchase was made, yes.
Speaker 2: All right so, that's, that's quite a history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 667251
Speaker 1: So--and it doesn't hurt to name names in this interview (laughter)--you know.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.  Well, it's very interesting.  My grandmother's family, for example, her name was Sallie Brown [Sallie Brown Bell].  Then, she married Bell, then she married Brown.  So, Sallie Corona Brown Bell Brown, was a member of a family who were farmers for the most part, though her mother is said to have had a school.  We don't have any actual documentation of that little school where she taught children in the community.  They had twelve children, six boys and six girls.  One boy died very young.  The five boys went on all to be in the medical field.  Two of them finished Harvard Medical Schools [Boston, Massachusetts], one dentistry.  Others--one other finished medical school, one finished podiatry, and one was a pharmacist.  But, that says something about the nature of the families there.  When Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], now university, opened in the 1880s, my grandmother, my--told me how her mother [Sidney Brown] was so excited about a school that her children could attend and how she got together with her first cousin and they decided to send their boys to Virginia State.  And they did, indeed, not only send their boys, but they sent several of the girls to Virginia State as well.  That's where they met the man who was to become my grandfather.  He was in the very first class that entered Virginia State.  And these brothers started coming two years after that and they became friendly with him.  And so he met my grandmother when he visited Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] with these boys, but they did not marry then.  He went on to marry someone who was in school with him, and when she died later, he came back and began courting my grandmother.  And his is a glorious history, too.  He was very much involved in the early days at Virginia State.  He was very active as a student there.  And the president, first president--black president appointed there was John Mercer Langston, and he became friendly with Langston who was also a lawyer and in politics as well.  But, they were trying to get rid of Langston because Virginia State was always a very--a school that had many conflicts with the state government, but they had a powerful black man who helped to establish the school, and he made many demands which he was able to get through.  One of them was that all of their faculty would be black and not white because he said, "If people can't eat with you, why do we trust them to teach our students?"  And so, he insisted on a black--in fact, he insisted on a college and not just an industrial school which, again, was very rare for early black schools.
Speaker 1: That's right.  They were called these--
Speaker 2: So, Virginia State started with a college.  And my grandfather came and studied there, and when he finished the first program he was studying, Langston invited several of the students to stay and read law with him, so he was then studying, we might saw law, that might be something of an overstatement, but no question--
Speaker 1: Now that's in those days, that's--
Speaker 2: --about that's the way it happened in those days.  But in the meantime, they were trying to change things at the school and trying to get rid of Langston.  And my grandfather came to Richmond [Virginia] from the campus--the campus is in Petersburg [Virginia]--and demanded a hearing with the governor to speak on behalf of Langston.  And when he returned to the school, there was a motion made in the faculty to dismiss him from leaving the school without permission.  Langston refused to carry the motion, but finally, they got rid of Langston and then they expelled my grandfather as well.  And my uncles, my grandmother's brothers who were there left in protest, and all three of them, those two brothers and, and my grandfather ended up at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  My grandfather first took some classes in law somewhere else in the area but then enrolled in Harvard where he studied.  So, he has a very interesting history as well.
Speaker 1: What, what, what is your grandfather's name, again?
Speaker 2: Luther Winston Bell [Luther Bell], B-E-L-L.
Story_ID: 667252
Speaker 1: So, he ended up at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: He studied there.  And it's very--and, and it's very interesting.  I've, I've gone through all the records there with great care and they actually had programs for admitting blacks without some of the qualifications even at that time, and they would talk about the kind of admission that they had in the Harvard law records, but he met all the tests on his own, and he did not require special admission.  And he did seemingly quite well.  I read the reports all the way through.  But, I--I'm not--I don't think he graduated.  It's very interesting.  He's listed as a graduate at some point and there's actually one class where I think I, I recognize his picture.  I'm not absolutely positive, but his wife [Sallie Brown Bell] became ill and I don't think that he actually got--and, and, you know, they aren't able to tell me, but some of the books list him.  But, anyway, he, he studied at Harvard and is often listed as a lawyer, you know, passing the bar and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Did he practice as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  He was with some law firm that my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] remembered hearing something about--he died when my mother was seven, so she doesn't remember very well and doesn't really know all of the details.  He actually seemed to do most of his work as--in insurance, and he sent his business card to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  He went to Hampton before he went to Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and on that business card, he is listed as an officer and lawyer in this insurance company.  But, you know, there was really almost no practice of law by black people in those, those early days.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: The legal system was so prejudicial and so forth that black lawyers really couldn't make much money in those early days, so there are very few that actually practiced.  So, I have no, no indication of his doing anything other than practicing as the lawyer of the insurance company and the officer of the insurance company.
Speaker 1: Now, this is significant.  We, we spent the last couple of days at, at, at McGuireWood [McGuireWoods LLP]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and--yeah.  The lawyers there for the most part don't do litigation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they, they know business and they--so, they--and they, they negotiate deals.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so it sounds to me like your [maternal] grandfather [Luther Bell] read law with John Mercer Langston, went to Harvard and studied, whether he graduated or not--
Speaker 2: And he was there for three years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He finished the whole program, but something--there--it's interesting that I cannot find an absolute indication even though some of the books there list him as a graduate in that class.
Speaker 1: He would be a valuable asset to any business if he understood law--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --business law--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and negotiating contracts and deals and other things.  So, he would--I mean, even though as you were alluding to, black people were not allowed to litigate so much in the courts or were discriminated against when they did.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was able to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --inform and--deals and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --contracts and things.
Speaker 2: You know I'm a folklorist, so I'm inclined to tell a story, now.  May I (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, you may, by all means.  That's what this--that's what this is--that's what the strength of this collection is.
Speaker 2: There's an old black tale about a black man who was arrested for a crime, and so the judge is talking to him--I'm not good at telling the stories myself, I collect them.  But the judge is talking to him and so, you know, how--so, he'd say, "Oh, Uncle Jim," as they would call the blacks uncle, "We'll appoint a lawyer for you and we'll do this and that for you."  And this guy says to the judge, he says, "Well, don't worry about the lawyer, but if you could just give me a white witness, that's what I would need to go to court." Which says a lot about the tenor of and, and, and what was going on in the legal system.  In this country, one might even say today (laughter), some of these problems still persist so that a black person being accused of a crime would be much safer going to court with a white person to stand up for him than with a black lawyer to represent him at that time in terms of the way that judges and juries would perceive a black man as a lawyer.
Story_ID: 667253
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Yeah.  So--yeah, this is interesting.  You've got a interesting family history on this side.
Speaker 2: I wish I had time to talk more about it.  It's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now is there a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) an excit- and I have written about it.  I have a book called 'The Lineage of Abraham' ['The Lineage of Abraham: The Biography of a Free Black Family in Charles City, Virginia' Daryl Cumber Dance] and it's a study of the history of my mother's [Veronica Bell Cumber] side of the family and some of it of my father's [Allen Cumber] side, which is just as interesting.  His family also came to Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] very early.  The family had the name Cumber by the time I came along.  It has several spellings and, of course, this is not unusual with records having different spellings of names, but it ended up as Cumber.  And the Cumbers were in Charles City in the 1600s as well, and his family, again, we can document in the early 1800s in Charles City, and they, too, were a free black family in Charles City.
Speaker 1: So, Charles City--now, Charles City wasn't a black town per se, right?
Speaker 2: No, Charles City is a, a county, one of the larger counties in Virginia.  A number of counties grew out of it, one of the original (unclear) is in Virginia.  It's still a very rural county, but--
Speaker 1: So, Charles City is a county?
Speaker 2: Charles City is a county.
Speaker 1: Now, that's, that's interesting, okay.  It's--
Speaker 2: Yes, Charles City is a county.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No, no city connected with, with the area, has a very interesting history, black, white, and Indian [Native American].  It's the only place--I believe this is still true, I'm quite sure it is, that has furnished two United States presidents.  It has had always an Indian community and still an Indian community, but it is all--
Speaker 1: But, but--will you hold on the brakes for a second.  What two presidents are we talking about?
Speaker 2: [President] John Tyler and William Harrison [President William Henry Harrison].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None to brag about (laughter), it's just the record that I, I mentioned there.  But, also, it had, in terms of being a rural county, one of the larger free black communities of, of the time, and a continuing free black community and a relatively--I hesitate to use words like influential and powerful, but for their time, it was.  I found a number of instances, for example, when these people went to court and did, indeed, win a case.  Of course, we find this all over occasionally, rare, but occasionally.
Story_ID: 667254
Speaker 1: And you also find instances where they stood up to the white community in a way that's quite interesting.  For example, when President John Tyler was living, these two sides that were to become my family, Cumbers and Browns, had a court case about land where one of the Cumbers hadn't paid the poll tax--hadn't paid, excuse me, tax, property tax on the land, and one of the Browns went and bought the land, and the Cumber family and the Brown family went to court over this land.  Now, interestingly enough, it was land bordering John Tyler, President John Tyler's land in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia].  So, he sent his representative to speak on behalf of the Cumber litigant whom he favored and offered, I think if I remember correctly, to pay the money back to the Brown person who had purchased the land.  And so when this was brought up in court, he said, "Tell John Tyler to keep his money," or something to that effect, all of this to say that at a time when blacks were supposed to behave in a certain way when they didn't really have much power in court, the fact that this guy would make a statement like that, which is in the court records that I found and have copies of, suggests that they felt a bit of confidence and, and so forth.  And the same thing, during the Civil War, for example, there're run ins with the authorities during the Civil War, so many interesting examples of things that they did.  I don't--I didn't find anybody who was actively a soldier in the war, but they supported the Union, helped them to--they served what you might call as spies, helping the Union, showing them how to get here or there or what have you, one being arrested and facing serious charges.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, this demonstrates some grit and determination and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --independence.
Speaker 1: Yes.  It's, it's--it was an amazing study for me.  And I grew up hearing the legends, hearing, you know, my grandparents and neighbors talk about these people who were legendary people for me, but when I started doing the research, it was so interesting to find examples of how successful they were materially, how politically conscious they were and, of course, the moment that it was possible to vote, to--and, and to win office, they became some of the early office holders in the county and a couple of them in the state legislature [Virginia General Assembly].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, this is--so, you've written a book, 'The Lineage of Abraham' ['The Lineage of Abraham: The Biography of a Free Black Family in Charles City, Virginia' Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And this is where this whole story is outlined.  So, this is exciting.
Speaker 1: That--a lot of that story is there.  Now, of course, having written and, and, and having had many people read it, much more material has come.  As a matter of fact, a month doesn't pass that somebody doesn't write to me either to ask me something or to tell me something that they have discovered as well.  So, I've done a few little things that update some of it a bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  All right.
Speaker 1: So, the book itself, you know, what's there has been evolving still.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, the, the--so--
Speaker 1: Additional information.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is a good heads up to whoever is going to be watching this in the future that this material is out here and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the significance of it.  Now, can--so, your mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] grew up in, in--did, did she grow up in Charles City or?
Speaker 1: My mother grew up in Stanton [Virginia] until her father [Luther Bell] died.  She was seven years old.  After--and, and my grandmother [Sallie Brown Bell] had four girls.
Speaker 2: Stanton is like a hilly, mountainous region.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, near Charlottesville [Virginia].  And, actually, I think when my grandfather died, there were only three girls living.  So, my grandmother was then left with the care of these three girls, so she was looking for work, and she ended up going to Washington, D.C., and getting a job there.  I don't know this but it's probably not untrue that she allowed them to think she was white, getting the job that she got.  And she was there not for a very long time because my great-grandmother [Sidney Brown] was unhappy with her being a single woman there and--you know, in Washington with three children and insisted that she come home.  So, she moved to Charles City.  And so from that point on, my grand- my mother grew up in Charles City.
Story_ID: 667255
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, we were talking about your mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] growing up.  Now, did your mother--so, so, most of her upbringing was in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] you said, even though she started off--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Stanton [Virginia], then D.C. [Washington, D.C.], then--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what--most of what she remembers is from Charles City because I think she was still seven.  My grandmother [Sallie Brown Bell] didn't stay in Washington very long.
Speaker 1: Did your mother kind of discuss what it was like when she was growing up or have any stories that she told?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She had a few stories about Stanton, mainly very personal stories about the family there.  There were these four girls at first; one died very young.  And then they--she used the term adopted; I, I don't know about that--a son.  So, there was a little boy in the family for a while and she remembers very much breaking through ice when they were ice skating on a pond and almost dying as a result of that.  And with her father [Luther Bell], she didn't have a lot of memories because he traveled a great deal with his business.  And some of the letters he wrote to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]--the only letters that I have that he wrote were to Hampton.  He continued to be friendly with the people there and he went there to finish what I guess was sort of high school, but he wrote letters with the top administrators--he exchanged letters with them, and he talks about how much traveling he was doing.  And sometimes, he was--in, in one letter, he would write of being in three or four different states.  So, her father was not a constant presence in the house.  But, her father also loved cards and one of her few memories of her father is that she dropped his cards and he spanked her (laughter)--spanked her for that.  And I, I laugh about it and she laughs about it, too, because I am also an honored card player.  Nobody has ever told me what the game--card game was that he loved, but everybody talked about--who knew him talked about the fact that he loved cards.  I love bridge.  I like other card games as well.  And some of the elder people in Charles City remembered him very well when he used to come with the boys to Charles City and they'd paint this vivid picture of this distinguished man with his glasses and always dressed in stiff collars and that kind of thing, and they would sit out on the porch in my grandmother's house and, and play cards, have tea, that sort of thing.  And he's a man who's--who was a very, very--who used flowery eloquence in his letters at least.  He talked about the beauty of Hampton and the influence of Hampton and how much he loved Hampton and how much the great work at Hampton must continue and, therefore, I'm enclosing a dollar (laughter) in this letter, you know, which wasn't a small amount then.  But, at any rate, I'm fascinated by him.  Of course, he died when my mother was seven, so I have only those letters that I love to read, which I discovered only when my mother was dying, incidentally, and I went to Hampton and discovered those letters.  I say discovered; they knew they were there, of course, but we didn't know they were there.  And I was so delighted to come back home to my mother and say, "Look at these letters from your father."  And we had about four or five letters.  And my mother had this beautiful handwriting, too; mine is exactly the opposite.  And his letters, you know, are just perfectly written and beautifully written, so I get excited about--talking about this, this man.  There's so many figures in my life who are not really in my life but who remain such presences and such inspirations to me.
Speaker 1: Sure.  That's wonderful to be able to, you know, see the work of a grandfather like that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and to, you know, I mean, have that kind of a story in your family.  So many people just don't--can't, you know, trace it.
Speaker 2: It's been amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it's amazing what is there.  When I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I found a note from my great grandmother [Sidney Brown] to Harvard.  They had written to inquire about my great uncle, who had died, and so she wrote back to tell them.  So, she also wrote beautifully.  And I found letters recommending students to some of these schools and those, those early black teachers wrote beautiful letters.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The, the standard of communication in those days was a lot different than it is today (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.
Story_ID: 667256
Speaker 1: So, so, your, your mother [Veronica Bell Cumber]--so, she, she finished school in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia], I guess, and then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She finished Charles City and went first to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], which is unusual because most people in my family went directly to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  It became the family school from its very beginnings, but she went to Virginia Union first, didn't like Union, then went to Virginia State, did a normal degree, which is not a full college degree, was not uncommon.  You could teach with a normal degree.
Speaker 1: It's like a two year--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --like an associate's degree now.
Speaker 2: That's--we would call it that now, but it was called normal degree.  And then she began teaching, taught in a few other counties before she got an appointment in Charles City.  I don't remember the--which ones right now, though I have been there and I've seen some of her reports and that sort of thing in the early days.  Then, she came to Charles City and taught there until her retirement.  Now, she went back to school in the summers to complete her college degree and I was born by that time and I used to go to Virginia State with her.  So, Virginia State is in my blood historically and so forth.  And in the summers, I would spend the summers at Virginia State and even to some degree participating in her class activities.  One class in drama was having a play and I was in the play and that sort of thing.  So, Virginia State, as I said, sort of became home to me and so it was a given--as a matter of fact, my father [Allen Cumber] who died when I was nine said something that's interesting to look back on.  He said--he was so proud of me--he said, "My daughter is so smart, she's gonna skip Ruthville High School [Charles City County, Virginia] and go straight to Virginia State."  And it turns out I didn't finish Ruthville High School and I did go to Virginia State without finishing high school.  But, I did spend some time (laughter) in high school.
Story_ID: 667257
Speaker 1: So, now, now your father [Allen Cumber], now, he, he--did he go to college or?
Speaker 2: My father went to college but he did not finish college.  He, he went to Saint Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Right, now, that's a small Episcopal school--
Speaker 2: That's now closed.
Speaker 1: --that, that college.
Speaker 2: --unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: It was open as late as--it just closed recently in the last, ten years--
Speaker 2: Just recently.  They kept trying--they kept trying and one of our former presidents of Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Eddie Moore [Eddie N. Moore, Jr.], went there for a few years trying to save that college but it, it didn't work.  He went there for a while and, and one of my favorite pictures of him is in the [U.S.] military outfit there at Saint Paul's.  And oddly enough, it turns out that my first lecture, my first speech at a college was at Saint Paul's, and when I received the invitation, I sent them the picture and I said, "Please find this building for me.  I just want to go to this building where there's a wonderful picture of my father standing." And they did and my family took a picture there.  It was my first time to Saint Paul's.  But, no, he did not--he did not finish.  His mother [Sarah Bassett Cumber] had died very young and there were seven children in his family and they did not receive the kind of upbringing that many people in Ruthville [Virginia]--because the people in Ruthville were noted for sending their children not only to college but to medical school and to other professional schools, this from the 1800s, I'm talking about.  But, in my father's case, his father [Ernest Cumber] had gone to Virginia State as well.  I had three grandparents who studied at Virginia State and I, I think he, he completed a normal degree.  He did some teaching.  But, his wife died when she was thirty five years old and these seven children, he was left to raise, and none of those children finished college.  My father was the only one who went.
Speaker 1: Now, your father's last name may have an African root.
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: So, it was variously--different variations of--
Speaker 2: That's right, of--
Speaker 1: --of--
Speaker 2: --Cumber, yes.
Speaker 1: --Cumber, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Cumbo.
Speaker 2: Yes, Cumbow, Cumbu.  Um-hm, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so at--so, we know it does--we, we know it has a--has a--I mean, how did--did, did the family always know the origin of the name?
Speaker 2: No.  That's not a part of the--of the legend.  They, they talk about, you know, the Cumbers here in this country and later, one other person who wrote to me after reading this book had done more research in African roots of this name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the, the roots are in--
Speaker 2: And with--
Speaker 1: --Sierra Leone and Gambia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so, your father--now, he, he worked--the, the, the maritime industry was strong in the--this region.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --he--
Speaker 2: For a bit.  But most of his short life--he died at thirty five, too, and he always used to tell--he suffered from heart disease.  I--problems--I remember the pain he used to have, couldn't lie down at night, sometimes had to sit up because of the heart pain.  So, he died quite young.  But, most of his adult life, he was an entrepreneur with what was--used to be called at the time a beer garden where people came to play music and drink and dance and that sort of thing.  At one point, he had two.  I can only remember one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  There's a--he had a place called the Shanty Inn [Charles City County, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Shanty Inn, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, this had a--the place had a juke box, right?  And--
Speaker 2: That's right.  And they served food and it, it was a very successful business at the time.
Story_ID: 667258
Speaker 1: So, but he passed away at age thirty-five, so he was--now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, what they look like, how they walk, how they talk, who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody said I looked just like my father.  Indeed, I was in my fifties once and I went to Williamsburg [Virginia] and somebody walked up to me and he said, "You must be Allen Cumber's daughter."  So, you know, there's no question that that is the case, but my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] and father looked alike.  And after he died, people always said, you look just like your mother.  So, I think I look like both of them, very handsome couple.  I'll show you pictures, very handsome couple, very I want to say stately but nothing stiff about them.  But, my father was very tall, very erect, slim, neat looking in dress.  They're both smart people.  My father did have a drinking problem.  That was one concern in their marriage and why my mother said she didn't have more children and perhaps to some degree in his business, though he always had people who were so faithful to him who worked for him.  And he must've been--I think I have a tendency perhaps like some people do to idealize a little bit of family member who died.  I remember, you know, so fondly the things he did with me and for me and--but, but one of the things that he did for me without knowing it was to be such a warm and generous person.  I can remember all through my childhood after he died, people would come up to me and hand me ten dollars and say, "Your daddy saved me when I had this problem," or, "Your daddy was always so good to me."  And I'd go to our little doctor--our doctor there in our little community 'cause we had no shortage of doctors.  People in these families had doctors and sent their children to be doctors.  So, in this little community when I was growing up, we had two doctors' offices I could walk to.  They're really home offices I could walk to.  And whenever I went to one doctor, Dr. William Brown [ph.], I used to always call him Uncle Billy, we finally called him that, Uncle Billy.  Mother would give me money to pay Uncle Billy after he treated me and Uncle Billy would say, "Put that money back in your pocket, girl," and then he would give me money, you know.  My father's good will carried me through my childhood even after he died because he was so much loved in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were about nine years old?
Speaker 2: I was nine years old when he died.  And incidentally, the Ruthville School [Ruthville High School, Charles City County, Virginia] was closed after integration, as so many schools were closed.  And just last month, there was a kind of celebration of people who went to Ruthville School.  All of us would be in our fifties and all 'cause, you know, it became--black names were lost with integration for the most part.  And I was asked to speak there at that, and for the whole evening, all I could hear was people telling me about my mother as a teacher and how much they had loved her as a teacher even in the introduction.  The person who introduced me told me--I mean, told the audience how he remembered things my mother taught him and I still occasionally even hear that about my grandmother's [Sallie Brown Bell] teaching.  So, I come from a line of people who were great teachers and who, who loved teaching.
Story_ID: 667259
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: That's very interesting question.  I grew up an only child.  I always wished I had siblings, even as an adult.  I remember when my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] was sick.  I wanted so much to have somebody else to help me make some decisions.  I had none, but three years ago at the age of seventy-five, I discovered that my father did, indeed, father a child when he was a high school senior and the moment--the moment I heard about it, I was able to put some things together.  I had learned, for example, that the principal had not allowed my father to graduate because he caught him kissing his daughter.  And so my father didn't graduate from Ruthville High School [Charles City County, Virginia], but went to Saint Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] when he was put out of school and graduated.
Speaker 1: Because they had a high school and college.
Speaker 2: That--almost all of the early black colleges [HBCUs] did do that because, of course, the people were coming to them without, you know, the background that one would expect for a college.  And so that's how he happened to go to Saint Paul's.  And a few years ago at bridge, a friend came to me and she said, "Daryl [HistoryMaker Daryl Cumber Dance], I just came from," I think it was her seventieth high school reunion, and she said, "I have something to tell you."  She said, "One of my friends at this reunion was asked why she had had different names."  They used to call her one thing at one point and one at another, and she said, "It was because she had been adopted and later found out about names."  So, I won't get--go into complications because I don't think I want to mention her name.  I'd prefer that if she chose to do this, she would.  But at any rate, she said, my father was Allen Cumber.  So, this girl, my friend knew my father's name was Allen Cumber and she said, "I, I got her afterwards and I said, 'Well do you know Daryl?'  She said, 'Oh, yes, that's my half-sister.'  She says, 'I don't really know her, but I know who she is.'  And she said, 'You know, the one thing I'd like to have is a picture of Allen Cumber.'"  So, she said--you know, she had seen me even but she never said anything to me.  And so this friend made it possible for us to meet (laughter) because I was so happy to hear about her existence, and I have met her and we love each other.  I love her.  She has two children.  So, I have a sister (laughter), I'm so happy to say, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was she the, the daughter of--
Speaker 2: That daughter of the principal and the--and she and I, this sister and I, can't decide whether my father knew about her birth.  Her mother wrote a letter, which she shared with me to her when she was--she didn't know her mother until she was thirteen and discovered the adoption papers, and then she found her mother and started writing to her mother.  And then the sister went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and she said to her mother, "I'm meeting people from Charles City [Virginia] and you have to tell me who I am.  I don't know who I could be," (laughter), you know, "meeting or maybe getting to know."  And her mother wrote her a long letter and it's very interesting letter, such love.  Her mother was a first year student at Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and my father was still in high school, and she came home for Easter and became pregnant.  And she was afraid to let her parents know.  So, when they took her to go to Virginia State on the bus, she got on the bus and went to New York, had this child.  They wouldn't let her take the child out of the hospital because she was not an adult and said, "Your parent or somebody has to come," so she had to tell her father.  Her father said, "We can't take this child to Charles City."  I haven't told you much about the Charles City community, but I mean, it was a very strict moral community and he was the principal.  So, the--to make the story short, he was--she was given to a family he knew here in Richmond [Virginia] who later adopted her and raised her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Wow, what a story.  So--
Speaker 2: And I learned all of this at seventy-five (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you look alike?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  My daughter [Daryl Lynn Dance] thinks we do.  I'm much taller.  Her mother was small.  But, we're very much alike personality wise.  We like the same things.  We enjoy the same things, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You discovered a sister.
Story_ID: 667260
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I don't know about the earliest but I have very fond early memories.  I, you know, grew up on a reasonably large--we had twenty acre land, lots of space to play, lonely because I had no siblings, but never lonely during the day because lots of children would come and play.  My father's [Allen Cumber] place of business was at one edge of the property some distance from the house and, you know, he would allow me to come only sometimes in the middle of the day, and running down there and I would insist on chips and soda, and he'd give it to me and I knew I'd get it because he'd want me to rush out of there and go back home, that sort of thing.  But, wonderful memories growing up.  And growing up, another memory, and this is a part of what shapes me.  Right across the road was the principal then, not the same principal I'm talking about of the school when I went to school and my cousins.  All these people in Ruthville [Virginia] were cousins.  Right next to me was another cousin who was a classmate of my [maternal] grandmother's [Sallie Brown Bell] at Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  When I had time, I would go talk to these elderly people.  These are my grandmother's peers.  And they would tell me stories, and I loved sitting and hearing these stories.  So, I was working on that history all of my life without realizing it.  And I have so many interesting funny stories about my grandmother and her peers when they were at college because they saw themselves as country hicks, you know.  They'd never seen a gas lamp.  They'd never seen so many things.  They laugh about themselves there.  But, they were also--
Speaker 1: Never seen a gas lamp (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's interesting.  You know, they, they were--they were such smart--the people in this community were so smart from the very beginning.  I look back at these great-grandparents, great-great-grandparents, at their wills way back there in the 1700s.  They had desks and they had a couple of books and that kind of thing.  They were always smart, smart people.
Story_ID: 667261
Speaker 1: What are some of the stories you were told when you were growing up?  Are there any, can you remember (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, my [maternal] grandmother's aunt was--preceded her [Sallie Brown Bell] at Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and she tells me, you--I don't know whether you know.  Virginia--the land there was just a beautiful plot, comes from an old plantation.  And at first when they started classes, what they had was just a building that was there, when they started with that.  And the first real building that was constructed was Virginia Hall, Virginia Hall, which has been replaced with another Virginia Hall, but right at that same spot it still stands.  So, the students had to, you know, go get water first thing in the morning.  They had to get up, 4:30, 5:00, I've forgotten the exact hour, go get water, prepare for classes, and what a curriculum they had.  You know, I don't know whether I would've finished Virginia State with the courses that these people were taking at that time.  It, it was a real college curriculum, planned for their classes and then they had to work a little bit each day.  They were helping to build Virginia Hall and they finally, you know, completed this building.  And in this building, the women lived, the classes were held, they had their auditorium, just, just things about that.  And one--there's one little story about the gas lamp that I don't remember too well, but I remember one threw something over and said she couldn't figure how to turn it out and found out that they could've started a fire (laughter) and that sort of thing.  But, but any rate--
Speaker 1: So, this is--this is basically how they built the school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And these are the stories--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, they may have had some formal builders, too, and they may just have been going to get the bricks and this sort of thing.  I don't really know the details, but I know they did work somehow.  And they played sports and it was an exciting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well this is the formation of the school, really (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: It was the formation of Virginia State--
Speaker 2: Exactly. And they were a part of a developing black elite and they talk about the social events and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 667262
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did the--did the school have an elite kind of--I guess, did it come out of like a, a group of elites (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: You mentioned John Mercer Langston--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --being a--I know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was very elite in his thinking.
Speaker 2: And, of course, you know--elite, now, people may get a different kind of impression because these were people who were not well to do, but they were intelligent, industrious, ambitious people and I hesitate to say this, but you know it as well as I do, they were light skinned people who felt a certain privilege because of their color.  There are interesting tales about my [maternal] grandfather who was darker and his introduction into the family of my mother--grandmother.
Speaker 1: What, what--can you--
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, my grandmother, like many of these people, I am ashamed to say, privileged light skin and preferred that her daughters not--that her children not marry darker people.  But the stories are so interesting because she was so impressed with my grandfather who was a handsome dark man.  I remember one person I talked to, very elderly lady, she said to me, she said, "When Winston Bell [Luther Bell] came with his--," they always talked about his stiff collars and his glasses and everything, I guess it must've been a kind of look of elegance or something, she said, "Sidney [Cumber Dance's maternal great-grandmother, Sidney Brown] fell so much in love with him, if Sallie [Sallie Brown Bell] hadn't married him, she would've married him herself."  And I don't understand because she was such--she put such a high premium on light skin.  All of that to say, that his historically, this is a part of the developing of the black elite, skin color, education, and money.  Very few had much money (laughter) early on.  But, it's, it's very interesting.  This, this Aunt Ruth [Ruth Brown Hucles], after whom the community [Ruthville, Virginia] was named, came to the university about its third year, married an administrator at the university and so remained in that community.  And they had a publication at the college early on about what was going on at the college, and a lot of it focused on the social life of that college community.  And so that's something of the--and even now when you talk to people, people that she married, somebody whose name is Hucles [Henry B. Hucles, Sr.].  That's a big name at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and so forth.  Her daughter [Elaine Hucles Brown] married a Dr. Brown [George William Clement Brown] and--who was a founder of Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia].  So, you know, these, these names became in part--a part--became rather privileged names.  In--I always hesitate to say society, elite things like that about blacks because, for one thing, some of it annoys me and disturbs me, and for another thing, people will not understand it in terms that we perhaps understand it today.
Speaker 1: Right.  It's, it's reality, though, of, of life in those days and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and it spills over into today--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in some ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Organizations and groups today still much the same ideas (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 667263
Speaker 1: I think in the interview with, I think, [HistoryMaker] Mercer Cook, we talked about Will Marion Cook, his ancestor who heard a speech of John Mercer Langston's about skin color--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and decided to drop part of his name because--I mean, the Mercer part, so he called himself Will Marion Cook as a result.  He, he dropped the Mercer part because he, he didn't like what John Mercer Langston said about skin color--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and advancement and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, there's, there's a lot of tension around that.  But, yet that's--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And you can't ignore the fact that it, it was and to some degree still is an issue.
Speaker 1: Right.  And color often connected you to power--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because of relationships and--
Speaker 2: Or won power for you.
Speaker 1: Or--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or property, too, 'cause there's so, so many black people that had property early on, had it because of this relationship to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --white elites that had property.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, it's real.  So, at any rate, so they were telling you about the origins of the school and how it was created and, and what some of the tales--
Speaker 2: That's right.  And I would enjoy these and I'd come home and my [maternal] grandmother [Sallie Brown Bell] would say to me because she was sort of my caretaker.  My mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] taught school and then sometimes would help my father [Allen Cumber] in the evening, and she said, "You're so late coming from school.  I guess you stopped by to talk to your good friend, Patty [ph.]." And that would be her, her good friend and cousin, and she was absolutely right.  You know, in, in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia], we had these porches on our front, so when you passed and somebody was on the porch, they'd wave to you and say--invite you over and that sort of thing.  So, I've always enjoyed sitting and hearing stories and tales.  My, my whole--I mean, my career is built on what I was developing in these days, listening to stories.
Speaker 1: So, entertainment when you were growing up was talking to other people.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I mean, they had certain events that were the social events and so forth, but, yes, conversation was a big part of it.  And I so well remember that even when I'd go to play with my friends, I'd always find an excuse to sit down and talk with some of these interesting people.  And if I could tell you about all of my neighbors, I, I was so fortunate to grow up in this community, such interesting personalities surrounded me.  And as I said, most of them were relatives as well.
Story_ID: 667264
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now, you, you went to school in Ruthville [Virginia], right?  Or was it one school called Ruthville High School [Charles City County, Virginia] or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One, one school, Ruthville elementary and high school and there were other elementary schools, but everybody fed into this school, Ruthville, which was the last school built by this free black community in this case with some help from the county.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, so, so, this is--how, how many students, I guess, were in the school?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I would have I think thirty some students in my class, wasn't a great big school.  This is a rural--a rural area, but when you add all of them together, you know, we had students from first grade through the eleventh for the time that I was there.  Had I finished high school, I would've gone to the twelfth grade, but I didn't finish high school.  And you ask about things to do, that was a part of why I didn't finish high school.  I became something of a problem for my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] because I wanted to go out.  I wanted to go to movies, which would be in Richmond [Virginia] and Williamsburg [Virginia].  I wanted to do things and my mother wasn't about to let me go on a date in a car with a young man.  And so, she wanted to get me somewhere where I could have more of a social life without having to travel several miles.  And at that time, there was an experimental program at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] called early entrance in which high school students who had good records could take a test and enter early.  We didn't have that at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  My mother took me over to Virginia State and met with Dr. Daniel [Robert Prentiss Daniel] in his home, the president at Virginia State, and asked if I could take an examination and possibly enter Virginia State.  So, he said, "We'll, let her take the exam."  So, I took the exam.  Nobody ever told me what I made on it, but students would always say, "She's the one who did this on the exam." So I must've done very well.  So, I entered college two years earlier than I had anticipated entering college and it was all almost overnight because I started--when mother--when mother found out he'd take me, she (laughter), she just about left me there and she took me home and brought me back for summer school.  So, I started--excuse me.  I--
Speaker 1: So, this is all--this is all in an effort to make sure that you were chaperoned and supervised--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because at Virginia State, they didn't let you go off campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah black colleges [HBCUs] the rules were--
Speaker 2: You had to be in the dorm at eight o'clock except for special events and so forth.  So, this solved her problem and I started college early.  I started at fifteen and graduated at eighteen.
Story_ID: 667265
Speaker 1: Now, now, when you were--well, when you were in grade school and in high school [Ruthville High School, Charles City County, Virginia] leading up to this, I, I take it you probably did a lot of reading.
Speaker 2: Always.  Always.  And, of course, before, my [maternal] grandmother [Sallie Brown Bell]--this was part of the problem.  When I went to--started school, the teacher said to my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber], "This girl knows everything, she knows the books by heart.  I've gotta put her up in another grade." And she did.  They wanted to put me two grades ahead 'cause my grandmother had been teaching me all along.  I had--mother would bring the books from school she was using and I would read everything I could get my hands on.  I had a neighbor next door who was a big reader, oh, I tell you.  And she, she got lots of magazines and that sort of thing.  And every Sunday when I left church, I'd stop by her name--house.  Her name is Wilnette Carter [ph.], and she would gather together--sometimes she'd give them to me before she had read them, the new magazines and a new book she had read and so forth, so she was kind of my library.  You know, of course, black people couldn't go to (laughter) the libraries in--it would've been in Richmond [Virginia] then.  My mother did have permission for state library, so we could go to the state library but couldn't go to the city libraries.  But, Mrs. Carter was my library.  And, of course, you know I would buy some books myself when we came to Richmond as well.  But, Mrs. Carter was such an influence on me in terms of just giving me everything.  I look back on it and I feel almost bad about it because she was so excited about me and loved me so much that she'd give them to me to read before she did, and I'd take them back.  But, yeah, I've always been a big reader.  My mother would come in at night and tell me to turn the light on and I'd--off, and I'd turn it on again and she'd come in and punish me for it.  But, you couldn't keep from a book and I'm still a great lover of books.  I still--when I taught and my students didn't want to go to the library because they thought you could find everything on the computer, I would still make assignments that would require them to go to the bookshelves because there's a certain excitement that I want them to feel in books themselves and in the way they're ordered there and other books that you discover when you're--when you're doing that, and what it means to, you know, just sort of skim through a book and, and go to the index and go to this and that sort of thing.  It's not the same as just pulling it up (laughter), I don't think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did--what, what was your favorite literature in those days?
Speaker 2: My favorite what?
Speaker 1: Favorite literature, favorite books or magazines or newspapers?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at the time I was growing up, I didn't know some of the magazines that were being published at the time.  But, you know, Ebony and Life and Reader's Digest and these kinds of things I enjoyed.  And I, I went through all kinds of books.  But, the interesting thing is, like all too many people, I didn't see as much black literature so that I grew up not as familiar with people like Zora Neale Hurston and Countee Cullen and so forth as it would have been wonderful to do.  I was reading the usual things, you know, the usual children's books, the usual American literature and British literature.  I loved--my mother had a copy of 'Cavalcade' that--
Speaker 1: Negro Cavalcade ['Cavalcade, Negro American Writing from 1760 to the Present']?
Speaker 2: Negro Cavalcade 'cause she had studied with Davis, Arthur Paul Davis, at Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  I think probably this may have been the summer; I'm not quite so sure.  But, at any rate, she, she had that with her notes in it and it was so exciting to me.  So, I did hear--get a little bit about African American literature there, but it was--and I'll tell you, we read Frank Yerby.  We read what we called the popular with the white community African American writers, and I would go buy those books and that sort of thing without knowing to buy Langston Hughes.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did they teach Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] when you were in school?
Speaker 2: We studied Dunbar--I wouldn't even say we studied Dunbar.  We used Dunbar for a performance (laughter).  I remember memorizing for one performance, walked my honey home last night, jump back, honey, jump back, held her hand and squeezed her tight ['A Negro Love Song'].  You know, but, but, in class, the textbooks were all white.
Speaker 1: Were they passed down from the white schools?
Speaker 2: They were passed down from the white schools; my mother would buy mine.  You know, but, that was the practice at the time.  You could buy new ones.
Story_ID: 667266
Speaker 1: Now, what about radio, movies, that kind of thing?  You--
Speaker 2: Movies, you had to go to Richmond [Virginia] or they might have movies in the high school for a special program or something, but Richmond and Williamsburg [Virginia].  There were no movie theaters in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia].  This is strictly rural.  There is, you know, very little in Charles City other than plantations.  So--but, we went to Richmond every weekend and we did shopping and usually I'd go to a movie when I can--so, I was--I was--and then I had an aunt who lived in Newport News [Virginia].  I'd spend the weekend there and then we'd do movies and skating and things like that.  In Charles City, if I skated, it was on the road.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And in the summers, I visited my uncle in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and my aunt in Paterson, New Jersey.  So, I wasn't an isolated rural--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --person.
Speaker 1: So, you got around a little bit as a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a young person.
Speaker 2: And, and we had--my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] and father [Allen Cumber] had best friends in New Haven, Connecticut, so that was also a part of our summer travel.
Story_ID: 667267
Speaker 1: Now--all right, now, Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], you're fifteen years old, right?  And you're a freshman and (laughter), so tell us about that experience.  Did you feel like you were too young, or you're (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I--no, I never felt--it's interesting.  I've always loved being with older people and even in regular school, I was a year or two younger than the students in my class for the most part.  So--and I was always tall, so people didn't think I was the baby, you know, among my group of friends.  So, it was not a problem for me.  I never--I never felt a problem.  It, it was worse for boys, I think.  I had two cousins who had the same thing happen and the first one had a terrible time.  He started Virginia State at fourteen and maladjusted, maladjusted.  So, my uncle, my grandmother's brother who was a surgeon in Petersburg [Virginia] when the second son was ready for college 'cause they were both really smart and they just breezed through at fourteen, what he did was to keep him home in Petersburg and let him go to Virginia State and take a few courses, but didn't enroll him in college so that he was about two years older, about seventeen maybe, sixteen, seventeen, when he let him go to college, and then he made the basketball team.  In other words, he was mature enough and it worked out so much better for the second one than for the first one.  But, it was not an issue for me.  I never felt younger.  I always felt more mature than I was, not because I looked more mature, but, but, I was tall and I was pretty smart as a student.  And so, I fit in perfectly well and, you know, developed friendships that remain until this day, close friendships.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were describing--we were alluding or are alluding to the nature of black colleges [HBCUs] in those days and I guess it was pretty much across the board, the white colleges did the same thing, which is unlike today's college atmosphere where students pretty much do--have a lot of freedom.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what were some of the rules that you, you had at Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we lived in dormitories, all girls, all boys.  If a boy came into the dormitory, we had a kind of reception area.  He could come in there at certain hours and you could sit in there.  If for some reason a boy had to move beyond that, you had to notify everybody in the hall, boy in the hall, and (laughter) he might go to get a package or something that somebody needed him to go get.  If you--you could not leave the campus without special permission, so I know nothing about Petersburg, you know, because I never left the campus.  You could get special permission to go to a movie or something in Petersburg, but you could not go with a boy as a freshman.  You had to be in the dormitory by a certain time unless there was some special activity on campus.  But, but, you know, you accepted that and coming from Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia], I was almost--I was so happy to be there with things to do and places to go and--so, it--Virginia State, my college experience was so wonderful.  I mean, there were things we complained about.  We had a big to do to get permission to wear bermuda shorts, you know (laughter).  This is--the--I mean, you weren't to walk out showing your knees with short dresses and short shorts.
Speaker 1: So, this is like 1953.
Speaker 2: I went--actually, '53 [1953], that's exactly when I went.  So, the rules--people would find them laughable today.  We complained, but they were norm--the norm for us.  So, it was not, not really a problem.
Story_ID: 667268
Speaker 1: Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] had good faculty, so I had wonderful classes. I--
Speaker 2: Who were some of your favorite teachers?
Speaker 1: Well, I was an English major and so I loved a man whose name was Dr. Joe Wallace [ph.], and also Joe Jenkins [Joseph H. Jenkins], and Jenkins was the person who hired me when I went back to teach at Virginia State.  So, we--I had a long association with many of them at Virginia State.  And, and, you know, we, we had a great drama teacher, Felicia D. Anderson, who was noted throughout the black college circuit for her plays.  We had--my French teacher was one Dr. Carter [William T. Carter], this elegant man, African American, but oh, to hear him speak French, it was wonderful.  I, I just had a great experience.  And many of these people I knew from going to high--going to summer school with my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber], you know.  So, I was meeting them on another level.  Then, I had relatives who were still teaching there and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's a beautiful, beautiful school, beautiful campus, even more so now.  It's just amazing.  We, we have grown so we have so many new beautiful new buildings and we have such a location.  It's up on a hill with a river flowing by it.  It's, it's a beautiful site.  I love that school, so I'm on the board now and I go to board meetings and, you know, tears are welling in my eyes when I drive up on the campus.  And we, we have some meetings in Virginia Hall still and, and when I'm there, all these memories not only of my own memories of Virginia Hall but my [maternal] grandmother's [Sallie Brown Bell] stories and my great aunt's stories and so forth are going through my mind.  It's a very special place to me.
Story_ID: 667269
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, a lot of people don't realize it, but Petersburg [Virginia] is--has a special place in African American history prior to the establishment of the school being a--being a pivotal battle in the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And also, another free black community of some note in Petersburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that there was a community name per se, but they--
Speaker 1: There was a free black--
Speaker 2: Free black people, yes, yes.  Of course, everywhere--I don't want to suggest they weren't everywhere, but if you look at the statistics, you will find that a large proportion, I think something like a fifth of the free blacks in the nation were in Virginia.  South Carolina, of course, also has a large--every place has its free black community.  There's no question about that.  I don't want to overstate it, but in Virginia, it was proportionately speaking large.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--now, when--did you--
Speaker 2: May I--may I interrupt--
Speaker 1: Okay, sure.
Speaker 2: --one minute to say.  There's some interesting battle sites in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] as well.  One of the great victories of a group of black soldiers took place in Charles City on land that belonged--at least belongs now to one of the Tyler [President John Tyler] descendants.  And we know a bit about that particular battle from the losers who wrote letters telling about how those black soldiers fought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, this is--yeah.  Now, this is--I've read that there was a Battle of New Market Heights where black people really--the black soldiers were pivotal in--
Speaker 2: And I wish I remember the battlefield here.  I don't recall, but I think I have it in 'Lineage of Abraham' ['The Lineage of Abraham: The Biography of a Free Black Family in Charles City, Virginia,' Daryl Cumber Dance], yeah.
Speaker 1: The Battle of the Crater, which was a disaster, but it was--black people, you know, showed themselves brave and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  As a matter of fact, there are so many accounts of the bravery of black soldiers during the Civil War.  Well, not just the Civil War.  We could go through war after war after war.  And I think it's interesting, this effort to prove oneself.  You know, maybe if we do it here, the country will recognize and appreciate our bravery.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, Petersburg, right on the outskirts of Richmond [Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --once it broke, the war was effectively--
Speaker 2: Over.
Speaker 1: --effectively over--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --even though--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they had to sign the treaty of Appomattox Court House (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --but the war was--it was done.
Speaker 2: Some very important battles here.  Just out here in Henrico County [Virginia], battles, yes.
Story_ID: 667270
Speaker 1: So, did you join a sorority?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, were you involved in any other campus activities at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I was active in a number of activities.  I also had a job, always had a job on, on campus, worked in the library, worked as an assistant to English teachers, marking papers and doing things like that.  So, I always had a few hours of work each day.  I was in the sorority.  I was in the French club.  And we had little groups in the dorm and that sort of thing, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were--
Speaker 2: Honor society.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I went through college quickly, too.  I didn't go back my fourth year.  I did my practice teaching and then I was finished.  Because, you know, I started in summer school.  So, I didn't have a lot of time because I was really busy.
Story_ID: 667271
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, you, you graduated [from Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in '57 [1957], was it?  Or '56 [1956] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I grad- the class of '57 [1957].  I actually finished in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, you had a teaching degree, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And did--so, did you immediately teach school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--we did practice teaching.  I did my practice teaching at Armstrong High School in Richmond [Virginia].  And then I, I finished the practice teaching and it was I think about eight weeks.  So, I finished probably something like in late October, and then I had a job--was given a job there beginning right after Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I started teaching at Armstrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Armstrong is a famous--well, Armstrong High School [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School] in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] is a--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: It was renamed Dunbar--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --later on [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  One of a little--a wonderful account of that a few years ago I read.  But, Armstrong High School was kind of the African American high school in, in Richmond.  There were two high schools and I think--everybody wouldn't say this, but I think Armstrong had the best reputation as, as a great high school.
Speaker 1: What was the other one?
Speaker 2: Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Maggie--okay.  All right.  Somebody was just saying the other--the--just the opposite the other day (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's why I said, others might say different things.  But, I really--and I did teach a little bit at both.  Regular job was at Armstrong, but I taught summer school once at, at Maggie Walker.  And I, I think probably, you know, things like more students going to college and that kind of thing.  But, of course, they were sports rivals and both of them were very strong.  But, my husband [Warren Dance, Sr.] were he alive would tell you about his sports career at Armstrong High School, and he was a member of a football team that did not for the whole season lose a game and that had only one team to make one score against them, one touchdown against them.  So, you know, the, the sport--the--sports was big.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, there--there's a--we were told about an annual football game around Thanksgiving, Walker and Armstrong.
Speaker 2: The, the classic Maggie Walker--Armstrong Walker Classic, absolutely.  Now, I'm not a big sports fan myself, but, absolutely.  That was--that was a big issue.  But, at Armstrong, Armstrong was like the Armstrong at Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.].  At Howard, you had--I mean, even Countee Cullen taught at the high school there at Howard.  You had these fantastic--and if my memory were better, I could name some of the other outstanding teachers there who were nationally known people.
Story_ID: 667272
Speaker 1: And here at Armstrong [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia], I wouldn't say we had nationally known people, but we had dedicated, strong, well educated teachers, teachers who went to the North because, you know, in Virginia, you were sent to the North to get your degrees.  They paid you to go out of the state so you wouldn't insist on going to the white schools.
Speaker 2: This is a curious things.  I've heard it before that if you finish like Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] or if you finished a, a state school in, in a southern state, the states--the southern states, to prevent you from going to graduate school at another state school would actually pay you--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  They paid--I did that.
Speaker 2: So, you could go to University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]--
Speaker 1: I went to--
Speaker 2: --Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --Columbia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I went to Columbia during the summer only with a state--you wouldn't even call it a scholarship, but they would give you the money to go to summer school.  This was to be sure that they kept the white schools white.  So, yes.  But, but, as a result of that, we had--we had a number of black schools where the educational level of the teachers was higher than that in white schools.  That was very true in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia].  In Charles City, you'd be surprised at the number of teachers with master's degrees that I had when I went to school and in the white school, the number with normal certificates.  When I went to school, I knew of only one black teacher who had only a normal certificate.  But, you know, the reason for that is, of course, that there were no other jobs available to the black teachers, so teaching was the--one of the best jobs for a black woman--for a black woman in the South.  So, we had a great faculty there.  I learned so much from the teachers there.  You know, education courses are one thing, but observing teachers in action is another, and it was such a great experience for me to teach there.  I remember one Margaret Bettis [ph.] who was my supervising teacher and who actually lived out in this community.  They used to call us Mutt and Jeff.  I don't think she was five feet tall and, of course, I'm so tall, but I was leaning on that woman in terms of learning.  I learned so much from her.  And there were other really outstanding teachers there.  And Maxie Robinson incidentally was a coach at Armstrong and his son, Maxie Robinson, you probably know went on and, and all of his children have done very well, two of them nationally known.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is--Maxie Robinson's sons are--
Speaker 1: One was a early sport- newscaster.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Max Robinson, the newscaster in Chicago [Illinois] for ABC?  Is it ABC News?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: That's, that's--okay.
Speaker 1: And the other one was one that really started the pressure against South Africa--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --to free Mandela [Nelson Mandela] and so forth, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson.
Speaker 1: Randall.  So, you know, it was a great experience teaching at Armstrong in those days.
Story_ID: 667273
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you got married in 1958 to Warren C. Dance [Warren Dance, Sr.], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet him at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] or?
Speaker 2: No.  I met him at Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia].  He had just gotten out of the [U.S. military] service and was substituting, and we met and married about a year and a half later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so, he taught at, at--
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't teach at Armstrong.  He was substituting at Armstrong--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and later, he taught in the physical education program in the city and they went from school to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, at some point, I guess you go--you go back to Virginia State in '63 [1963] and you earned your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --master's degree, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  At the time I was teaching in Richmond [Virginia], if you were pregnant, you had to stay out for quite a length of time so that you would not be ever at school obviously pregnant, so you had to stop a certain number of months before the delivery and then you had to stay out a certain number of months after the delivery.  And it just so happened that when I was out on this pregnancy leave, the same Dr. Daniel [Robert Prentiss Daniel], the president of Virginia State, called me on a Sunday night and he said, "Mrs. Baker [Ruth Taylor Baker]," one of the teachers in English, "is ill and had to go to the hospital.  We have to have somebody to meet her classes tomorrow."
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And so all of a sudden, on one Sunday night I remember thinking about teaching at Virginia State and then Monday morning I'm meeting a class at Virginia State.  I had not even been to graduate school, but they had this terrible problem, and so I started.  And immediately, Mr. Jenkins [Joseph H. Jenkins], who was the chairman of the department and who had been my teacher had me to start on my master's degree as well.
Speaker 1: Now, had, had, had he ever mentioned that before, you teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I had applied to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] for graduate school and they had suggested I go elsewhere, and then I had gone to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for a summer.
Speaker 1: University of Virginia in those days had--in fact, did, did they have any women at all in graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, that's the--well, graduate school is where they would sometimes accept a woman or a woman who was--whose parents taught at the university.  Other than that, it was pretty much male dominated school.  So, actually, when I finally did go because later they were a little happy to receive me as the government started doing things to encourage integration, so that when I went so work on my Ph.D. at the University of Virginia, I was the second black woman in the department--student in the department, the first black woman and the second black student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, this is in '71 [1971], some years later.  But--so, Professor Jenkins, I guess he prized you as his student and thought you were--you could really do the job and--
Speaker 2: Well, my teachers were very encouraging and that--that's another thing about a school like Virginia State.  Oftentimes, you get such special, personal attention, encouragement, help if you needed help, advice more than sometimes we wanted to, to take.
Story_ID: 667274
Speaker 1: But, Mr. Jenkins [Joseph H. Jenkins] was an interesting (laughter)--he was an interesting teacher, small man, bright guy, and, and, you know, he knew he knew what was best for you and that was it.  For example, when I started Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], if I may go back a little bit, fifteen years old, registering for classes one day, had thought I'd be in high school much longer, so he was there registering me for classes.  This was our meeting.  And so he said, "So, what are you gonna major in?"  I said, "Major?  I don't know."  He said, "Put English down there," (laughter).  So, I'm sure if I thought about it, I would've put English anyway.  But, you know, that's the kind of person, person he was.
Speaker 2: He made sure he got you.  He, he knew--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --what you scored on that test.  So, he wanted you for the English department.
Speaker 1: He, he said, "Put English down there," and he was like that.  I remember when I went, they were starting to do some television courses, courses--teaching--with the television.  And so, he said, "Daryl [HistoryMaker Daryl Cumber Dance], I want you to do world literature for me."  Well, first of all, world literature wasn't exactly my forte and, secondly, the idea of teaching on television, this was all so new and everything.  And I said, "Oh, no, I can't do it."  So, he calls me in the office a little bit later.  He said, "You're gonna start these courses on such and such a day.  We've set you up with So and So," and everything.  And he looked at me like this, you know.  So, I'm sure if I had said absolutely not, I'm not gonna do it, I could've gotten away, but he was that kind of teacher.  Lots of teachers were in those days, very demanding and commanding, and it was a great experience.  I did it.  But, there were things, he, he sort of pushed you into.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So, so, he recruits you basically and has you--
Speaker 1: Yes, and he's a wonderful teacher--
Speaker 2: --teaching and--okay.
Speaker 1: --and a good friend, a good friend.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Even though, I have to tell you that--you know, people are people of their time.  When I came back from my graduate work at Virginia State, I discovered that I wasn't making the same money that the fellows were, even those with less experience.  So, I first went to Mr. Jenkins and I said to him, "Why is my salary less than--?" I, mentioned a colleague in the department.  He said, "Well, Daryl, you have a husband [Warren Dance, Sr.] to take care of you," you know.
Speaker 2: That was the thinking in those days--
Speaker 1: That--exactly.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: And this was a man who would've done anything for me, but somehow he did not think it was necessary for me to make the same money.  But at any rate, I went to Dr. Daniel [Robert Prentiss Daniel] and so he said, "Well, we're gonna work on this, Daryl," (laughter). And I said, "Well, I'm going back to Armstrong [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia] if we're not going to get this straight."  And, and we did, but at any rate, if you lived as long I have, you've been through a number of issues and you look back on them and you just can't believe some of the things.  And I--sometimes I can't believe myself, some of the things I accepted without a great deal of resistance.
Story_ID: 667275
Speaker 1: What was your master's thesis about?
Speaker 2: It was on William Faulkner's 'Light in August'--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --which is one of his many wonderful books, but the most wonderful (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's the one about Joe Christmas, right?
Speaker 2: That's the one about Joe Christmas.
Speaker 1: And, so--okay.  So, what--well--
Speaker 2: And Mr. Jenkins [Joseph H. Jenkins] loved Faulkner.  I had done a seminar in Faulkner with him [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], so he's responsible to a large degree for introducing me to the full--to a big part of the Faulkner canon, hesitate to say full.  Faulkner was such a big writer, so many--so many works.  But, it was--it was exciting doing that book.  And he--that--Joe Jenkins directed my thesis.
Speaker 1: Now, Faulkner, was he teaching at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] at the time or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, interestingly enough, Faulkner came to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and I had planned to go to hear him on a night when we had a big snow, so I never had a chance to meet him in person, but his last years were spent teaching at the University of Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, the, the book, if I remember from, from school, it touches up on the subject of race, right?
Speaker 2: Everything Faulkner practically (laughter), and touches is an understatement.  But, yes.  You know, Faulkner--Faulkner is a very interesting writer, disturbing in some respects about racial attitudes, but far advanced of most of the people of his place and of his time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a kind of sensitivity to a number of issues regarding race.  And certainly, he may have developed some characters that you consider stereotypical, but he also developed so many characters whose, whose approaches to an understanding of race and racial issues and so forth went far beyond that of most of the white writers of his time--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) maybe even the black writers of his time.
Story_ID: 667276
Speaker 1: Did Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] at the time teach about any of the black writers?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I never had a course in African American literature in my college, master's [degree] or Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I ask--you think about it.  Now, this is something that is hard to believe that you say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me say this.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's, it's not enough to say I never had a course, I never had a work assigned.
Speaker 1: And this is during the lifetime of Langston Hughes and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --James Baldwin.
Speaker 2: And--which means it was worse than it was when my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber] was in school 'cause she had a course in African--well, it wasn't called African--black literature.  But, no.
Speaker 1: She had a course in Negro literature or something?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  It--um-hm.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's, that's something.  Yeah, so we, we ran a space where we were--we discounted our own production--
Speaker 2: We might say we discounted, but what they were doing was trying to be sure that you had what you needed to compete with white students who were finishing UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and so forth.  So, they wanted to be sure that you had a similar kind of background.
Speaker 1: Right.  I've--
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: --I've--yeah, I've heard those arguments at--Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: And do you know, to some degree, we still have some of these issues.  I had a group of students to come to me the other day at a black school [HBCU] to say that they were concerned that the courses offered didn't have an Afrocentric perspective; they weren't offered with an Afrocentric perspective.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a--that's a deeper philosophic discussion, but, but not even to teach the literature of--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Langston Hughes or Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar]--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: --Margaret Walker or--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --any of these.
Speaker 2: That was a problem--
Speaker 1: Baldwin.
Speaker 2: --there at Virginia State.  Now, I think maybe some of the private schools did have a few courses, but it was very interesting at Virginia State that that was lacking.  But, of course, you know, one of the things is that the textbooks, if you had anthologies in those days, it was rare--finally, the anthologies might have a poem by Hughes and a poem by James Weldon Johnson, maybe a poem by Dunbar, but in the time when I was in school, American literature anthology didn't have any of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we have all those writers, those black writers in the canon now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You'll find them in every university.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You know, you're gonna have to read some Countee Cullen or something--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know, to get out of there.
Speaker 2: Thank goodness (laughter).
Speaker 1: But (laughter) in those days, that's, that's really odd to think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you got none.
Story_ID: 667277
Speaker 1: Now--okay, so in--so, that's '63 [1963], you finished your master's degree [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And, now, were, were you involved at all or any of the students involved in the Civil Rights Movement, during this period of time?
Speaker 2: I was never directly involved in demonstrations.  I was--at the time had two small children [Warren Dance, Jr. and Allen Dance], I was working, some of the time I was studying as well, so I was never involved in a demonstration.  I always gave financially when we were giving to causes and things like that, but, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I know some of the figures that were--I mean, some of the people that were mentored with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] were from around this area, like--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --Samuel DeWitt Proctor and--
Speaker 2: That's true and there were--and I had very close friends.  But, what, what tended to be the case most often was that they were persons who were not employed by the government because there was a little concern if you were teaching school and so forth about getting too involved in these.  Not everybody failed to because of that, but people who were independent of, you know, government jobs like I was holding felt a little more, I think, inclined.
Speaker 1: Was it, Vernon Johns was around here.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Vernon Johns was around in the--
Speaker 2: Well, he's a little bit--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --distant, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's in Virginia, minister at Petersburg.
Speaker 1: Samuel DeWitt Proctor, right?  Is that the one?
Speaker 2: Well, well, Proctor.  I, I wasn't thinking about him as a minister.  This was actually a minister and there was something about it recently.  But, but, yes, a lot of people.  And, and some people--
Speaker 1: Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] was--
Speaker 2: --Wyatt Tee Walker--and, and some people whose names you probably didn't hear.  But, students at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] were doing sit-ins.  Alice Calloway, I remember as one of the women who was very, very active.  Bernie Hill [Beresenia Walker Hill] who was married to Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], and it's, it's probably not fair to call a couple of names because there was a strong community in Richmond [Virginia] sitting and demonstrating, fighting for integration and, and that sort of thing, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And Oliver Hill and, and his wife.
Speaker 2: And Oliver Hill, you know, was one of the main people in school integration, and not only school integration.  Before that, he had fought for years for equality of salary for school teachers and he was a big part of so many of the cases.  Yes, Oliver Hill is a big name here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember Lutrelle Palmer [Lutrelle F. Palmer, Sr.] of Newport News [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was the principal of Huntington High School [Collis P. Huntington High School, Newport News, Virginia] and is--his--we interviewed his son [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], you know, so he was like I guess your father's [Allen Cumber]--your father's generation.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: He lost a job because of advocating for equal pay for black teachers.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Well, see that's the thing.  If you became too involved, you might lose, lose your job.
Story_ID: 667278
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so, you're teaching in--at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and in--when did you start working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I started working on a Ph.D. in 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: At the University of Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, what was that--now, you were the first black and the first woman.
Speaker 2: In the English department.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: In the English department.  One of my friends from Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] was the first black woman into medical school and one of my teachers at Virginia State was the first black to get a degree from the University of Virginia.  Walter Ridley [Walter N. Ridley] was his name.  So, these--they are the pioneers.  One of my colleagues from Virginia State entered the English department the year before I did and both of us finished our Ph.D.'s there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--well, this was all still pretty new.  How, how were you treated?  What, what was--
Speaker 2: Well, it was very interesting.  The English department is a noteworthy department at the University of Virginia.  It is not and was not when I was there anything representative of what you would think of as southern because it, it had such a diversity of faculty from so many different places including, including the South.  So, for the most part, within that department itself, one felt comfortable in the classes.  There might be some things occasionally outside the classes that would case some discomfort, but I had a great education there.  Now, of course, it was lacking in some things, specifically anything having to do with African American literature.  And so this is the time, you know, students are sitting in, demanding courses, sometimes going into the president's office, demanding courses.  So, I said I wanted to do--you had to have a main author, so I asked to have a main author, James Baldwin.  So, they had a meeting and came back to me and said, "We can't approve James Baldwin, but we will allow you do works by ten black authors."  So, that was so unusual and unheard of, I said, "I'll do it."  Now, the interesting thing about this is that I didn't have any background to do black authors.  I didn't have--I hadn't read enough to do black authors, but I made the demand thinking it wouldn't be (laughter) approved, and stepped in, one might say, over my feet.  But, it was a wonderful experience because it gave me a chance to educate myself.  And so, I chose works by ten black authors.  This was in place of the major figure.  And I go back to that now--I'm so embarrassed, no women did I choose, partly because I didn't know the women writers, didn't really know the men, but it's easier to find out about them at that time.  So, that's what I did.  Then, the same thing, when it was time to write a dissertation.  I said, I'm going to ask to write a dissertation on African American literature, thinking that it wouldn't be accepted (laughter).  So, I made the proposal 'cause I'm ready to do my dissertation on Faulkner [William Faulkner], you know.  That's what I've studied.  That's what I've prepared for.  Again, they accepted it.  So, the problem was, there was nobody there to work with me, but there was a wonderful man in American literature, Crane [Stephen Crane] scholar, who agreed to work with me even though he [Jacob Levenson] made no pretense of having any background in African American literature, but I mean he's a good scholar and so forth.  And my last year working on my dissertation, they brought in their first black faculty member and--Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.].  So, everything was pretty much laid out by the time he came, but it was very helpful to have him there for that last year as my second reader.  And I did--the dissertation was: 'Wit and Humor in African American Literature' [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you come to choose that as a topic?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's a book called 'Wit and Humor in American Literature' [ph.] that I had very much enjoyed, and the whole time you're reading that you're saying, but where are we (laughter)?  Don't we have wit and humor, you know?  So, I mean, it, it was clear in my mind that this was something that needed to be done and also, mind you, that the whole time I'm drawing this up and everything, I'm doing it not with this kind of seriousness of anticipation that I'll do this dissertation, but rather to make a statement.  But, then they accepted it, so it became more than a statement.
Story_ID: 667279
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.].  Now, he's an interesting person.  There are people that really consider him the, the, the--one of the best, I guess, literary minds we've, we've had.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And so, do, do you have any reflections about Houston Baker?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the only thing I can say is that I regret that he wasn't there in time for me to have a course with him or to have more impact on this dissertation because coming in as he did, he wasn't going to do too much to make any changes or anything to make it more difficult for me.  But, it was wonderful having him there.  I knew even then--and he was quite young.  He's younger than I am; he was quite young then.  But, I knew even then, you know, what, what a mind he was.  And incidentally, he's done things through the years.  We've made--kept in touch and he's occasionally said, "Daryl [HistoryMaker Daryl Cumber Dance], why don't you do this?"  And I did.  As a matter of fact, he's responsible for 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance].  When I started working on wit and humor, I started thinking, well, what I'm reading here reminds me of what I heard from some of the stories I heard in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia].  And I stopped and went back to Charles City and started collecting folklore, tales that clearly have an impact in terms of theme and sometimes actual subject matter on the literature.  Some of them occurred just as they occurred in the folklore in the literature with Richard Wright, with James Baldwin, with Margaret Walker, with any number of people.  So, I went back and I collected.  And so I begin my dissertation with folklore, mainly at that time from Charles City.  And he said to me, Houston Baker, "You should expand this chapter into a book."  So, the moment I finished my dissertation, I applied for a grant and I started traveling around collecting the folklore that became 'Shuckin' and Jivin'.'
Story_ID: 667280
Speaker 1: Now--well, just back to your dissertation for a minute.  What, what was--what was the most profound thing you learned about, you know, or demonstrated in your dissertation African American literature in terms of wit and humor?
Speaker 2: Well, the fact that humor is at the basis of it.  We often think of the literature as being a tragic literature, full of woe and tears and horror and so forth, but what is interesting and certainly this is nothing new to observe is that from the very beginning with slavery, African Americans have achieve- have, have used their humor as a strength to survive, to overcome, to retaliate, to fight back, to get something for themselves, to fool the people who are in charge.  It's, it's just amazing how in the midst of what we've been through as a people, we have never lost the power to use that humor in many ways, sometimes just for relief from what is going on, but oftentimes for many other, other reasons and things, people have used their humor, their cynicism, their sarcasm, their laughter, their tales to teach.  And I, I don't know whether I mentioned teach just now, but within our families, within our communities, humor has been something for teaching.  And those who are our writers knew that from the beginning, from the slave narrators, and we have such wonderful bits of African American folklore from a number of them right on through to the present.  The, the--and when I talk about humor, I'm not just talking about the tales, I'm not just talking about the jokes, I'm talking about the proverbs, I'm talking about the songs, I'm talking about the sermons.  Humor is at the basis of so much African American literature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who, who was your advisor [Jacob Levenson]?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, Crane [Stephen Crane] scholar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Take me a while.
Story_ID: 667281
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in '71 [1971], you're promoted to assistant professor at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] after you get the Ph.D., right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, you didn't stay there long, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I did not.  (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  What, what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, there was a pay issue, but I didn't leave in protest with that because they equalized the pay.  Then, they ask I think VCU, probably--I, I forgotten exactly how this came about.  They asked--VCU asked to have an exchange program with Virginia State and had me come to VCU and teach a class, and they sent a, a verifying scholar from their English department to Virginia State to teach a class.  And then, after having taught that class there, they just made some offers and provided some opportunities that convinced me to move to Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: What were some of the factors?  'Cause you--
Speaker 2: Well, one, the poss--
Speaker 1: You had--we, we know you loved Virginia State.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what--I mean, what would make you leave Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, I lived in Richmond [Virginia].  I had two small children [Warren Dance, Jr. and Allen Dance].  Commuting was a real problem.  Sometimes when I had to stay in the evenings for things, it created all kinds of issues.  I had to get up so early in the morning.  We had only one car, so I had to find somebody I could ride with.  That was one of the big issues.  The other thing was that there were more opportunities for publishing in a publishing community at VCU.  The chairman of the department asked me to work with him on a project that he already had a contract for when I came.  So, it was--it was tempting in many ways.  But, the gruel- it was really grueling for me working at Virginia State, just getting there and back and forth, and it meant some days I was away from home from as early as six or seven in the morning depending on who I got a ride with until nine or ten at night.  Now, that wasn't true most days, but it would certainly be five or six in the evening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna--
Speaker 2: And Virginia Commonwealth University was giving me classes two days a week (laughter), you know.  I lived twenty minutes from the school--
Speaker 1: Okay, we're go- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, and the salary.
Story_ID: 667282
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Virginia Commonwealth [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia].  So, what, what courses did you teach at Virginia Commonwealth?
Speaker 2: I taught courses in American literature, in African American literature, and black women writers, and African American writers, and in Caribbean literature, and occasionally, of course, in folklore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you kind of defined what you were gonna teach on some level, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  As a matter of fact, I kind of created there the program in African American literary studies.  They brought another person in at the same time who was in African literature, and we worked together a bit.  So, we were really developing in our library holdings, in our field, and in our department courses in our field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, this is--this is the time when people are--I mean, well, earlier even when you--when you started doing your dissertation in the early '70s [1970s], people--students were calling you for this kind of--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --coursework and so you were one of the creators of, of this--
Speaker 2: At Virg- at Virginia Commonwealth University, absolutely.  Now, interestingly enough, at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], that wasn't the case.  I didn't have a course in African American literature there, but it was only a year after I finished.
Speaker 1: So, was the, the atmosphere there still like they have to learn what white people learn to--I mean, the students should learn nothing else?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they have, have--they have actually a program in African American culture and so forth there now.  I'm not so sure that everybody is completely happy with everything that is going on, but certainly, it's a different school from what it was when I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems--I mean, when you look back it seems like counterintuitive to think that the black colleges [HBCUs] would not be the pioneers and study black literature and black culture, but--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --that's really the case, right?
Speaker 2: That's true.  It's, it's odd.  And, and when we say black colleges, we probably shouldn't lump them all together--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --because there are some that have been outstanding in this field like Atlanta [Georgia] and Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and so forth, but some of the state schools in the South and certainly Virginia State is representative of this.  We're rather late beginning to build programs in these areas.
Story_ID: 667283
Speaker 1: You're teaching these courses and when did you start working on the book, 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, it sort of grew out of the dissertation's first chapter and I started working on that pretty much right away, and it took some time, but I finished it and then I couldn't find a publisher for it, so it laid there.
Speaker 1: Well, let me go through the process a little bit first.  Now, did you have to--did you do a lot of travel to collect these stories or how did you--how did--
Speaker 2: At Virginia.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Virginia.  As a matter of fact, the title was Virginia but the publisher asked to change it because the fact of the matter is, they're not limited to Virginia, these stories, but I collected in Virginia and Virginia, as I said, was a part of my title originally.
Speaker 1: Now, let me suggest this, too, that lots of people I've interviewed, when they get past like a certain generation of folks going back if they can go back, that people end up in Virginia (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: My, my father's people in Kentucky--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you go back far enough, it's Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, so--because this is the place where we were brought first to work for nothing and--
Speaker 2: Often times, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and right off the boat.  This is the site of Jamestown [Virginia] and the site--you know, it was these--early plantations and activities.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And, so a lot of people no matter where they end up, this--
Speaker 2: They come back for Virginia (laughter).
Speaker 1: --they have a root in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know.  So, this--yeah.  So, a lot of these stories are historical stories.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  There's no question that they aren't limited to Virginia.  Now, there's some that are specific to Virginia.  But, yes, all the collecting was done in Virginia and I'm hesitating a little bit because one of my friends who, who gave me some of the toasts, said, you know, "I've gotta have a party to tell the toasts."  He came in, sat down with me with the tape recorder.  He said, "I can't," (laughter), "I can't do it."  He couldn't tell a toast in that kind of atmosphere.  So, he was living in Washington [D.C.] at the time and he went to Washington and had a party, collected, and sent me the tape, yes, yes.  But, that's probably the only exception that I can remember. Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was a Richmonder.
Speaker 2: So, so, what people did you gather these stories from?  Did you--was it a broad--
Speaker 1: A broad range.  You know, some people think--it's so interesting.  So people think that folklore doesn't circulate among certain levels of people, college, presidents, big politicians, teachers, lawyers, doctors, ordinary people.  I collected a lot in prisons.  I collected in senior citizens centers.  I collected rural and urban.  It's a true variety of people and it's a variety of people.  Now, of course, some, some tales reflect certain experiences, but it's so interesting because sometimes, some of our top people have had some of those experiences as well.  And so, you know, it's, it's, it's not--and education-wise, everything from illiterate people to Ph.D.'s.
Story_ID: 667284
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, do you have favorite stories that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your favorites?
Speaker 2: And as I said, I don't tell the stories so well.  They're favorite--the whole--it's favorite because I'm hearing the person tell it, and I can't do that, but I'll share with you as best I can.  On the side of a mountain once, the Lord called three people, and he said, "I want the three of you to help me with a project."  He said, "I want you to go out and collect stone and bring it back to me."  The three people were an Italian, a Jewish person, and an African American. "Go out," he said, "collect stone."  So, they went out and collected stones.  The first person back was African American.  He rushed right back with a pebble and handed it to the Lord.  The second person back was the Italian.  He had a wheelbarrow filled with crushed stones.  And finally, the Jew came back with a mountain.  So, the Lord in his patience blessed the stones and said, "I will now turn them into bread."  So, the black man had a biscuit, the Italian had loaves of bread, and the Jew had a bakery.  So, the next day, the Lord said, "Same men, same assignment.  Go out and fetch stones."  Well, the black man was extremely happy for a second chance and the first one back that night was the Italian man with his wheelbarrow filled with stones and the Jew came back after an hour or two with another mountain.  And they waited, eleven o'clock, twelve o'clock, the black man still hadn't shown, one o'clock.  Just about daybreak, the black man came back with mountains and boulders and everything just being hurled at the Lord, and the Lord looked and he said, "Upon these rocks, I'll build my church."  And the black man said, "I'll be damned if you will.  You're gonna make bread today," (laughter).  I love that story.  It says so much about the history of our experience in this country in many respects.  I won't spend a lot of time talking about it.  But, that's the kind of way in which the people have captured the essence of a number of the problems that we face.
Speaker 1: In a--I was just thinking, in a--in any story like that, I mean, the humor--I mean, did you--in the book ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance], do you try to decode the human?  I mean, try to analyze why this is funny or why this resonates?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't do it in that book, but sometimes when I talk about them, the stories are--you know, I go out to lecture or something, I do, indeed, talk about some of the--try to get us to look at the depth of the stories to understand the essence of them and how they originated and why they remain popular.  Because, you know, there's an interesting thing.  We have observ- this is as true as anywhere.  With folklore, it's not gonna continue if people don't respond to it, if people don't like it.  These tales, some of them that have continued for hundreds of years continue because they spark something, they strike something, they say something to important issues.
Speaker 1: Right.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so many of the stories you start laughing at the beginning and start--I mean, whatever it is, it hits the core at the very beginning, and you laugh throughout the story--throughout the story.  And the, the--I don't know if you found like, in some of these, the story itself is funnier than the punch line.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's--I mean, it, it touches on so many different cultural--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --things, issues and, and--
Speaker 2: And, and some of them touch so painfully among some issues that you can't really laugh, you know.  But, the irony of some of the situations is what strikes us, yes.
Story_ID: 667285
Speaker 1: Did you--so, so, was there a--you mentioned a cross section of people the stories came from, but was there a particular group that had the funniest stories of, of all the different kinds of people?  Were--
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't think so.  But another thing that's really funny is this.  Some people have negative attitudes (laughter) towards some of the stories, clearly, and they don't like the stories that do this or they don't like these kinds of stories or they don't like that kind of story.  And even though they don't like them, sometimes they tell them.  I'll tell you a funny situation.  There's a body of, of, of tales that deal with how the black man came to be as he is.  I call them the etiological tales, why things are why they are.  Why we're poor, why we look a certain way, and so forth.  Now, those tales, a lot of people don't like them in that they're embarrassed by them.  They certainly don't like to share them with a larger audience.  I went to Jamaica to a lecture on African American folklore at some colleges, and so they asked me to send the stories I would use.  And I sent the stories I would use (laughter).  So, when I got there, these two representatives from the organization came to me and they said, "I don't think you should use these stories," and they were stories about why the black man is black, that kind of thing.  He--they said, "I think this would be--divide the races.  I, I, I--we, we don't want you to tell these stories."  And, so we went on to have a discussion and I certainly am not going to insist on that, but we started talking about it.  And one of them said, "But, you know, we've got a story very much like that story here."  And she went on to tell me a version of the story that she didn't want me to tell that she had laughed at and had been part of her folklore, and we sat there and we had this interesting almost sharing of the very tales that they didn't want us to share among us.  It was an interesting situation, but it's not--and I--it happened in Jamaica, but it's the same kind of thing you run into here as well.  So, the audience is, is very important and has an impact on--usually stories people will tell because there are times when I'm collecting from groups that people will tell me later, I'll tell you something else if we get together again, but I didn't want to tell that story here, you know.  So, that's interesting, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the story you told with the three, the three, protagonists, and you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that--that's such a common thing.  And I've heard so many of these on porches, it's a black man with a Chinese man and a white man or black man with a Jew and a white man.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: An Indian [Native American] is in it sometimes and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a Mexican.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: It could be any number--but, it's always three.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And one is always black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the other two are--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.  And that number three forever--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in every folklore (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Right, right.
Story_ID: 667286
Speaker 1: A person who collected a lot of those kind of stories is a person that helped you get your work published.  You were telling me when I came in that Richard M. Dorson who wrote the book, 'American Negro Folktales' was impressed with your work.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And he is the one who was the reader for the Indiana University Press [Bloomington, Indiana] and was responsible for selecting the book ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance].  Then, he wrote the very first review of the book in The New Republic, I think, and so that was very helpful.  I didn't know him until after the book was published.  They had a reception for me out there and I met him, but he was very influential to that respect in my career and very influential in the field.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  How did you--I've often wondered how he got interested in this and how he--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not so sure that I know.  I probably should know.  But, being--
Speaker 1: He was at the University of--he was up north someplace.  I know he was--
Speaker 2: Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Was, was he always in Indiana?
Speaker 2: I don't know about always, but he, he was at Indiana.  And, of course, being in folklore, it's kind of hard to be in folklore, in American folklore without finally hearing the tales.  And he dedicated the part of his career that I know most about to collecting African American folk--and teaching about African American folklore.  But, most of the early collectors were--that we know about who got their works published were white.
Speaker 1: I guess it's like the--but, you know, but, as we were saying earlier, the people like Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], and Langston Hughes, they draw from this tradition (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  And, of course, Langston Hughes did some collecting and publishing of folklore as well.  But, they all draw from it, absolutely.
Story_ID: 667287
Speaker 1: So, what was the reception?  I know what it was like around where I was, but--'cause we loved it, but, but, what was the reception to 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance]?
Speaker 2: Well, very interesting.  When it came out, I was in Jamaica and my husband [Warren Dance, Sr.] called me very upset.  The Washington Post had published a review.  I think it was a half page review, and the man had been very critical of my comments about black men or my tales that involved black men.  And I've forgotten now exactly how he put it, but it was a kind of--at least one really harsh sentence in there.  And my husband was so upset and I said, "The Washington Post?  A half page," (laughter)?  Didn't matter what he said (laughter).  That this first book is getting this review there in The Post.  And by and large--and I, I can remember one of the--I wrote a, a chapter called "Oh Lord, Will I Ever? The Black Man and the White Woman" [sic. "Oh Lord, Will I Ever? The White Woman and the Black Man"] and when I wrote that chapter, the publisher wanted to know if I wanted to tone down a little bit some of the things I was saying about the black man's attraction to the white woman in this body of folklore, and I didn't.  So, that was--that was the chapter that I got hit on.  But, by and large, it was very well received.  But, I want to say to you that the most important thing in my work, for me, has always been the way ordinary readers respond to it, not so much the professional reviewers.  And starting with 'Shuckin' and Jivin',' I have been so reinforced.  I got letters from people, sometimes two and three page letters talking about how reading this, they heard their mother's voice, how it took them back to stories they used to hear, how they remembered their version and they want to share with me of one of these.  That's really what's most important to me here because this belongs to the folk, and by folk, I don't just mean uneducated, but I mean the people who pass it, who, who, who grew up on it, who passed it along.  So, that's, that's what meant most to me.  But, I've gotten good reviews and it's sometimes cited as a classic work of African American folklore.  I get requests constantly, just last month, from Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] to use a couple of stories in something he's doing now; I've forgotten exactly what it is.  But, I've been very pleased with the reception of 'Shuckin' and Jivin.'  And, of course, some people were alarmed by the obscenities in some of the stories, and some are embarrassed by the nature of some of the stories, so it's been across the board.
Speaker 1: Did, did you agonize or any of that, the obscenities and--
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when I did it, you know, I was--I was doing this during a period when I call it my sort of militant period, and I was doing the research, and I was reading even some of Langston Hughes' version of some of the toasts and I said, "That ain't the toast, that's just not it," you know.  And I was determined to publish something that reflected these tales and stories exactly how they were told by the people.  So, I refused to clean up the language.  I refused to clean up the tales.  There were one or two that you just couldn't print.  But, basically, my goal was to present a collection of African American folklore that was real and the way it was told by the people.  Now, later, I did another collection ['From My People: 400 Years of African American Folklore,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance] where I cleaned them up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I wanted it to be available to children and schools and so forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, I know--I mean, but, you were right.  I mean, the book resonated with a lot of people.  Ken Simmons, whose father was from Georgia, you know, really appreciated this--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] and kept it as like a bible in--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --eta Creative Arts Foundation.  This--you know--
Speaker 2: And I am so honored by that, thank you.
Speaker 1: So, any rate, yeah.  It, it would inform a quip every day, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's great (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 667288
Speaker 1: So.  Now, you got a Fulbright sc- research grant in '78 [1978] also.  This, this is a big year for you when your book comes out.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Now, the book came out some years after I did it, 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I said, I was in Jamaica on that Fulbright when it came out and I was in Jamaica because of this 'cause I had gone down to talk about African American folklore and people--I met some people, important people who were interested in the field, and they said, listen, you know.  We've got versions of these same tales.  You have to come down here and collect.  And so, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I took the Fulbright to go to Jamaica to collect Jamaican folklore.
Speaker 1: And--yeah, that had formed a book called 'Folklore from Contemporary Jamaicans' [Daryl Cumber Dance], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  And, again, similar kinds of responses, but, again, the rewarding thing is the people here in this country who said, took me back home, you know, hearing those voices and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: I imagine a book about Jamaican folklore really resonated in New York [New York] and in--
Speaker 2: Well, Jamaican community--we have a sizeable Jamaican community here in Richmond [Virginia], and they've been very supportive of my work.  And I think they have a Caribbean association and a Jamaican association, so a variety of the Caribbean and then some just from Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Is there a major or significant difference between the folklore of African Americans and, and Jamaicans?
Speaker 2: I would not say a significant difference.  Here, while Brer Rabbit is the most popular, Anansi the spider is most popular there.  Sometimes, it's the very same tales, it's just Anansi--sometimes they have Brer Rabbit and sometimes we have a Anansi, but for the most part--so, those differences.  In Jamaica, it might be about the ackee tree, whereas here will be something that's here, but not significant.  Sometimes the animals are a little bit different.  It reflects a little bit, the culture and the physical surroundings in these places.  And I'd say the same is true as you move from place to place in the Caribbean.
Story_ID: 667289
Speaker 1: And how would--how, how does black folklore compare with white folklore or, or differ from white folklore in any significant way?
Speaker 2: How does it differ from Af- white folklore?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think really the folklore of a people represent their culture, their views, their ideas, their heroes, and that sort of thing.  So, the difference is great.  Now, the similarities are, of course, that many of them deal with issues like identity, who we are, what is our relationship to the world, and so we'll find similarities in those.  But, basically, basically, if you read a tale, it's clear.  Now, sometimes, it's almost a very same tale, but the change of race and reflection of the philosophy of a few or the experience of the group.  So, you know, there--there's a kind of placement of works in terms of motifs.  So, the motifs are often very much the same, but basically, it's going to reflect the experiences of their culture.
Speaker 1: Okay, with different flavor to the--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.  For example, there's this terrible tale about the black family who has the sheriff come and say, "We've discovered the body of your son in the water, and the body has chains on it and a rope around it and a rope around the neck and it's beaten and everything."  And he said, "I hate to inform you, this is the worst suicide we've ever seen."  That tale is told by people with the mafia, with things like that as well as by--and, of course, it changes from African American then.  So, some of the--sometimes, the motifs are similar, but basically, there is a unique, a unique quality of African American humor and folklore, wit and humor, folklore, folktales, prov- and proverbs, another thing, the same thing.  Every culture has proverbs and every culture uses the proverbs to teach a lesson, and every culture has proverbs against greed, against certain things and so forth.  And yet as we look at African American proverbs, often we can--we can see an element of them that also reflects a black experience.
Story_ID: 667290
Speaker 1: Now, did you--how did you feel about Richard Pryor?  I think of all our comedians--and he was really popular in the late '70s [1970s].  Did you--were you a, a fan of Richard Pryor?
Speaker 2: I hated myself for loving him so much (laughter).  I mean, it was--it was--it's interesting.  You know, he went through certain periods, but sometimes some of his attitude was so negative towards blacks, so negative towards women, so negative towards black women (laughter).  I remember he said, "Black women hate to see us with white women 'cause they don't want to see us happy," (laughter).  But, Richard Pryor was certainly one of the best, most talented comedians ever.  He could take anything and make you fall down laughing.
Speaker 1: I, I know when I first heard him say--the--he's in a--somebody's in an argument and say, "I got the book.  I got the--," I heard that in the barbershop and I just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I cried.  I couldn't--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know that, that--
Speaker 2: And, and so sad, his life, you know.  But, yes, a great talent.
Speaker 1: Did--are you familiar with the story of Mudbone?  It's a--
Speaker 2: Mudbone?
Speaker 1: Mudbone, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: It's a story--it's--I think the story is called 'Little Tiny Feets' [sic. 'Little Feets'] and it's told by a man named Mudbone.
Speaker 2: Okay, no I don't.
Speaker 1: He's from Tupelo, Mississippi.  He, he starts the story off in Peoria [Illinois] and then he--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's I think his greatest story.  If you haven't heard--you, you need to hear it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll have to look it up.  You write it down for me before you leave.
Speaker 1: It--it's a classic story, from beginning to end.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a--boy, any rate.
Story_ID: 667291
Speaker 1: So, after--what, what was your next book project after ['Folklore from Contemporary Jamaicans,' Daryl Cumber Dance]--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, you know, the books--projects start and one gets put aside and that kind of thing, but when I went to Jamaica, I was at the University of the West Indies [Kingston, Jamaica] and I shared office buildings with a number of important writers, so I decided to talk to the writers about their use of folklore.  And what happened was, that started a collection of interviews.  And oftentimes, I didn't limit myself to the folklore.  That's what started me with it, but when I left Jamaica collecting folklore, I also had tapes of a number of interviews with important writers in that group.  And so I went all over the Caribbean interviewing other writers.  I went all over the United States where they were living, California, New York, Florida, even some in Virginia collecting interviews.  So, I put these interviews together and, again, I couldn't find a publisher.  The American publisher says--the American publisher said, "Most people don't even know these writers.  They're not interested in your interviews."  But, one of them said to me, "We're doing a series of fifty books, fifty women writers, fifty southern writers, fifty western writers.  If you want to do fifty Caribbean writers, we'll do that book."  So, I laid the interviews aside and I did fifty Caribbean writers, which were bio-bibliographical studies of the writers, many of whom I had interviewed.  And in the meantime, this book, again, is just lying there unpublished.  I hear from somebody at Peepal Tree Press who said, "I hear you have an interview with Ismith Khan, and I'm doing something on him, would you let me see your interview?"  I sent him the interview and he said, "Let us publish these interviews.  Let me see the others."  And so, then, I called the book New World Adams: Interviews--Conversations with Caribbean Writers [sic. 'New World Adams: Conversations with Contemporary West Indian Writers,' Daryl Cumber Dance].  So, a number of these books sort of were being worked on at the same time and came out within years of each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 'Fifty Caribbean Writers' ['Fifty Caribbean Writers: A Bio-bibliographical Critical Sourcebook,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance], which was published by Greenwood [Greenwood Press] is, is basically a reference book (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a kind of reference book.
Speaker 1: And then 'New World Adams' is--
Speaker 2: The conversations.
Story_ID: 667292
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think you, you remembered the name of your advisor, you know for your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so embarrassing.  Jacob Levenson, a great early Crane [Stephen Crane] specialist--
Speaker 1: Right.  He was--
Speaker 2: --American literature specialist.
Speaker 1: At the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: At the University of Virginia.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, we were--as we're moving along here, your, your next project was 'Long Gone: The Mecklenburg Six and the Theme of Escape in Black Folklore' [Daryl Cumber Dance]. Now, who were the Mecklenburg Six?
Speaker 2: Okay.  They were men on death row in Mecklenburg, Virginia [Mecklenburg County, Virginia], death row, all of them for heinous murders.  I picked up my paper one morning and saw that there had been an escape [from Mecklenburg Correctional Center] and the news was all over the television, all over everything.  Six men, six men on death row had escaped.  And immediately, I started hearing songs, sayings, things, folk responses immediately to that escape.
Speaker 1: From people that you knew around the--
Speaker 2: No, not so much--you, you--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --not necessarily people that I knew, but I would hear--sometimes you'd hear something shared on a radio.  Sometimes, it would just be somebody said, "Did you hear somebody said this?"  There was one person on a radio station that just kept coming up with sayings, you know, lines and so forth about them, where are they, what they're doing, who they are, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Were they all black?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm hesitating here.  One was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I'm hesitating here because he became an honorary, excuse the expression, nigger.  That's what they called him when I talked to them just like they would have to another black person.  But, when you're on death row, you pretty much are reduced in that respect because, of course, death row in Mecklenburg was largely black.  So, it, it fascinated me.  And, of course, they were on the run.  And the black man on the run is a major theme in African American literature.  And I can say black man on the run because, as I said, he pretty much was embraced as another black man.  So, I just was fascinated by the quick responses to it in respect to themes in folklore.  And, of course, much of the folklore deals with crime and prison and, and, and hearings and judges and that kind of thing.  And that's, of course, what this was all about--and jail, and jail.  So much of it comes out of jail.  So much of it I lose to jail.  So much of it I lose to judges and what have you.  It was just throwing the folklore back in my face that had to do with this.  And so, I'm not so sure I realized I was gonna do a book, but right away, it became a book project.  And so, I went to talk to the guys when they were captured.  It was an interesting story.  If you know this, they fooled them into not only letting them out of jail but sending them a car to drive out of jail. Oh, you didn't know about that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, it's interesting.  These guys--it's unbelievable, too.  These guys and some others in prison kept talking about what they could do to get out.  A lot of them were talking about, more than these six.  And one person kept reporting it to the authorities; they're planning this, they're planning that.  So, the authority had their plans, though not every particular and did nothing about it.  And so finally, they, they really started the process.  And what they did was to fool a guard into the cell, capture him, put on his uniform, another guard, capture him, put, put on his uniform; so, they did that.  They all got dressed in the uniforms.  They--
Speaker 1: So, they had to do this six times, right, to get six uniforms?
Speaker 2: They--yeah, yeah.  They, they had a number of people captured up there in the--it's amazing how it worked out--captured there.  Then, they got on the phone and called the person who guards the entrance and said, "We've discovered a bomb," I think I have it right, here, "and please, just quickly let us out," you know.  "Don't hold us up.  We gotta get out with this bomb."  And they called and said, "We have to have a car 'cause we got a bomb, we've gotta get out with this," and so they're all dressed up.  They have a stretcher.  They put a fire extinguisher on the stretcher and cover it with a sheet and say, "Let us out, let us out, let us pass."  The car is waiting for them.  They jump in the car.  They called the gate and ordered, ordered, ordered the gate keeper to open.  They drive out, six men.
Story_ID: 667293
Speaker 1: They went to North Carolina first.  This place [Mecklenburg Correctional Center, Mecklenburg County, Virginia] is in the southern tip of Virginia.  So, they drove to North Carolina.  So, I said to them, what did I say?  "Well, what were you planning to do," (laughter)?  He said, "We had no plans 'cause we never thought it was going to work."  So, they drove to North Carolina and in North Carolina, they separated.  There were two brothers [Linwood Briley and James Briley] who were a part of the three Briley brothers, a notorious group of killers in, in Richmond [Virginia].  The two brothers, the white guy, and one black guy stole a truck and started driving north.  Two of them were left there and they went to get some wine and cheese and were caught.  So, they were captured the next day.  The four that I mentioned to you drove on through--back through Virginia and on up north, and they somehow knew they were headed north because Canada was making all kinds of preparations in fear that they were going to come to Canada.  The goal of the Briley brothers, and they were kind of the smarter ones in terms of the planning and so forth except for one guy who didn't go who I think was really critical to the planning, they went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where they had an uncle and they stayed there.  The other two, the white guy and another guy whose crime mainly was in Charles City [Charles City County, Virginia] where I come from--he's not from Charles City--they were trying to get to Canada.  And after several days, they ran out of money and they were captured just before I think they got to Canada; I think I'm right on that.  The two brothers stayed in Philadelphia.  They remained free for a long time.  Well, all this time, things are going on and just everywhere, I was discovering more and more songs and ditties and tales and comments and so forth on these guys and drawings and what have you.  And I went to talk to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] here about what was going on, and I looked and they had a bulletin board, and there was all kinds of sketches on the bulletin board.  This was after they captured them all, though, all kinds of sketches on the bulletin board.  So, all of these responses to this escape.  Finally, they captured them all and they've all--and, of course, the political mayhem in Virginia as a result of that was just unbelievable because there was every reason that it could've been prevented and ridiculous that it did occur, that these people--they didn't harm anybody.  They made up their--they said they, they all agreed they would not hurt anybody.  So, nobody was harmed except scared to death or something like that.
Story_ID: 667294
Speaker 1: Is there any particular response to it that's of--that was of maybe the most noteworthy I guess, or--
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, and, and I'm not gonna remember one that I can--I can give as well but, you know, it, it, it--some of them sounded just like the, the toasts.  It was, you know, like if you know, 'Shine' ['Shine and the Titanic'], it was early in May when something happened, when four, five, six black men made their getaway, they say, you know.  So, it sound--it's fit into the tradition of a number of tales and it was celebrated by song.  They were characterized by someone.  They caught the Brileys [Lindwood Briley and James Briley], one of them had--looked like a shower cap on his head and they had all kinds of little drawings and comments and everything with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], which was pretty much making fun of the guys, what I saw of theirs there.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Interesting.  Yeah, there's a--there's a song, I know I was reading about.  I don't know if you're familiar with this one--it's called 'Run, Nigger, Run.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Have you heard--oh.
Speaker 2: And so many songs about running.  And--the man, he's long gone.  That's why I, I use the title, he's long gone ['Long Gone: The Mecklenburg Six and the Theme of Escape in Black Folklore,' Daryl Cumber Dance].  One of the slave--one of the slave songs is exactly that.  Yeah, like a--
Speaker 1: My father was raised in rural Kentucky, first sang the song 'Run, Nigger, Run.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then in the early '70s [1970s], a friend of mine who used to--he's a black postman, but for fun, he used to subscribe to the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] paper and all this--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --other stuff to know what they were doing, and he got a--he had a record that the Klan made--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the same song.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And I was looking that up and I--there's a lot of confusion as to whether it's a song that emanated from the racist white community or from the black community.
Speaker 2: It's the same thing about a number of pieces.  As I said, they have many times the very same one with some cha- even John Henry has a big white tradition and, of course, we know it has a big tradition of black beliefs as well.  So, a number of these circulate in--and the etiological tales I'm telling you about, they're popular in the black community oftentimes or always and in the white community.  And in the white community, they're designed specifically to malign blacks generally as they've been collected.  And in the black community, I think they're designed really to show the hypocrisy of the white community.  So, they--a little bit different, but it's not unusual to find similar ones different places.  And it was so interesting to me to find the FBI, the guys in jail, the man on the street, all kinds of people responding to this in similarly, generally folkistic ways.
Story_ID: 667295
Speaker 1: Now, your next project was 'Honey, Hush!' ['Honey, Hush!: An Anthology of African American Women's Humor,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance], right?
Speaker 2: 'Honey, Hush!'.  'Honey, Hush!'.
Speaker 1: This is an anthology of African American women's humor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Humor.  Humor.  That's right.  I received a call from Norton press [W. W. Norton and Company] saying that they wanted me to do a collection of African American folklore.  I had just read a book from their press, which was on southern humor and I said to them, again, indignant (laughter), my militant self, "You have this book on southern humor that has almost nothing about black women."  And most of what he had was from 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance] on black women.  I said, "I've already done a book on African American folklore.  What you need is a book on black women's humor."  And the lady said, "Send me a proposal."  So, I hadn't really planned to do this, but sounded like a good idea, and I sent the proposal in right away and started working on it.  And already--it's interesting how things are in your mind without your realizing they're in your mind.  I realized all these wonderfully funny, humorous, ironical tales, stories, proverbs from African American women.  So, I got to work on that.  That was the most fun ever.  And by the time I was working on that, I was a member of a group called the Wintergreen Women [Wintergreen Women Writers' Collective], and we're a group of mainly African American, but at least one white member, of women who got together because most of us were isolated as, you know, one of one or two black women working in larger schools and a chance to get together and talk about some issues that were affecting us.  So, we started meeting every year.  It turned out to be a wonderful thing.  We've been meeting constantly now for close to thirty years.  I--oh--yeah, close to thirty years.  And one of the things we do when we meet is to share research projects and to get ideas from each other and get support from each other.  So, I said to them when I went, "I'm gonna do a collection of African American women's humor.  Help me.  Give me--," so, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni said, "Well, I'll do the introduction to it," and she, she did, and it was--it's a wonderful one.  And I think just about everybody in the group contributed some story to it.  But, I couldn't get a title for it.  So, I was working on a title and I'd send titles to my editor.  I had a wonderful editor, Amy Cherry, at Norton and just couldn't get a title, and she would send me back.  And so finally I just wrote to all the Wintergreen women and I said--and they knew about the book.  They had helped to plan it.  They had made contributions.  So, I said, "We're having trouble with a title."  And Joanne Gabbin [HistoryMaker Joanne V. Gabbin] at James Madison University [Harrisonburg, Virginia], who--very good friend of Gwendolyn Brooks and--who has honored Gwendolyn Brooks in so many ways, wrote back to me and said, "Honey, hush."  And it hit me as just perfect.  If you've been around black women, you know how common that phrase is, and it's not just black women.  Again, when I was doing something for my last book, I talked to a white American who has lived in Antigua for fifty years and she said, "Honey, hush."  So, I named it 'Honey, Hush!' and it's, it's been one of my most fun books, even though every time I say that, I think about how much fun I had with others as well.  But, you know, I've gotten--I told you one of the things is the way people respond to the books.  Women have written to me and they say, "This book got me through my divorce.  This book helped me deal with the death of somebody."  One women wrote to me and she said, "I keep 'Honey, Hush!' on my bed table and every night before I go to sleep, I read a selection and I wake up in the morning with a smile on my face."  So, these kinds of things, you know, just, just are the most important responses to books.  To me, it got really good book reviews, probably more reviews than any other book I've done.
Story_ID: 667296
Speaker 1: Is there a particular kind of story that is indicative of, of black women that doesn't, you know, occur so much with black men?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, almost every chapter is a particular kind of one.  One deals with the power of black women.  One deals with issues of appearance and, you know, race and color and hair and body and everything, such a critical issue in black women's folklore.  Two chapters deal with the men, one with the good men, one with the bad men (laughter).  So, they deal with the issues that particularly affect African American women.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the title, this 'Honey, Hush!' ['Honey, Hush!: An Anthology of African American Women's Humor,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance] is a kind of a line that punctuates laughter.  I mean, you know--I mean, it, well, sets the laughter off--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in something.  A story or an incident happens and someone says--
Speaker 2: Honey, hush.
Speaker 1: And then, boom, everybody--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --falls out.  But, that's--I don't know what you call that particular kind of humor.  But, you know, I, I worked in a theater at one time and I was--I was telling you about Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] or [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward or whatever, they would often say, "There it is," or, "Honey, hush" or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --something--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that, that would, you know, when a ironical situation comes up, all they have to do is say that--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and that sets everybody off.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It's one of those key words (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: And you hear--
Speaker 2: So, I've had a lot of fun with this book.
Speaker 1: I know one of them was: you better let that go.
Speaker 2: You better let that go?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: You better let that go.
Speaker 2: Well now, you know, these exact sayings that you're saying, again, when I was doing, 'Honey, Hush!' it hit me so much that I put an ending to each chapter with these sayings.  So, each chapter has the selections, the stories, the tales, the songs, but then it has--what do I call them?  One is "Mama Sez," which are the sayings from the older black women and another one from younger black women ["Sister to Sister"].  So, those two sections because those sayings do, do resonate and they're just full of irony, humor, and so suggestive in and of themselves.
Story_ID: 667297
Speaker 1: Now, you taught at Virginia Commonwealth [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] for twenty years, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  But before that, we've got another book we haven't talked about.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And the other book came out this June.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that book is 'In Search of Annie Drew: The Mother and Muse of Jamaica Kincaid' [sic. 'In Search of Annie Drew: Jamaica Kincaid's Mother and Muse,' Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that book deals with the mother figure.  And Jamaica Kincaid I might say is an Antiguan writer, called by many an African American writer because she's been here since she was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Now, she's New York [New York] based, right?  She's--where is she--
Speaker 2: Not exactly New York based, but she lived in Vermont much of her married life.  She's in California now.  But, let me say this.  New York was where she wanted to go when she came here and, indeed, she did live in New York after serving as a kind of maid, au pair for a couple of white couples in the area.  She moved to New York and lived there probably until she married [Allen Shawn] and she was twenty-nine, I think, when she married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--for--well, go on.  You were telling us about--
Speaker 2: Well, I just wanted to mention that book.  And with that--oh, and the other book I didn't mention is '400 Years of African American Folklore' because the Norton [W. W. Norton and Company] editor called me back and said, "We still want this book of folklore."  So, what that is is a bigger collection than 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance], deals with more genres than 'Shuckin' and Jivin',' but also does clean up some of the objectionable material in 'Shuckin' and Jivin'.'  So, '400 Years of African American Folklore' is something that you can share with your children.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's interesting 'cause I've--stories like, you mentioned 'Shine' ['Shine and the Titanic'] a little while ago--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'Signifying Monkey.' There are different versions.  I know [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr., did a version of 'Signifying Monkey' without the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --vulgarity in it ['Signifyin' Monkey'].
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, and they are not folk versions.  They are cleaned up versions by academics and something is lost in them, but I have them in, in this late--in this last book as well because I, I think I would want young people to be familiar with these forms but, obviously, you can't put them on the shelves in school libraries.
Speaker 1: Now, so in 2002, you published a book called 'For My People' as well?  Is that about Margaret Walker in any way?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's--it, it borrows--it's--it borrows its title from Margaret Walker's 'For My People.'  This is--mine is called For--'From My People'--
Speaker 1: 'From My People,' oh I'm sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) '400 Years of African American Folklore'--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--
Speaker 2: --is the subtitle that I--
Speaker 1: --what you titled the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what two things together I had a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --question about.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: What year?  Four hundred years was--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  'From My People: 400 Years of African American Folklore' [ed. Daryl Cumber Dance].  All right.  So, all these books came out while you were at Virginia Commonwealth?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  The Jamaican ones came out when I went to the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia].  The work had been done while I was at Virginia Commonwealth University.  So, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one after I left University of Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--'In Search of Annie Drew.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is an impressive output.  Now, I only knew about the one book--when we got the assignment (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --to do this interview.  But, this is so much--this is an impressive output of information--I mean, books.  Did you--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 667298
Speaker 1: Did you have much--a friend of mine would--use- used to always say that a lot of black professors in situations don't have the graduate student, you know, power to help them and that sort of thing, I mean, especially in the black colleges, you know, some people get a person like--I can't think of his name now, Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles].  He wrote everything himself from--I mean, he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he, he, he had this prodigious output; he had no help.
Speaker 2: I had no help either.  The one thing I have, in 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' ['Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans,' Daryl Cumber Dance], I have a few proverbs that a student did and that student has gone on to become probably the best known person working on African American proverbs in the country.  His name was Dennis [Dennis Wilson Folly] when he was in school.  Now, what is his name?  It'll come to me in a little while.  But, at any rate, I never had graduate students to work with me.  I never had graduate student assistance beyond somebody who might go to the library for me.  So, no, I didn't have that support.
Speaker 1: And it seems to me, I--now, I don't--and correct me if I'm wrong, but I think--I mean, I know professors, some feel--
Speaker 2: Let me interrupt myself--Anand Prahlad is the (laughter) proverb, proverb specialist.  The student's name is Anand Prahlad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And--well, how do you spell that as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: A-N-A-N-D, P-R-A-H-L-A-D, Prahlad, I think.  I think.
Speaker 1: Is he an African American or is he--
Speaker 2: He's African American, grew up here in Hanover County [Virginia], the neighboring county to this one [Henrico County, Virginia] and was at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] when I was working on 'Honey, Hush!' ['Honey, Hush!: An Anthology of African American Women's Humor,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance], and he collected these proverbs from his family, and so he agreed and was pleased to agree to have me put a few in, then went on to do a Ph.D. out in California [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and become a scholar.  He's done some work in Jamaica as well. But, this is--this is another thing about my work that I am, that brings me great pleasure, and that is seeing students respond and grow as a result of the work.  Now, I taught this young man, not so young now, somewhere in the early '70s [1970s], and he does not come to this area without calling me and we get together and we share work.  I have a manuscript of his right now and he, he read 'From My People' ['From My People: 400 Years of African American Folklore,' ed. Daryl Cumber Dance] for me and gave me many suggestions because he went on to do his degree in folklore.  I never studied folklore myself, you know.  I never had a class in folklore.  So, we just had this wonderful relationship and I have this relationship with so many students through the years and I guess this is what makes teaching so very special.  I learn from them and they express ways in which they learn from me.  As a matter of fact, I have so many students who had just never even heard of the material we have in class, white students who never known anything about African American or Caribbean literature.  Somebody said, "I didn't even know they had a literature.  I thought they just had resorts," you know.  That kind of thing, we might call it ignorance, but it's sad, but true.  I mean, how many people can we walk out and say, name a Caribbean writer for me.  It's a new thing.  And so when you have students who are so delighted to discover a whole new body of work and who year after year write back to say, "I see So and So has written another book, I'm gonna get it."  You're very--really pleased to have had some kind of impact on their lives.
Speaker 1: I know so many professors say they're under pressure to publish, but I, I--my sense is that you--you're doing these books because you want to.  Those are the kinds of things you're interested in.
Speaker 2: And the thing is, they just--all of a sudden something happens and I have to do the book.  It's not like I sit down and plan, what will I do next?  What will I do to get a promotion?  What will I do for that?  These books just somehow come to me from my excitement about what's going on in the world of literature and folklore.
Story_ID: 667299
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, how did you come to leave Virginia Commonwealth [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] for University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] was governor and the governor was--the government, state government was having some financial problems, so he put in an early retirement system.  And I woke up and I looked at the paper, and you had to be fifty years old--fifty-five years old, had to be fifty-five years old, you had to have taught so many years.  They would give you a supplement until you qualify for social security, and I wasn't thinking about retiring, but it looked like retiring was a good idea 'cause if I retired five years later, I'd get less than I would get taking this special plan.  So, I said, "Well, Doug designed this for me," (laughter).  "I might as well retire and just take visiting years."  Visiting years are very nice.  Schools are wonderful to you when you're there for one year.  They don't put you on all those committees, you know.  They, they do great things.  So, I'm--I had a vision of retiring and enjoying visiting professor here or there.  So, I put in for retirement and immediately went to the University of Richmond (laughter).  But by the time I had gotten all my books moved and all my files set up and everything, the idea of moving year after year (laughter) was less appealing, and so I stayed there, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, you're there another--how long?
Speaker 2: I stayed all together twenty years.  But, I went as a visiting scholar and just stayed.
Story_ID: 667300
Speaker 1: I'd like for you to talk a little bit about the civic work you've done.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  You know, I've been around for a number of years and I've had an opportunity to be a part of a lot of things that have developed.  For example, I worked with the African American museum back then when Tony Binga [Anthony J. Binga, Sr.] developed the idea of an African American museum in Richmond [Virginia].  That's been years ago, has nothing to do with the building that is there now, but it was wonderful.  We had the women to come from the museum in Chicago [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs.
Speaker 2: Yes, to talk--someone from that museum to talk with us and to be able--
Speaker 1: Was this recently?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  This was years and years and years ago, yes.  So, this was one of the very important ones.  I work with a committee that finally evolved in--into the humanities institute up at University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], the VFH, the Virginia Foundation for the Humanities.  That's the name that came about later, but when they wanted to develop something like this, I was invited to be a part of that.  So, it's been wonderful to be a part of a lot of things that have evolved in, in, in this state in particular.  I've served on a number of boards for the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], Fulbright, things like that.  So--and I've, I've reviewed books for a number of publishers.  So in many ways, I've had a little something to do with developing fields, with works that come out in the fields with emotions of professors in different universities when I'm asked to be on review committees.  So, it's interesting to see that in an area that was pretty much a new area, one that people hadn't even thought about when I started this journey, I've had a chance to work in ways that have developed it.  And, and speaking about my Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I've been on the board on three occasions at Virginia State as well.  I'm on a board out at Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] now, on a black, black writing project [Project on the History of Black Writing].  And I've set up a couple of little endowments, one at Virginia State, one at Elam Church [Elam Baptist Church, Charles City County, Virginia], and one was done in my honor at the College Language Association.  So, while education is my love, my community is very important to me and I've--grateful for opportunities I've had to, to work in the community.
Story_ID: 667301
Speaker 1: We always ask this question that's related to what you're talking about.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my main concern is with education.  We have got to do something about education, school systems, particularly in urban areas.  Public schools used to be a matter of great pride.  You mentioned the high school in Washington [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.] that, you know, was nationally known, and almost all of us of older people can point to city high schools that used to be such a pride in their community and in which those students came out and competed with kids everywhere, even as I was suggesting this family in Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That is not happening as much as it should.  We have the exceptional students who, who do that, but all too many students cannot pass exams, cannot get into universities.  This whole country needs to rethink its education system.  We've got wonder- some wonderful private schools and a few special--a lot of--a lot of cities have special schools.  Like, we have our governor school [Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies] and another special school in Richmond [Virginia].  But, they aren't serving most of the African American students.  As a matter of fact, in cities like Richmond, which are largely African American, these special schools have mostly or largely white populations.  Something has to be done.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School] in Lexington, Kentucky, that is now some kind of a magnet school, a special school and black students are the minority.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So, we, we have got to do something to improve the school buildings, some of them are disastrous, to in school the--improve the faculty.  We aren't getting always the kinds of teachers we used to get because we don't pay enough, we don't--we don't prize our teachers.  And it's not to say we don't have some wonderful ones there, but we've got to improve the faculty.  And then, we have got to do things to reach students very early.  What's being formed in children before they come to school is going to have an impact on how well they do in school.  So, some of the preschool programs, we have to revamp and work on.  But, that's my major concern (laughter).  Of course, I'm concerned about politics in this country.  I'm concerned about economics in this country.  I'm concerned about a lot of issues here, but the black family and the black school student, these are some of the main issues that concern me.
Speaker 1: Has there been any, any attempt to try to figure out how to get the, the top black teachers and top teachers, period, in inner city schools?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing we have to do is to make teaching a viable vocation for people.  A few kids who might like to teach probably don't even follow through on education degrees because they know the salaries are so low.  They know that there are issues and problems that they don't want to deal with that you have to deal with in the school system now.  So, we almost have to start from the beginning to try again to make teaching the kind of career one used to be proud of and could make a living at.
Story_ID: 667302
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, all your books and research, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's interesting.  I've learned from the problems I've had.  I don't think (laughter) I'd even want to say I'd go back and eliminate them.  I've really had a wonderful career, a really wonderful career.  I wish I could've gotten into the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] when I first tried to.  Things might have been different.  My career might have been jumpstarted.  But, then, I don't know.  It might've affected what I did in terms of family planning and that sort of thing.  So, I don't look back with regret.  I don't think on anything, on anything, which doesn't mean I didn't have any problems, which didn't mean some things didn't go wrong but, you know, you learn so much and sometimes something really great comes out of what goes wrong.  I, I wish I had something really important to say here and I probably should, but I don't.  I have been so happy in my career.  I mean, I've run into terrible problems.  I mentioned, you know, the thing about the salary, racial issues have come up and so forth, but they've only made me stronger and, and they've only resulted sometimes in some work or some writing or some essay or some presentation, somewhere where I get a chance to get it off my chest and look what I wrote about it (laughter).  You know, I'm glad I did that.  And if I hadn't had this happen, I wouldn't--I wouldn't have written that piece.  So, no.
Story_ID: 667303
Speaker 1: Okay.  Likewise, when you look back at, at it all again, what today would you consider to be your major accomplishment?
Speaker 2: I think my major accomplishment is making a difference, making a difference in some schools where I've taught, making a difference in the lives of some students I've worked with, and raising a family.  I haven't talked about my family and they are very important to me, and I have been very blessed.  I was married for fifty-three years when my husband [Warren Dance, Sr.] died.  We had three children, two early on in our marriage, one a little bit later.  I have two grandchildren.  They're all very (laughter) special people.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about them.  Tell us about them.
Speaker 2: Well, my older son is Warren Dance, Jr.  He married a beautiful Ethiopian lady [Tadelech Dance] who knows how to treat a mother-in-law in the African style.  He's a lawyer for Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation].  He's in Liberia right now.  He has a son [Yoseph Warren Dance] who turned twenty-one recently who is in college at Drexel [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I don't mind them being in Liberia 'cause this is home for my grandson now and he comes to spend breaks with me.  He plays golf at Drexel.  My second son is Allen Dance.  He's a computer specialist.  He retired in his forties, does some consulting work, but without him, I could never have done these books.  He's a computer specialist.  He's over here every couple of weeks to do something for me.  He spoiled me terribly.  He's a very imaginative and creative person and he's often able to give me suggestions about setting things up and that sort of thing, to help me when I go to do lectures and need my PowerPoint and what have you.  So, the lawyer helps me with that side of the work, the computer specialist helps me with that side, and then my daughter [Daryl Lynn Dance] who is much younger is a writing specialist.  She has a Ph.D. in linguistics and she will sometimes read and offer me suggestions, and she is such a good editor of my work.  So, I raised my children to support my work and to promote it.  My second son, incidentally, has a daughter [Veronica Cumber Dance].  We don't have many names in our family.  My second son is named after my father [Allen Cumber].  His daughter is named after my mother [Veronica Bell Cumber].  My first son is named after his father.  But, it's a, a wonderful family I've been blessed with and I'm excited that for the first time, everybody will be home at some point during Christmas, not all the way through.  The African family will be here just before Christmas, but they go to Arizona so their son will have somewhere he can golf during the winter, and then they'll come back right after Christmas and be a while.  The daughter is teaching in Wisconsin now.  She'll be here from the 20th to the 6th, and the second son lives in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, congratulations, sounds like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: --great family.
Story_ID: 667304
Speaker 1: What's next?  What are you--are you working on a project now that--?
Speaker 2: I always have about several projects possibly in the works.  They may not be done.  I'll be seventy-nine soon.  But, when I did 'In Search of Annie Drew' ['In Search of Annie Drew: Jamaica Kincaid's Mother and Muse,' Daryl Cumber Dance], I was getting ready to do something I was excited about with Ellison [Ralph Ellison], and I put it aside.  I may pick that up.  But, I've got folders up there of several things I want to do.  I've got some things I've done and haven't yet published, a novel, for example.  So, whatever I'll get to work on I don't know, but I'm always working on something.  This new book is keeping me busy.  I've been having book signings.  I've gone to Paris [France] to talk about it.  I'm going to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] to talk about it.  So, I'm a little bit busy now to do anything new right away, but I've got a lot of things in the works.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't mentioned that we need to talk about or raise before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: We've covered a lot.  We've covered a lot. (Pause) But, every time--if I think of something, it's just too much to get into, so let's hear the last question.
Story_ID: 667305
Speaker 1: Okay, very simple question, not much to it.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a devotee of the word.  I love collecting the word, interpreting the word, spreading the word, that's I think what I've been doing and I'd like to be remembered as a devotee of the word as well as loving wife, mother, daughter, grandmother.  My family is first in my life, but they are a part of the rest of my life as well.  And the rest of my life has been dedicated--some people say, well, what, what do you work on?  And it seems I'm all over the place, Caribbean women, this or that or whatever.  But, really, it's my love of the word.
Story_ID: 667306
Speaker 1: My parents, Allen Cumber and Veronica Cumber [Veronica Bell Cumber].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And about what year is that?
Speaker 1: Probably, maybe somewhere around 1940.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's good.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Daryl Cumber Dance, graduation from Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in 1957.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Daryl Cumber, graduation from Virginia State in 1957.
Speaker 2: What's the article?  Oh, that's--
Speaker 1: The article is, is about my graduation, too, I think.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of me, Daryl Veronica Cumber, taken when I was almost four years old.  My mother had the picture taken and then put in the paper to celebrate my fourth birthday.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, this is you a little older, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  They are five, six, and seven, I think.  Or, no, there's just two of them, maybe six and seven, something like that.
Speaker 1: Anything else out of this book or?
Speaker 2: No, that's all I'm doing here.  Now, before that, you may want to do that picture over there.  Are you gonna do that picture?
Speaker 1: This one?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  That was before I married.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  It doesn't really--
Speaker 2: I wonder what else I have there.
Speaker 1: You have a baby picture, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.  This is Daryl Veronica Cumber, the first picture I gave to my husband to be.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  I like these--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --baby pictures.
Speaker 2: --that's another baby picture of Daryl Veronica Cumber.  I think I was close to two, and that one is how many months?  I think that's six months.  What does it say?
Speaker 1: It--there's not anything on it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, this is a--
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: --nice smile (laughter).
Speaker 2: --Daryl Veronica Cumber again, an infant picture, maybe about six months--no, four months.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says four months.
Speaker 2: Oh, it does?  Oh, okay.  Oh, it sure does.
Speaker 1: On the front.
Speaker 2: Right on the corner.  Right in the corner.  Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: This is Warren Carlton Dance [Warren Dance, Sr.] and Daryl Veronica Cumber Dance on our wedding day, August 23rd, 1958.
Speaker 2: And the picture on the other side?
Speaker 1: On the other side, my mother, Veronica Cumber, my girlfriend, Ada Gibbs [ph.], my girlfriend, Elaine Lilly [ph.], Daryl, and Warren.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Be careful.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Just anywhere in there.  Stick this--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: We don't have to do this.  Do you think this--okay.  This is the English faculty at the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia].  I am in the center.  I won't try to name all of the people, but this picture was taken 2011 or 2012.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the board at--Board of Visitors at Virginia State College in 2007.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, you call it the Board of Visitors (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this is the Board of Visitors at Virginia State College in 2015.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: This is a treatment in Fifty Plus of me talking about African American folklore in 2003.  Do I need to say my name each time?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I think it's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  That, that was all right.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me soon after the publication of 'Honey, Hush!'.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I think that's 1998.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was 1983, a picture in The Richmond News Leader, which is a now extinct Richmond newspaper.
Speaker 2: In 1974, a picture in the university news.  I do believe this is Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  All right.
Speaker 1: This was a wonderful opportunity to lecture in Japan and there I am at one of the universities in Japan at a tea.
Speaker 2: Do me a favor and take that bottom one out, too, book.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Oh, this one.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: This is 'The Lineage of Abraham: The Biography of a Free Black Family in Charles City, Virginia' [Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: 'Honey, Hush!: An Anthology of African American Women's Humor' [ed. Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 2: 'From My People: 400 Years of African American Folklore' [ed. Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: 'Fifty Caribbean Writers: A Bio-bibliographical Critical Sourcebook' [ed. Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 2: 'Long Gone: The Mecklenburg Six and the Theme of Escape in Black Folklore' [Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 1: 'New World Adams: Conversations with Caribbean Writers' [sic. 'New World Adams: Conversations with Contemporary West Indian Writers,' Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 2: And the last one is?  (Unclear) did I put it in there already?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Where did I put it?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: It was there on the floor.
Speaker 1: I thought I had one out, too.  I didn't have one out?
Speaker 2: Here it is, right here.  Okay.
Speaker 1: My first book, 'Shuckin' and Jivin'': Folklore from Contemporary Black Americans' [Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 2: Okay.  One more piece, I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you have a 'Shuckin' and Jivin'' over here.
Speaker 1: Well, take that bottom one out.
Speaker 2: And there's one here (unclear).  We forgot this one.
Speaker 1: This is 'In Search of Annie Drew: Jamaica Kincaid's Mother and Muse' [Daryl Cumber Dance].
Speaker 2: Make sure I put this one back over here (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, now, this big one.
Speaker 1: This is a collage--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a collage of articles on me compiled by Murry DePillars, dean at Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia] and an outstanding artist and art historian.
