Story_ID: 373199
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines from The HistoryMakers, an interviewer, and Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] is the videographer.  If you would state your name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: James Russelle Dumpson [HistoryMaker James Dumpson], D-U-M-P-S-O-N, and Russelle I have to add is R-U-S-S-E-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Why they put the E to it I do not know, but that's the way it's been for umpteen years.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Tell me your date of birth.
Speaker 2: April 5th, 1909.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, city of brotherly love.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what is or was your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation was a teacher, both at the elementary, high school and eventually university levels.  The last one was a university level where I was dean of the Graduate School of Social Service at Fordham University [New York, New York]
Speaker 1: All right, and what is the location of this interview?  The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: In my home, 541 North 58th Street in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I don't know today's date, why is that important (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It's January 11th [sic. January 10th].
Speaker 2: It's January the 11th, you tell me.  Sometimes I might have said the 9th or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand and seven [2007]--
Speaker 2: --the 12th, I may--the year I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's related to my birthday, birth date, my birth year, my years, so the year becomes very important.
Speaker 1: Okay so it is 2007?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2007 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 373200
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some People magazine-ish type questions, okay?  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite location for vacation?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, Cape May, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, that's an interesting one, probably corned beef and cabbage, remembering my heritage.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Favorite?
Speaker 1: Phrase?
Speaker 2: Phrase?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No I don't as I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --of it, no I don't.
Story_ID: 373201
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna begin by talking about your family lineage, and on your father's side, tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father's name is James Thomas Dumpson [James T. Dumpson], and he came from Wilmington, Delaware.  My father was a bank runner, that is, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He took money from one bank to the other or from one bank to others but it was known as a bank runner.
Speaker 1: And what year was your father born?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember his parents [Hester Dumpson and James Dumpson]?
Speaker 2: I do not, I never knew his parents at all.  I knew his brother, I knew members of his family, but I never knew his parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived in Wilmington, Delaware, and Wilmington for Philadelphia was like going to the hinterland and we never went to Wilmington.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, well, tell me more about your, your father.
Speaker 2: My father was a very conventional African American.  As far as I remember he did not go to church.  He was a hard worker, he worked, as I said, as a bank runner in Philadelphia, very quiet man, not much of a disciplinarian, I remember my father disciplining me only once in my life, and I thought the world had come to an end because he decided that he was gonna take over for my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] and discipline me, I mean by strap, something my father had never done in my life except that one time.  He was a very quiet man, not a religious man, he did not go to church with the rest of the family.  He went to work every day; that was his commitment, good house, just good family keeper.  He did what my mother told him to do, she was the ruler of the clan.  He loved her but she was the boss, and so he didn't stand out as a particularly central figure in my growing up, in my early life, except that I knew that he was the provider, he was the main provider and that I remember about him very well.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: He did not.  He came from Wilmington, Delaware, I think as I've said.  I knew nothing--I knew his sister, I knew two of his sisters, both aunts--who were my aunts whom I used to visit occasionally because one lived, had a beautiful home in New Jersey, the other lived in Philadelphia not too far from my own home.  I did not know his parents; I did not know my god- grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he spoke very infrequently about his own background.  He had a good friend, Uncle Norman [ph.], whom we called Uncle Norman, who lived at the house for a while with my family, but outside of that he had a sister whom I did know, Aunt Fannie [Fannie Dumpson], whom we used to call Aunt Fannie, I never went to Wilmington during my father's life as far as I recall.  Wilmington to Philadelphia was an outpost.  Wilmington, Delaware, who wanted to go to Wilmington, we wanted to go to New York [New York] so that I never went to Wilmington to see any of my father's ancestral equipments.
Speaker 1: What--how much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: My father I--if I recall correctly had finished probably what we then called the eighth grade.  I don't think he had been to high school although I'm not sure of that.
Speaker 1: Did your parents purchase the home that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes they did.  They pur- we lived in three different homes, one at 3942 Delancey Street in Philadelphia, we did not own that home, it was a great day when my father and mother advised us that we were going to move to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  If you're a Philadelphian, and living in those days, you knew that that was a great step up socially and so forth, and we moved to West Philadelphia to the uppity uppers as we used to call them.  And they bought that home, at first they didn't buy it, then they bought a home in West Philly where I finished my adolescence, high school and college work.
Story_ID: 373202
Speaker 1: Switch to your mother, tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother was--name was Edyth Smith Dumpson.  And you have to spell the name, her name, the way she spelled it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you spell it--
Speaker 2: --it was E-D-Y--
Speaker 1: --for us.
Speaker 2: --T-H-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not E-D-I-T-H.  My mother had been a teacher in the public school system of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and had come from a fairly well known, I won't say well known, a fairly stable family in Philadelphia and South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Had gone to what was then the teacher training school, which was really the Philadelphia Normal School [Philadelphia Normal School for Girls; Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was the official name of the teacher education program in Philadelphia, and had taught school during my very early, early life.  My mother was the--my father [James T. Dumpson] was the provider of the family, but my mother was the leader of the family, and she set the standards for all of us in terms of our education for the kind of housing we lived in, even to what my father's role was.  It was defined by my mother, and my father was one of those patient bystanders, good provider but what your mother says is the rule.  I remember my father reprimanding me only once in my life.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother was the person who set the standards in our behavior.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes I did, I knew my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Aldine Smith and my fa- grand--I always smiled when I recall this, she was Aldine Smith, my grandfather was named Johnson [ph.], he lived--they had separated years and years ago, had a good relationship.  I spent a lot of my summers with my grandfather and his new wife on 132nd Street here in Manhattan [New York, New York] and my grandmother lived--remained in Philadelphia until her death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that I knew my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Aldine, who was--died, I think, shortly after--in the early teens, early part of the century.
Speaker 1: Okay, your great-grandmother was Aldine?
Speaker 2: No, that was my grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay what grandmother--
Speaker 2: --was Sarah [Sarah Smith].
Speaker 1: Sarah?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Sarah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just clarify the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother was Aldine Smith?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Aldine, my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your great--
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother was Sarah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they were all from--
Speaker 2: Philadelphia--
Speaker 1: Philadelphia, okay.  And do you remember any stories that you can share about your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: No I don't, I can see her in my mind's eye now as if she were still alive walking in this room.  A tall lady, light skinned, light brown skin, very stately of course, Philadelphian top and bottom if you know what that means, there was nothing New Yorker about her, shall I say, a very quiet lady but a very strong forceful lady in her quietness.  When she spoke, she spoke, and you paid attention to her.  Now having said that, I really described my great grandmother, Sarah--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --is that whom you asked me about?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You asked--you hadn't asked me about my grandmother 'cause I have a different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, no, we were talking about--
Speaker 2: Sarah--
Speaker 1: --Sarah Smith--
Speaker 2: --yeah, Sarah.
Speaker 1: If you remembered anything else--
Speaker 2: At 908 Hutchinson--no, Delhi Street in Philadelphia, I remember it very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you spent time with her?
Speaker 2: I didn't spend time with her, I spent time in the environment because my grand--great-grandmother and my grandmother lived at 908 Delhi, North Delhi Street, I think it was Delhi.  We lived, and I was raised in Hutchinson Street, which was just around the block, so, it was back and forth from my mother and father's home, around the corner to my grandmother and great-grandmother's home--
Story_ID: 373203
Speaker 1: You wanted to tell me about your [maternal] grandmother, she had a different type of personality.
Speaker 2: She had a different type of personality, she was--my [maternal] great-grandmother was a tall, lanky lady, my grandmother was short, stout, and was a great kind of a disciplinarian for the whole family, unlike my great grandmother who let things go as they would.  My grandmother, Sarah--Aldine [Aldine Smith] I mean, Sarah [Sarah Smith] was my great-grandmother.  Aldine was always into everybody's business.  Telling my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] what she could do and could not do.  Telling my aunt, who lived in--block around the corner from my house, my mother's house, what she should do with her children.  She was a very active member of the family.  And always reminding us of our background, that we were Philadelphians, we were from the Smith family, there were certain things we did, certain things we did not do that were acceptable and unacceptable.  And she set the standards, if it were, for the whole family.  On my mother's side, on my father's [James T. Dumpson] side, and on my uncle and aunt's side who lived just around the corner on Delhi Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you, you say that your [maternal] grandfather--grandmother and grandfather separated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Separated, I--
Speaker 1: --and what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Edward Johnson [ph.], he lived in New York [New York], and when I began to enter my adolescence or late, middle adolescence, my mother established relationship between me and my grandfather, and I would visit my grandfather here on 132nd Street, and for summers then I came to know New York and become acquainted with the big city.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there anything special that you did with your grandfather when you would come to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not with--
Speaker 1: --city?
Speaker 2: --my grandfather, my--as, as I've probably indicated my grandfather and my grandmother natural, had separated.
Speaker 1: Right, but I'm saying when you came to New York to see your grandfather, was there anything special that you did together in the city?
Speaker 2: Not with my grandfather except that he--she, my grandmother, my new grandmother--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --had a niece who had a son who was adolescent, about my age, fourteen, fifteen, whatever, and that was when I began to see New York.  He and I would go, you know, on the ferry to Staten Island [New York], Statue of Liberty and that was when I first began to become acquainted with New York.  And then I was a high school student, I hadn't then gone to college.
Speaker 1: So let's see, now, well, okay let's go to your mother, now we talked a little bit about your mother and father.  Do you know how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about life with your mother and father.  You've already alluded to the fact that your mother was the disciplinarian and your father was not, is there anything else you'd like to share about either parent, like what traits did you get from each parent (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother was the leader--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --of the family--
Speaker 1: Did you get that trait from her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), whatever traits I have came from my mother, not from my father who was a provider, economic provider for the family, but not the leader.  The disciplinarian in the family, and there were four or five of us, was my mother--
Speaker 1: Mother, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I remember my father disciplining me only once in my whole life and that was a big day when, but my mother was the leader, my father was the provider.
Story_ID: 373204
Speaker 1: Let's go on to your young years, if you can remember, when you think about your very young years, what's your first childhood memory.
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory I think is that of our relationship with the Quakers.  We lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I was born and raised there, and as I began to think of the community as I looked back and began to know the community, I knew the leadership in the community and the providers of the community if I can put it that way, were Quakers.  And my first meaningful experience with others, other than my immediate family, was with the Quakers, who had a settlement house known as the Eighth Ward Settlement [Eighth Ward Settlement House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was just down the block from where I lived.  And through that settlement I became familiar with people whom I now know to have been Quakers.  Through whom I went to camp, my first experience at a camp was Camp Happyland, which was run by the Quakers in the Eighth Ward Settlement House.  It was my first real meaningful relationship with people who were white and not--and looked different from those whom I knew in my immediate neighborhood.  It was a very interesting and influential period in my life because as I look back on the fact that I became a social worker and my whole professional development, I really think it had its roots in my relationship with those white Quaker ladies who ran the Eighth Ward Settlement House.
Story_ID: 373205
Speaker 1: Now the 1920s is when you're growing up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the '20s [1920s], this is right before the Depression [Great Depression], what do you remember about before, and then the time when Depression would come in '29 [1929]?
Speaker 2: I, all that I remember, I should say it this way, I don't remember much about the Depression.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The family was stable as far as I knew.  We had food, shelter and clothing.  What I know about the Depression is what I learned later and what I had to teach when I became a professional in the field.  So the Depression really has had no impact on me in my memory now.  I think it probably had impact on my parents [Edyth Smith Dumpson and James T. Dumpson], who had to provide for the family.  But it was during that time as I recall, and I try to put this together in my own thinking, it was during that time that we moved from one neighborhood to the other, which was a scale upward and economically.  And how my family brought that about I'll never understand because we moved from central Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Eighth Ward Philadelphia to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and that would be the same as moving from Harlem [New York, New York] to the, out in Queens [New York] somewhere, economically and socially.  But I've never been able to understand how my family brought that about, how my parents brought that about.
Speaker 1: Right, because your father is still a bank runner and your mother is still teaching school right?
Speaker 2: My mother stopped teaching when she took on the role of family raiser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did not work.
Speaker 1: So it was left up to your father to be able to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct--
Speaker 1: --be able to do this--
Speaker 2: --that's correct.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year it was when you moved to West Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: No I don't really.
Speaker 1: Or how old you were?
Speaker 2: I was then I should say about fourteen, I would think.
Story_ID: 373206
Speaker 1: All right, now let's just step back because I need to talk about--we'd like to talk about more of your elementary school years, do you remember what elementary school you went to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, O.V. Catto [Octavius V. Catto Secondary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Say it again?
Speaker 2: O.V. Catto School.
Speaker 1: O.V. Catto--
Speaker 2: Catto, C-A-T-T-O, and O.V. Catto [Octavius Catto] turned out later in my own studies, to have been a libertarian man active in the slavery-- freedom movement back in the late '60s [1860s], O.V., Catto, C-A-T-T-O.  That school was at 42nd [Street] and Ludlow [Street] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I remember it very well because when my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] took me there to register me, lo and behold, the teacher, Mrs. Johnson [ph.], and my mother had been schoolmates in the Philadelphia school of pedagogy [Philadelphia Normal School for Girls; Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where my mother also studied to be a teacher.  And so my first teacher, Mrs. Johnson, whose name I will never forget, of course, was delighted to see a former classmate of hers bringing her oldest son to become a student under her tutelage at the O.V. Catto School.
Speaker 1: Okay, what type of school--were the students black and white, all black--
Speaker 2: No, at that time where I went to school, the O.V. Catto School was all black, and teachers were all black.  I didn't come, didn't experience an integrated school, as we call it now, until I went to West Philadelphia High School for Boys [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and besides Mrs. Johnson, what--were there any teachers that influenced you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Only Mrs. Johnson stands out in my mind, and I think she stands out because of her relationship with my mother.  They both had been in the Philadelphia school of pedagogies.
Story_ID: 373207
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you had siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: I have two sisters.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: Juanita [Juanita Dumpson] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where do you, where do you fit in?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest, okay?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of the family.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I have two sisters, Juanita and Doris [Doris Dumpson Grundy].  And I have two brothers, Roland [Roland Dumpson], who is now a Roman Catholic priest here in the archdiocese [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia], and Clarence [Clarence Dumpson] who's deceased.
Speaker 1: And tell me what you used to do as children, the type (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As children?
Speaker 1: --of, yeah, types of games or--
Speaker 2: Played on the block--
Speaker 1: --holidays--
Speaker 2: --played, went to the settlement house, just down the block from our home was the Eighth Ward Settlement [Eighth Ward Settlement House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] house that, as I've said before, was run by the Quakers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so much of our, my activities as a child was in that settlement house, where I later became one of the teachers in the settlement house, from there became part of my professional development.
Speaker 1: Was it like a community center, I mean did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --it have--
Speaker 2: --it was what we would call a community--
Speaker 1: --center--
Speaker 2: --center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: All right, so, I mean were there arts and crafts, did you--
Speaker 2: Arts and crafts, athletics, all kinds of social activities for different age groups of children.  A camp that was connected to that, that took children out in the summer to a place called Happyland [Camp Happyland], run also by the Quakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where you lived, what were--well, describe your community or your neighborhood where you lived, and the type of people, the types of professions that they might have held.
Speaker 2: Well there--I would have to talk about two neighborhoods, one was the Eighth Ward Settlement area between 8th [Street] and 10th Street and Locust [Street] and Spruce [Street], and that was my very early childhood.  I didn't know much about the people there except that they all were our neighbors and my mother's [Edyth Smith Dumpson] sister lived on the block just behind us in place called Delhi Street.  It was not until we moved to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I began to recognize a difference between the neighborhood in which I was born and the neighborhood in which I was gonna grow up through adolescence and early maturity.  And that difference was that at the Eighth Ward Settlement area, 8th and 9th Street, Locust and Spruce, that was a very poor neighborhood, it was very, it was one race, it was all African American.  When I was about twelve or whenever we moved to quote, West Philadelphia, that was a great change, socially, economically, politically, everything that one can think about change in one's life because moving to West Philadelphia was as if you had lived in Harlem [New York, New York], let me put it this way, and suddenly your family had moved to Queens [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --to a very nice home and environment.  So the change from the Eighth Ward Settlement environment and moving to West Philadelphia was a complete social and economic change in my life and in my family's life.
Story_ID: 373208
Speaker 1: After you leave O.V. Catto School [Octavius V. Catto Secondary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] do you go to high school, is there a middle school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I went to West Philadelphia High School for Boys [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: That was an interesting experience in that it was my first opportunity to be in a racially mixed environment.  My school in the Eighth Ward Settlement [Eighth Ward Settlement House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] up to the eighth grade, I was in a school that was--children were all African American, there were no such things as Latinos and there were no white children.  When I went to West Philadelphia High School was the first time we divided by boys and girls.  There was a West Philadelphia High School for Boys and an adjacent building, the West Philadelphia High School for Girls.  It was white and black, we were--well I remember my own graduating class, out of two or three hundred there were twelve African Americans in the class.  So we were a tiny, tiny minority.  And looked upon by the faculty there as very exceptional because at that time the numbers of African American boys particularly going into high school and remaining and graduating had, was very low.  So those of us who stayed through the high school and graduated were considered very exceptional, Af- people of color as they called it.  But the school was predominantly a white school, all boys, with an adjacent building to it, all girls.  We were kind of, shall I say, lionized, those of us who finished high school because there were twelve of us out of a class of three hundred some odd, when I say twelve I mean twelve African American boys.  And we were of course considered highly, highly exceptional because the dropout rate then among African American children in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was very high.  If we got to high school by the first--by the end of the first year the majority of them had dropped out for economic, family economic reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, so a lot of them probably had to go to work?
Speaker 2: They had to go to work--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and supplement their family's income.  Had nothing to do with their intellectual ability, it was an economic requirement for their families.  I was fortunate in that I didn't--my family insisted that we go to, finish high school and I, that was, my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson], as I said, had been a teacher and that was one of her goals as the mother of this family, every one of us had to finish high school at least.
Speaker 1: What were some of the activities in school or out of school during your high school years?
Speaker 2: In my high school years I was very interested in music, and I was part of the glee club, music, music was it, literary club, were two of my major interests in high school.  And I had high school professors, all of whom were white by the way, I never saw a person of color in the faculty of my high school in Philadelphia.  But there were, then, and they were men because I was at West Philadelphia High School for Boys, West Philadelphia High School for Girls was an adjacent building, who were intensely interested in the few African American boys who moved up from twelve to thirteen, I mean from grades ten, eleven, up through and graduated.  And as you went up that scale the interest in you as individuals became greater and very supportive I should say, very supportive.
Story_ID: 373209
Speaker 1: So you said in high school [West Philadelphia High School for Boys; West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that music was one of the, your favorite things?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What music are you listening to now; this is about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now?  You mean now?
Speaker 1: No, in 1923--
Speaker 2: In nineteen--I remember this music teacher, Reinhold Schmidt was his name, who was the first person to introduce me to opera, and to what we now refer to as classics.  Remember that we were--when I would go to music class, if there were fifteen boys in the room, it was an all-boys section of the high school, there would only be three of us were people of color.  And Reinhold Schmidt, whom I remember as if it were yesterday, made sure that those three of us who were people of color began to know about music written by people of color.  And that was my first introduction to, who are the people of color who have contributed to the library of music and Reinhold Schmidt himself was a singer, was very skillful in doing that.  And in doing--introducing us to it, us three African Americans who had gotten that far in school, he also, of course, was introducing those white boys to an experience that they would not otherwise, might not otherwise have had.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the, the musicians that he taught (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then we knew about Nathaniel Dett [R. Nathaniel Dett], for example, Marian Anderson, of course, who was a Philadelphian had not reached the acclaim that she later--when she was coming up and was recognized by him as one of the great artists of the country to be in the world.  The other names I don't recall, of course we knew Marian because she lived ten blocks from where I was born and raised [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Dett, Nathaniel Dett was the name that I remember--
Speaker 1: Remember.
Speaker 2: --as first time I ever heard of Nathaniel Dett was from Reinhold Schmidt, who was my high school music teacher.
Speaker 1: And you also said that literature was another favorite pastime, what were you reading at this time?
Speaker 2: That I don't remember, probably Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne], certainly no literature written by any African Americans.
Speaker 1: None--
Speaker 2: At that point.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: But the usual literary schedule of high schools, high school students.  We had a reading list, we were supposed to report on them once a month or whatever.
Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --all?
Speaker 2: --I was beginning to take piano lessons through a man named Hoekstra [ph.], I don't remember Mr. Hoekstra's first name.  But my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] saw to it that every Saturday I think it was, I would leave my house and go to my music lessons, piano lessons at Mr. Hoekstra's up on 43rd Street.  And I was then about twelve I guess, and piano became an instrument of my own choice, and from the piano I went to the organ then became church organist and all that.  But that began from my music lessons as a teenager.
Speaker 1: Radio was a--something that was in most households--not at your time?
Speaker 2: Not at my time, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 373210
Speaker 1: What other activities did you and your siblings share, what type of games did you play (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Athletics, we had, I think I remember mentioning the Eighth Ward Settlement House [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], went there regularly, I finally became coach for the basketball team and--
Speaker 1: This was in high school [West Philadelphia High School for Boys; West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, that was even before high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That was in eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay but in high school did you--
Speaker 2: In high school I left sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's interesting, in high school I had nothing to do--I won't say nothing to do with sports, I did not engage in them.  I then became the scholar, if you will, in quotation marks.  I shouldn't say that because I was on the track team as a freshman.  Yes, I was on the track team in high school as a, as a freshman.  But as I started moving through the high school experience I dropped out of sports all together.  By the time I graduated sports was not a major part of my experience as a high school student.
Speaker 1: Were you looking forward to going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, that had been instilled in me by my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] from as early as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Had you decided what school?  Was there a teacher in high school that would be supportive of you going to college and looking at your academics rather than trying to steer you to something vocational or technical?
Speaker 2: My mother was the guiding force.  My mother as I indicated, had been a teacher herself, and it so happened that in my elementary school one of my teachers had been to the school of pedagogy [Philadelphia Normal School for Girls; Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with my mother--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but in high school did she help you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: Well okay, let's talk about high school--
Speaker 2: Oh, high school--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In high school, yes, I had one teacher--there were no teachers of color in high school.  But I had one teacher who became interested in me and my interest in literature.  And he became a guide for me through my high school experience in terms of what I was--what was gonna happen at the end of the high school period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: I've forgotten his name; I was just trying to think of it then.  But he introduced me to English literature for example, to American literature.  He pointed out people in both of those fields who were people of color, and he was always sure that I would understand and recognize the contributions that had been made to American literature by people of color.  And I've forgotten his name now.  And of course that transferred to a large scale when I went into the, into college.
Story_ID: 373211
Speaker 1: So, how did you decide what school, what college you wanted to go to?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a teacher at those days, and there was a man by the name of Leslie Pinckney Hill, a great African American educator, who had been a companion with Frederick Douglass, not Frederick Douglass, it's another American, African American luminary.  But Leslie Pinckney Hill was then the president of the Cheyney Training School for Teachers, now Cheyney University of Pennsylvania [Cheyney, Pennsylvania], and it was decided--I decided, my mother [Edyth Smith Dumpson] supported it, having been a teacher herself, that I was gonna go into the teaching profession.  And I went to Cheyney and had the great fortune of becoming associated with Leslie Pinckney Hill, one of the great African American educators in this country.  And Cheyney became almost a landmark as the beginning of my professional career.  I went to Cheyney, and it was at Cheyney that I heard about and learned about Negro spirituals, for example.  It was at Cheyney that I learned about leaders in the African American history books.  It was at Cheyney that--it was at Cheyney that I became an African American in the true sense of that term.  And the roots for that, from my identification as an African American, my knowledge now of African American contribution to American culture and to world culture, began in my relationship with Leslie Pinckney Hill at Cheyney.
Speaker 1: Okay, what else stands out about your college years?
Speaker 2: Well in addition to what I just said about Cheyney and professional preparation as a teacher, there was a woman named Laura Wheeler Waring, who was our music teacher at Cheyney, and through her I became interested in, committed to music written by African Americans.  I began to know the spirituals, I began to know people like Nathaniel Dett [R. Nathaniel Dett], then later Marian Anderson who was practically a neighbor of mine in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was in college?
Speaker 2: This was in Cheyney Training--
Speaker 1: Cheyney, okay--
Speaker 2: --School, Cheyney normal school, now Cheyney Teachers College.
Speaker 1: All right, so, what happens as you begin to get ready for graduation from college?
Speaker 2: Well, to begin to get ready for graduation from college two things happened.  One, I realized that I was at a, what was then a normal school that was just becoming a teachers college, that was Cheyney, and that was part of the Pennsylvania higher education system.  I then realized that my degree from Cheyney was not gonna be enough to get me where I thought I wanted to go, where I belonged, and therefore I began to take courses at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got my first graduate degree from Temple University.  Then, of course, I was in the midst of the whole educational system and knew that that was not enough, and I had to go on and finally ended up, of course, with a Ph.D. and all the rest of it--
Story_ID: 373212
Speaker 1: You left Cheyney [Cheyney Training School for Teachers; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Temple.
Speaker 1: --what, let me see, when did you graduate from Cheyney, what year?  Do you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-two [1932].
Speaker 1: --nineteen thirty-two [1932] with what type of degree?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a degree, Temple--Cheyney wasn't granting degrees then.  I had a teachers certificate.
Speaker 1: Teachers certificate, okay.
Speaker 2: I had a license to teach in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first degree came from Temple two years later in '34 [1934].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what was your degree in?
Speaker 2: Bachelor's degree.
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: Education--
Speaker 1: Education.  Okay, and did you go straight on to get another degree or did you start to teach?
Speaker 2: I started to teach in the school system in, what's the name of that place--Pennsylvania, Oxford, Pennsylvania, why would I ever forget it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: That was quite an experience, the Oxford public school system consisted of a segregated system for the first four grades.  African American children went to a small school down the block from the main school.  I was the head teacher there and taught grades--what did I teach? She taught one--I taught the two upper grades.  I must have taught third and fourth, I don't remember which.  It was a two-room school where African American children went, and as I said, down the block was the big school, the elementary school and the high school.  We finished children at grades four, African American children, and then they went up to the main school, grades five, six and seven.  I taught three and four and my colleague taught one and two, that's the way it was.  And this was the building, about a block and a half from the main school.  I stayed in Oxford, I had finished Tem- Cheyney by then you see.  I stayed in Oxford for two or three years, I don't remember which, when I finally decided I'd had it, and that was not for me and I was gonna move on and I think that's what I came to New York [New York], I'm not sure.  I'm almost sure that's when I came to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so at this time now your love for music, the music is starting to change, now what type of music did you like in the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: In the which?
Speaker 1: In the '30s [1930s], in 1930s?
Speaker 2: Always classical. I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Always classical--
Speaker 2: --always classical I was-- Okay.
Speaker 1: --never into other than classical music.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then of course you see I'd, had taken piano lessons and Mr. Hoekstra [ph.], my school teacher--I mean my music teacher, introduced me to nothing else but classical music, and then I began, became interested in the organ, the pipe organ, became organist for the church, and there again of course was church music and the music that one plays in an Episcopal church, everything else but jazz (laughter).  So I've--was a classicist throughout my education--
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: --and experience in music.
Speaker 2: As far as literature, in the 1930s, Carter G. Woodson writes and publishes his first book, Carter G. Woodson, in the 1930s--that wasn't--tell me the type of literature, since music, you stayed with classical, what literature (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I stayed with classical music.
Speaker 2: Okay and then with literature what are you reading or, at this--
Speaker 1: Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne] and the classics, I knew nothing of African American writers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Until I--
Speaker 2: --but we're talking about college now, we're--you've just, you're at Temple--
Speaker 1: Still talking about college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're--you're in--
Speaker 1: You see--
Speaker 2: Temple--
Speaker 1: when I got to coll--
Speaker 2: --and you, you graduated from Temple in what year, 1934--
Speaker 1: I don't remember the year, '34, [1934], yes, yes, 'cause I graduated from Cheyney in '32 [1932], that's right--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so now, 1934, '35 [1935] is when you come to New York?
Speaker 1: I came to New York, I think, yes.
Story_ID: 373213
Speaker 1: Do you find a teaching position in New York [New York]?  Tell me what happens when you come to New York?
Speaker 2: I came to New York to work for the Children's Aid Society [New York, New York], the largest children--child placement--child care agency in New York, one of the largest in the country.  And I came as a case worker, and it was as if I had gone to another civilization altogether.
Speaker 1: Well how did you come as a case worker for Children's Aid Society when actually you were trained as a teacher, so how did--
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The professional qualifications in those days required that you had a bachelor's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Whether it was B.S. or A.B, we hadn't pro- completely professionalized my profession in social work, and so I was able to come to New York.  I had a bachelor's, I was a college graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And therefore I could be a caseworker.  Having been commissioner of welfare of the City of New York I look back on that and think, what a terrible thing to happen, but, it happened.  I came from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with a bachelor's degree and went into childcare, child placement--child welfare.  That of course was a complete, complete turnaround in my life, particularly professionally.  Here I was in a social work professional job, with all the challenges that that presented of identity, of associates, and so forth, and so the first thing I decided that I needed to do was to get myself a social work degree, a social work education so that I would be better prepared to do the job at Children's Aid Society that I had been fortunate enough to get, plus the fact that I had a supervisor by the name of Sarah Marnell.  Sarah Marnell was a Jewish lady, social worker, well trained, whom I had known in Philadelphia, now I don't know how I happened to know Sarah.  And she was the case supervisor at the Children's Aid Society and she encouraged me to come as a case worker at Children's Aid Society.  And thereby was a complete change of my life.
Story_ID: 373214
Speaker 1: Well, okay, when you say a complete change, you decided that you needed to get a degree in social work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --so how did you go about that, how did you accomplish--
Speaker 2: Oh then--
Speaker 1: --that?
Speaker 2: --of course with Sarah Marnell as my supervisor, and by the way I should remind myself that Sarah Marnell had been a supervisor in what we now refer to as the Department of Public Welfare in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She had been the head of one of the major offices there, district offices and I had worked there, so when I came to New York [New York], and when I came to New York I had that contact, and at the Children's Aid Society [New York, New York], Sarah Marnell was the leading supervisor, she was head of the whole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 2: --program.  So that lead me into social work, social work education and so forth.
Speaker 1: Well, did you get a degree in social work?
Speaker 2: Yes, eventually I got a degree in social work from--
Speaker 1: Where did you--
Speaker 2: Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York]
Speaker 1: From Fordham University--
Speaker 2: Fordham University, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year that was?
Speaker 2: Oh Lord, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now this was a lot different from teaching, how so?
Speaker 2: No, not necess- no not, no, not--
Speaker 1: Not really?
Speaker 2: No, social work and teaching are both concerned about human development, particularly child and family welfare, so that they're quite akin.  And my transfer from the teaching profession to the social work profession was a matter of knowledge and skills but not a focus on individuals and families.  A good teacher is concerned about families and their children.  A good social worker is concerned about families and their children.  So it was a transfer of new knowledge, seeking new knowledge, new skills, professional skills, and applying them differently than one apply--but the teaching profession and social work profession are brothers and sisters as far as I'm concerned.  In fact, I used to say that when I became the dean of the school of social work [Graduate School of Social Service, Fordham University] here in New York, that they--sister and brother professions are teachers and social workers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you stay at the Children's Aid Society?
Speaker 2: Oh, I stayed Children's Aid Society about six or seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went from a case worker there to a supervisor to a director in charge of the adolescent program, and did the first residential program for teenagers in New York City through the Children's Aid Society.  Because in those days, boys and girls of adolescent age were sent to foster homes and then we were just beginning to think about group homes as we called them then, and residential residences.  And I operated the first residential program for teenagers.  One at Brace Farms, which was a country, was a suburb of New York and then one in the Bronx [New York], which was demonstrating how you could bring children out of their homes when they needed to be out of the--and not put them in institutions, teenagers.  African American teenagers, by the way, I have to emphasize that because they went, usually went into institutional care, and I demonstrated through Children's Aid Society how you can have them in a group home with fost- with group parents living as a resident in the city, going to school like every other child went to school, and still be in the care of a child caring agency.  And that was the demonstration we did with Children's Aid Society back in, I don't know, 1953 or fif- I don't know when it was.
Story_ID: 373215
Speaker 1: Once you left the Children's Aid Society [New York, New York], what did you do?
Speaker 2: Where did I go?  I don't remember where I went from Children's Aid Society, yes I do, yes I do.  I went from Children's Aid Society to public service and became a child welfare worker of City of New York [New York] and of course eventually, as you know, became commissioner of welfare of the City of New York, the first African American to hold that position.
Speaker 1: As a, I'm sorry, what was the title?
Speaker 2: Commissioner of welfare of the City of New York.  But before I became commissioner I was the director of the Bureau of Child Welfare [New York City Administration for Children's Services].  See I was still following my child welfare interests and training, so I became bureau of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Director of--
Speaker 2: --director of BCW, Bureau--director of Bureau of Child Welfare.  And then I became deputy commissioner, and then of course, commissioner for seven or eight years.
Speaker 1: So tell me first about your, the director of the ch- of the BCW, what--as the director of BCW what were some of the changes or things that you implemented--
Speaker 2: Probably two things that I implemented there was a reorganization of the bureau, that was, that's the largest bureau, child welfare bureau, public bureau, in the country.  And one--couple of things I did as I recall, one, was to look at who these children were and to make a search for more African American and more Latino staff members who could identify with those families, the communities from which those families came, that was number one.  Number two, was increasing the professionalization of the Bureau of Child Welfare workers and the public service.  And the third one, and I remember these so clearly because they were almost my daily--bringing the public sector and the voluntary sector closer together.  If you know New York City, or knew it in those days, the voluntary sector was Catholic, Jewish and Protestant.  The Jewish agencies took care of the Jewish children, Catholic agencies took care of Catholic children and Protestant agencies took care of Protestant children.  And the public agency took care of all the rest who were neither Jewish, Catholic, nor Protestant.  And I worked very hard under the mayor, Bob Wagner [Robert F. Wagner, Jr.] at that time, to bring this system into a greater reality of what these children were gonna be like when they grew up, and they weren't gonna be Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant, and they weren't gonna be black or white, they were going to be New Yorkers, also Jewish, Catholic and Protestant, black and white.  And so one of the earmarks I think, I hope of my administration of--as commissioner of welfare was a great support and leadership of Robert F. Wagner was to have the public department become a leader in the reorganization of the child welfare system, and to break down, and I say break down knowingly, the strong walls that had been built by Jewish Federation [UJA-Federation of New York, New York, New York], Catholic Charities [Catholic Charities of New York, New York, New York] and Protestant Federation [Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, New York, New York].  Each of those three federations representing three major denominations in New York City, and once I've said Jewish, Catholic, Protestant, and I tell you that 60 percent of the children were African Americans, you say, "Well, what happened?"  Well what happened was that they get thrown, if they were Catholic, and there were very few black Catholics then, there were practically no black Jews, and the rest were Protestants, and then when you get into Protestants you know you start with Baptist and Presbyterian, Lutherans, and who were the black children?  They were Baptist and Methodist, who had the least political say in the system, who had the fewest facilities available because it was then by ethnic--by religious groups.  And so my great challenge I thought then as first director of the Bureau of Child Welfare and finally as commissioner, to somehow gradually affect a complete change and put our focus on children and their needs rather than on the religious identity that they brought into the system.
Story_ID: 373216
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year are we talking about here?
Speaker 2: We're talking now about, I don't know, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When was I--
Speaker 1: All right, we were like--okay the Children's Aid Society [New York, New York] was like 1934 and you stayed there for seven years you said?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I left out the public--the international sector, I worked for United Nations [UN].
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: United Nations?
Speaker 2: United Nations, and was assigned to Pakistan.
Speaker 1: Pakistan, okay.
Speaker 2: I lived in Pakistan for several years.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay well, let's step back then and talk about life in Pakistan.  Okay, how did you come about the position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) United, as chief--
Speaker 1: United Nations--
Speaker 2: --advisor to the government of Pakistan.
Speaker 1: You were advisor?
Speaker 2: Advisor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, no, wasn't advisor, consultant.
Speaker 1: Consultant.
Speaker 2: Consultant in social welfare to the government of Pakistan.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got into the United Nations work through a woman named Sarah Marnell.
Speaker 1: Right, you told me about her.
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well Sarah Marnell became one of the leading people in social welfare in the United Way--in the United Nations, okay?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And Sarah Marnell had followed my career--
Story_ID: 373217
Speaker 1: Now, you accepted this position to go to Pakistan.  So tell me about life in Pakistan.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Make my reservation for tomorrow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went there as advisor to the government in child welfare and my experience there with the government and with the community for the academic community and the community at large led to my, of course, teaching at what they then had as in social welfare, and child welfare which was very meager in terms of what they needed.  And I suppose, as I look back on it, my real contribution was helping them set up a school of social work with an emphasis on family and child welfare in Lahore [Pakistan] and in Dhaka [Dhaka, Pakistan; Dhaka, Bangladesh] and then in Karachi [Pakistan], the three major cities of that country.  It was my first international experience.  I'd never been out of the country to work and I must tell you it was probably the richest professional experience I ever had in my life, or ever can have.
Speaker 1: What made that so?
Speaker 2: First of all, the commitment of the United Nations [UN] to developing countries and by commitment. I mean not only verbal commitment, but material commitment, money and staffing.  Secondly the eagerness and acceptance of the Pakistani people themselves, recognition of their need to get on board with their social develop- educational development and social welfare.  And number three was the commitment of the people whom we trained, who are now the social work leadership in that country.  Without those three parts we could have done nothing, and Pakistan would not be where it is in the league of nations of social welfare and social development.  That was probably the richest experience that I've ever--will ever have in my life, of working in a new culture, African American among Asians, fear of the United States in that country, not spoken of course, but fear, some of it envy.  Misunderstanding of who we are as Americans, suspicion about race relations in this country, and here's a black man coming to our country, a Christian in a Muslim country.  All of those conflicting contributions in the picture, and the United Nations, and then America, and then the Muslim world, coming together or being in surroundings, in which you then are going out to help them set up a social welfare education program.  It was quite a, as I look back on it, probably one of the richest challenges that anybody could possibly have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did it with the help of the government in Pakistan, with the support of the United Nations social development department [Commission for Social Development], but most importantly with the people, the family--leadership, the families of--who were all Pakistani in Karachi and Dhaka, and Lahore.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for, for about a year, is that right?
Speaker 2: I was there two years.
Speaker 1: Two years?
Speaker 2: And then I've gone back periodically.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so we're really now in 1953, you were there from 1953 to 1954?
Speaker 2: That was the official of the United Nations; I'm still there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I'm just saying this is when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, officially, yes--
Speaker 1: --first went--
Speaker 2: When I first went was '53 [1953] to '54 [1954]--
Speaker 1: --fifty-four [1954]--
Speaker 2: That's correct--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 373218
Speaker 1: You came back to the United States [from Pakistan], and that's when you took on the position of welfare commissioner?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so talk about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, talk about that, Bob Wagner [Robert F. Wagner, Jr.] was then the mayor, and I then was director of the Bureau of Child Welfare [New York City Administration for Children's Services] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, we, yeah we actually talked about that, but, okay, you said that you were the director, and then you went on to be the deputy commissioner?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then the commissioner--
Speaker 2: Then the commissioner [of the New York City Department of Social Services].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: BCW [Bureau of Child Welfare; New York City Administration for Children's Services], that's right, as commissioner, which you, well deputy commissioner, that's not much to talk about.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: As commissioner, it was in an administration headed by the mayor, Bob Wagner, the largest public welfare department in the United States, the first time that a person of color had held that kind of position as head of the largest public welfare department in the United States. The political differences between the Democratic regime in New York [New York] and the Republican regime in Washington [D.C], with public welfare being part of the public--the United--the national system, getting much of its directive, most--a large part is money from federal government in addition to state and city government, and being a black man heading the largest public welfare department program in the United States.
Speaker 1: What obstacles were there at that time?
Speaker 2: Well there were the obstacles, number one, of the non-acceptance of the need for government to provide help to people who were poor; that is number one.  United States has always been a country that believed on self-support, private initiative, and here we were heading the largest public department helping people with bread and butter and housing in the United States.  And that was a cultural diversion, then it was headed by a black man, who was a social worker, and who happened to be a Roman Catholic.  When you put all those three things together, you had a potpourri that wasn't very attractive.  But we turned out, I think, under Bob Wagner and the wonderful staff I had, the largest public welfare staff in the country, to demonstrate, one, the need for public intervention for people in need, for government support, for people in need in addition to private philanthropy, for looking for leadership, top and bottom of the largest public welfare program in the world, irrespective of race or color, and accepting of public responsibility in this country, in this state, in this city for people who are in need and that public intervention along with voluntary and not for profit intervention--non-profits in addition to public--in addition to not for profit that government has a responsibility, and that responsibility must be carried by people who are trained, committed to public policies that relate to people and their needs.
Speaker 1: All right, so you were in that position from '59 [1959] to '64 [1964], is that right?
Speaker 2: Oh no I was in that position, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953].
Story_ID: 373219
Speaker 1: And then I went, came out and went back after I was dean--was the dean at Fordham University [New York, New York].  Didn't I go back a second time?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so do you become--do you work with the human resources administration [New York City Human Resources Administration] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the same thing.
Speaker 2: It's the same job--
Speaker 1: Oh it's the same thing, I see what--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --one was the department of welfare [New York City Department of Social Services].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then the human resources administration, same program, same function--
Speaker 2: Oh same, okay--
Speaker 1: --same except we changed names.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (laughter), all right.
Speaker 1: Department of welfare became the department of human resources--
Speaker 2: Resources--
Speaker 1: --HRA [New York City Human Resources Administration].
Speaker 2: I got you, okay, so now are you teaching at all?
Speaker 1: No, not this year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not at--
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: --not at all--
Speaker 1: --no, then I went on--
Speaker 2: So we go to Fordham--
Speaker 1: Went to Fordham as, well, before I went to Fordham--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, and--
Speaker 1: Hunter College.
Speaker 2: --this was what, in--
Speaker 1: Oh the year, you got me now.  But I was the dean at Hunter, City University [City University of New York, New York, New York], and I went from there to Fordham.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As professor and dean.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, you wanna talk about your experience as the dean at Hunter?
Speaker 1: At Hunter I was part of CUNY, of City University, in both spots, both Hunter and Fordham, although I'll say something in addition about Fordham.  I think I was one of, if not the first, one of two or three black people who had been deans of univers- deans of schools of social work with the exception and I make, this is important, with the exception of Howard University [Washington, D.C], a black university, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] didn't have a department of social services yet, so I guess I have to say with the exception of Howard and Atlanta, Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] didn't have a school of social work.  So I was the first black dean in the United--in schools of social work with the exception of Howard and Atlanta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atlanta University, okay.
Speaker 1: And the largest public welfare department, the largest--one of the largest deanships in the country, Fordham University.  There was a lot of take about that at the time as I look back on it, now nobody thinks about it.
Speaker 2: What was the talk?
Speaker 1: Well, it was a black man, who incidentally happened to be a Roman Catholic, wasn't a Baptist, wasn't a Lutheran, wasn't a Presbyterian, wasn't any of those religious groups that had helped build social welfare in this country.
Speaker 2: Oh, about, what about Fordham University?
Speaker 1: Well that was it, they'd gone to Fordham and Fordham's a Roman Catholic institution.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Of course they would accept him, but the fact that he was Catholic had nothing to do with it, you know the Catholics have not always been the most liberal, and so Fordham is unusual, happen to be a Jesuit university and they're among the most liberal of liberals, and certainly within the Catholic community the most liberal.  But they'd forgotten what had been left aside, was that before I went to Fordham as the dean, I had been the dean at a public school of social work, Hunter College.
Speaker 2: Right so what--how was the transition from a public institution to a private?
Speaker 1: Well it was my own choice, I was offered the deanship and I went to it.  The--Hunter College was part of the city university, part of CUNY.
Speaker 2: Well what did you see in the differences in the schools?
Speaker 1: Well, first of all the structure, the administrative structure.  At Hunter I was part of government, I had a commissioner of welfare to keep in mind, I had a mayor to keep in mind, I had the political attributes to keep in mind.  When I went to Fordham, I was going to one of the largest private schools in social work in the United States that had its roots in the Jesuit priesthood community, Fordham is a Jesuit university, a faculty that was largely, was almost exclusively white.  And a private institution, where I couldn't rely on government, you know, protection of all the rules and regulations that government employment gives you that not, not-for-profits doesn't give you.  So it was a completely different structure, and in those days outside of Howard University, and Atlanta, there were no black people in deanships.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this was new, and then this was a Roman Catholic institution.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A Jesuit institution.
Story_ID: 373220
Speaker 1: Let's step back for a minute and talk about the social climate of the nation.  In the '60s [1960s], civil rights, were you active in civil rights at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: N, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, NAACP, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember--
Speaker 2: --went to all the marches in the city and I sat in and I was arrested.
Speaker 1: Where would--where did you march--
Speaker 2: Right here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: In New York, and sit-ins?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Here, here in New York?
Speaker 2: In New York City?
Speaker 1: And why were you arrested?  What sit--
Speaker 2: Oh I don't--we did--
Speaker 1: --in, or--
Speaker 2: --something and violated the rules of the City of New York, was arrested, stayed in jail overnight.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when Kennedy was killed?
Speaker 2: I remember it, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what you were thinking at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I just remember the tragedy and that Kennedy was killed.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was out of government by that time, I guess I was dean at Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] then, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: What about Vietnam [Vietnam War], what was--at that time you were probably a dean and the unrest and the things that were going on in the institutions or the universities, what was your thought as a dean about the student unrest?
Speaker 2: Well remember I had lived in Vietnam, I lived, I had worked in Vietnam for the United Nations [UN].
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I--
Speaker 1: --we didn't talk about that--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --we talked about Pakistan.  When did you go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I went to Vietnam, I was in Vietnam as a consultant to the government of Viet- no, consultant to the United Nations, I had two assignments with the United Nations, one had been in Pakistan, and one was a short-term assignment in Vietnam.  And I was torn pretty much because I had some--torn in my thinking, and identity because I had developed some relationships in Vietnam, and when the Vietnamese--when the war came I had to take a side.  And I had friends there and I was really torn between my allegiance as an American and my allegiance to my friends and colleagues in Vietnam.  How I came through that I don't even remember, but it was not a good experience.  But I help set the school up, school of social work up in Vietnam and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had a school of social work in Vietnam back--
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember--
Speaker 1: --in that day?
Speaker 2: --yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  There's no place that I go if they don't have school social work.  They aren't gonna have a school of social work.
Speaker 1: Okay so as a dean in the universities, how are you dealing with the students?
Speaker 2: Fine, there is no--of course, remember I was--this is all in New York City.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I had been commissioner of welfare, I was first black to hold that position, by that time the acceptance of blacks into any spot in the structure of New York City was not unusual, you know, we could have become the mayor at that time, in fact, we became the mayor, in fact we became the mayor after that.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: So the climate of New York City was quite different from the climate of other parts of the country.  We'd had, saw the mayor of--what's his name, I knew him so well, what was his---
Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Which--oh, in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]?
Speaker 2: Dinkins, Dave, we'd had Dave Dinkins as our mayor and we have had mayors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, but that's later on though, we're still--
Speaker 2: That's later on--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: --but there had to be preparation for that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: That didn't just happen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, you're right.
Speaker 2: And there had been leadership in the city council, there had been leadership activity, there'd been the NAACP, there'd been the Urban League in New York [New York Urban League], there'd been all kinds of community inputs into changing attitudes in New York City, that when Dave came to run for mayor a lot of groundwork had been done in terms of acceptance.  But it's true in terms of my own field that was not true.  I was appointed to commissioner of welfare as a black man in a white administration (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 373221
Speaker 1: We're still talking about the civil rights era, do you remember--were you involved in or did you attend the march in Washington [March on Washington] or do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to the march in Washington.
Speaker 1: Do you, can you--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that experience--
Speaker 2: I remember very well, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --remember where I stood.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And I remember how close I was to the rostrum, and I remember the March on Washington very, very, well.
Speaker 1: Well, well tell me about it.
Speaker 2: Well I just remember hordes and hordes of people.  I remember being almost as close to the rostrum, oh, as I am down the hall.  I was down, of course, on the ground level.  I can see the speaker, what's his name, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], almost could touch him, that close to him.  I don't remember much of what he said, but I remember the experience of being in Washington [D.C.], with all these people and being that close to the March on Washington.  I remember marching to the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.], I don't remember marching away.  It's all kind of vague, that's a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Right, do you remember when he was assassinated, when King was assassinated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember that only historically--
Story_ID: 373222
Speaker 1: --After Fordham University [New York, New York], is it the Health and Hospital Corporation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Health and Hospital Corporation [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, New York, New York] as chairman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of the board.
Speaker 1: You were the chairman of the board?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was chairman of the board.
Speaker 1: And what did you accomplish (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You see Health and Hospital Corporation is a government agency that administers all of the public hospital system in the City of New York [New York].  And provides some funds to the not, for the not-for-profits.  It is the, well you know we have a department of education [New York City Department of Education], okay, we have a department of health [New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene], we have a department of sanitation [New York City Department of Sanitation], health and hospitals is a department of hospitals, if you will.  And we had, I've forgotten how many hospitals, public hospitals, in HHC, in addition to contracts with almost all of the not, all of the not-for-profit hospitals.  Health and Hospital Corporation is the central hospital administrative and financing organization in the City of New York.  I've forgotten how many hospitals we had that were part of HHC, as we called it, and that is administratively they follow the rules and regulations of the chairman and the board.  But in addition to that the Health and Hospital Corporation has contracts with other than those eleven or twelve hospitals, so if you are ill and you go to the Lutheran hospital [Lutheran Medical Center; NYU Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York], you can be paid for by the City of New York, through HHC's contract with the Lutheran hospital.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So in a sense the chairman, the board and chairman of HHC, Health and Hospital Corporation, really is the overall structure for hospital--
Story_ID: 373223
Speaker 1: You were talking about the Health and Hospital Corporation [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, New York, New York] and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's fine, so, was there anything else you wanted to say about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yes, let me say this, let me share this with you.  Health and Hospital Corporation has two major functions.  It runs, I think eleven or twelve hospitals, and when I say runs them, it's the administrative structure for the public hospital system in New York City [New York, New York].  In addition to that function, it has contracts with the whole voluntary hospital system, not-for-profits, whether Catholic, Jewish or Protestant, in that they have contracts so that if you are ill and you go to Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York], that's not one of the HHC's hospitals, but your care can be paid for through Health and Hospital Corporation with the contract that we had, have with Presbyterian Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's really the overall, it has two parts to it, it runs its own system, that's public hospitals, Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] for example.  Is a Harlem, is a health, HHC hospital run by Health and Hospital Corporation, of which I was the chairman.  Or if you went to Presbyterian Hospital, or Catholic, St. Barnabas Hospital [New York, New York], you could be taken care of there and the Health and Hospital Corporation through the city could pay for your care there.  So, you see we have a public and a voluntary hospital system.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the HHC is the, was the, is the organization that finances all of the health, all of the 11 or 12, 13, I've forgot what it is public hospitals and provides funding to the not-for-profit hospitals, the public, Catholic, Presbyterian, whatever, so if you're sick and you don't have the money, you can go to Presbyterian and be cared for because the city will pay for it through HHC.
Story_ID: 373224
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of your publications.  You wanna tell me about them?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember what they were.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You don't?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No I don't, do you have any--which ones do you wanna talk about?  I don't remember them.
Speaker 1: I don't have any names.
Speaker 2: You got a listing of them and that will--
Speaker 1: Not by names, let's see--
Speaker 2: I know I did one with--
Speaker 1: Teaching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carten [Alma J. Carten], Carten.
Speaker 1: Carten, okay.
Speaker 2: I did one I think with, what's his name down at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Do you remember what it was about?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that was a collection of papers.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: All that isn't listed there?  I would recall--there are things--at least think--I think of least.
Speaker 1: Well you did a social welfare training project right, with the ministry of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Say that again?
Speaker 1: Social welfare training project?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what that was about?
Speaker 2: No, when was that?
Speaker 1: That was a while ago.
Speaker 2: Let me see that, I can help you.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean that's okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 1: --if you can't remember it--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --it's okay.  All right, let's go ahead and talk about after you left the Health and Hospital Corporation [New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what was next?
Speaker 2: After I left Health and Hospital Corporation, I left, haven't done anything since then, except I've continued my relationship, of course, with Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, this, this present academic year I'm not teaching, this is the first academic year that I haven't taught at Fordham.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nor have I taught at CUNY [City University of New York, New York, New York], at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York].  I've been part-time teacher at each of those places, I've joined--gone to seminars, given seminars at Hunter, I've given seminars at Fordham, I'm still known as a, as professor at Fordham.  And, I'm on their payroll as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 373225
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Thailand project?
Speaker 2: I went to Thailand under the auspices of the United Nations [UN] to look at what they needed in terms of social welfare education.  And in terms--in order to do that I had to know something about the social, economic and political structure of Thailand before I could talk about the needs of the agency serving the population and then get to what it was we, they needed to do in terms of improving the training of social workers to meet those needs.  And that was a United Nations assignment to go to Thailand and spend some time there examining the government services that were available, the not-for-profit services that were available, and to what extent were they adequate or inadequate, and what recommendations would I make to improve them to meet the needs of the people of Thailand.  That in a nutshell is what that Thailand project was about, and as I said was United Nations sponsored and financed and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, it seems that you've been to a number of places, what other countries have you worked in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Africa of course.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I understand that you were made a king in one of the African cities--
Speaker 2: Well, not a--
Speaker 1: --was it Ghana?
Speaker 2: --king, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, well tell me about that experience, this was in Ghana, was that--
Speaker 2: In Ghana.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am still a, what is the title, Ghana--
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  Nana.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  He was made a nana.
Speaker 2: Nana, I was made a nana in Ghana.  I went to Ghana several times, in fact that's one of my closest associations.  I went at the ex- invitation of the government of Ghana through the United Nations.  And I went as a consultant to them to help them in their development, in the further development 'cause they already had one, of this social work education program.  And, in fact I went to Ghana several times, successfully I think, effectively I hope, in helping them reorganize social welfare education programs in the country.  And it was on one of those trips to Ghana that I was made a nana.  A nana is, well if you were British you become a duke or a, what are the other offices of--it's an honorary position, honorary title assigned to an outsider if you were an insider you would be, you know, a revered patron of the country.  And so I was made a nana in Ghana, I've forgotten the year.  It's a title, if ever I were to go back, I've been back twice since I was made a nana, and that's the title they address you as, nana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: N-A-N-A.  It was quite a celebration, quite a festivity and quite a holiday for them.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure that we--talking about degrees going back, I'm not sure we talked about where you got your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Where did I get my Ph.D.?  Let's just say that I forgot now, I've got--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was it Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Did you get it at Fordham?
Speaker 2: At Fordham yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: Yes, Fordham.
Speaker 1: All right, outside--
Speaker 2: Oh it was at New School [The New School for Social Research, New York, New York], wait a minute, I don't remember now, I could go in there and look on the wall.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll look on the wall before you leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was either Fordham or The New School.
Speaker 1: Okay, what other countries have you been to, were there other countries in Africa besides Ghana?
Speaker 2: No, that I've worked in, no.
Speaker 1: Well did you just visit?
Speaker 2: Oh, I visited, oh, so many countries, South Africa for one, what's the one on the east coast of Africa, the big city, oh I've forgotten.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Ghana's on the west coast.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I remember that part.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other countries besides Africa, you know, that we haven't talked about 'cause we know that you've been to Vietnam and Thailand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been to Vietnam, of course--
Speaker 1: --and Pakistan.
Speaker 2: Pakistan, Italy.
Speaker 1: Italy--
Speaker 2: As a Roman Catholic I would have to go to say hello to the pope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: England of course, France, Portugal and Spain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Norway, oh my goodness don't tell my Norwegians that I didn't remember I've been to their country several times.  That's it, England, France, Germany, Norway, Spain.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I spent no time in Portugal.
Story_ID: 373226
Speaker 1: How did you get out of not going into the [U.S. military] service (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Good question, I didn't get into the service, I--you know that's a, that recalls for me.  I was exempt from the service because I was a child welfare worker at the Children's Aid Society of New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I had just set up for Children's Aid Society the first residence for adolescents.  And I was eligible for the draft, so, you know, and Children's Aid Society said to me, "You can't leave this new project that you've just started."  It was the first residence for teenagers, so you used to put teenagers--have to step back a bit, when teenagers had to be placed outside of their own homes, they were put in foster homes.  Well, putting a fourteen or fifteen year old in a foster home just wasn't working.
Speaker 1: So they wanted you to stay there to make sure that that program ran (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That program, that's right.  So I was exempt--
Speaker 1: Exempt--
Speaker 2: --from the draft because I had just set up the residence for teenagers in the Children's Aid Society.
Speaker 1: Now you told me that you were a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], what were some of the things that you did, activities with them?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, the--
Speaker 1: You don't remember?
Speaker 2: --NAACP is way back--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just--
Speaker 1: What about the Urban League [National Urban League] then?
Speaker 2: Urban League I was more interested, more active with what's his name, the great director of Urban League, and I see him in my mind's eye, executive director of the Urban League--Young, Whitney [Whitney Young].
Speaker 1: Whitney Young.
Speaker 2: Whitney and I were great friends.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we were personal friends.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet Whitney Young?
Speaker 2: I met Whitney here in New York.  He and his wife [Margaret Buckner Young], and I was very active with the Urban, National Urban League when Whitney was executive director.  And we went to several conferences together and we were really great pals.  I knew Whitney very, very well.  I was very moved when he drowned, as you may recall it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Out swimming one day.  But yeah, Whitney and I were, I'm trying to think of anybody else in the National Urban League with whom I, no one that I'd been as close to as I was with Whitney.  He and I were buddies.
Story_ID: 373227
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the awards that you have been--that have been bestowed on you besides becoming a nana.
Speaker 2: I don't know how many doctorates I don't have--I have, four or five, six, seven, probably the one that, the two that meant the most to me have been Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And Tuskegee, for a couple of reasons, I had always revered Tuskegee as an institution, and when I was asked to accept an honorary doctorate from Tuskegee it had more to me--more meaning not only because it was a doctorate but because it was from Tuskegee.  Similarly I would say for Howard University because I knew Howard, I knew Howard's school of social work, from the dean and I, of Howard, were great friends.  The president of Howard at that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was?
Speaker 2: --I knew very well.
Speaker 1: Was who?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that--
Speaker 1: Remember, okay--
Speaker 2: --now.  The dean I know, or I remember, was a woman and that was unusual in those days.  The other honorary degrees or honorary doctorates I've had have been honors, but I had no, I didn't have the same kind of relationship with the university that gave it to me.  Except Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York], of course when Fordham gave me an honorary doctorate I had been the dean there, had been on the faculty and so forth.  But the other honorary doctorates were just, I don't know, they needed somebody to give an honorary doctorate to and they needed a black face to include in their doctorates that year, and I was fortunate to be the guy.
Story_ID: 373228
Speaker 1: Continuing to talk about organizations, if we narrow down things that were going on here in New York, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.], when he first became, do you remember anything about that time?
Speaker 2: No, I remember, of course, and knew Adam Clayton Powell very well.  I had, I was just a beginner, shall I put it that way, in the profession when Adam Clayton Powell was around.  I worked more closely with Adam's son [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] than I did with Adam Clayton Powell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell was somebody over there that I knew and that was, that was it.  I was quite young then, professionally, and, and, chronologically too.  So I did--I--he's a, was a veteran to me, was an image to me.  His son, what was his name, Adam Clayton, Jr. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junior--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I worked more closely with the Urban League of New York City [New York Urban League] and certain, upper local groups.
Speaker 1: Okay was there anybody else here, locally that you worked with?
Speaker 2: The mayor, first black mayor we had, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]--
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Dinkins.
Speaker 1: David, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: David and I were very close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you work on any committees with him, or--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --well, David was the mayor I was, that was part of my commissionership--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right--
Speaker 1: --I was commissioner of human services [New York City Department of Social Services], and, I'm trying to think of the president, these people's names have slipped me.  Member of the city council--no the--what was the woman's name who was borough president?
Speaker 2: Woman.
Speaker 1: Motley [Constance Baker Motley]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Motley.
Speaker 2: Motley, and then more recently, Motley was back in David's time.  Oh, Virginia, Virginia Fields [C. Virginia Fields].
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  Virginia Fields--
Speaker 2: Virginia Fields okay.
Speaker 1: I was very--worked very closely with Virginia.  I was--worked very closely with David, David Dinkins.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And the borough president, what's his name, I've forgotten those names now--
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Percy Sutton.
Speaker 1: Percy Sutton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But when you leave government and move into retirement, you forget them.
Story_ID: 373229
Speaker 1: You married?
Speaker 2: Married.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: What, the year?  I don't know that (laughter)--
Speaker 1: How long have you been married?
Speaker 2: For umpteen years.  Just came back from visiting with my wife, my son-in-law and I and my daughter just came back from Hawaii where we visited with my wife.
Speaker 1: She's in Hawaii you say?
Speaker 2: She lives in Honolulu [Hawaii], yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: She's in practice; she's in the nursing field.  She teaches nursing and--at--for the government in Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: How long we been back?
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  A couple weeks.
Speaker 2: A couple weeks ago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: Here in New York.  Here in New York.
Speaker 1: How did you meet her?
Speaker 2: We belonged to a group, a club, Just Us Guys and Gals, known as the JUGGs, JUGGs Inc. and the purpose of the JUGGs, very interesting as I think of it, the purpose of the JUGGs was to find young black talent that was ready to be presented in recital at Town Hall [The Town Hall, New York, New York].  Now, are you a New Yorker?
Speaker 1: I was born and raised here, but I live in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Oh, but you may remember that if you were a professional singer or, instrumentalist professionally and you were--before you were able to be managed by a managing company and go on tour, you had to be presented at Town Hall at your debut recital.  And that's when I first knew some of these people we've talked about.  And that's when I was very active with a group named, the JUGGs, J-U-G-G-S, Just Us Guys and Gals.  And our mission was to find young black artists whom we would present in their formal recital at Town Hall.  And we have a number of artists who, black artists, all of whom were presented in their debut recital at Town Hall on 43rd Street.
Speaker 1: And so you both worked on that committee?
Speaker 2: That was what JUGGS was about, Just Us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --Guys and Gals, we had a party every now and then, of course, we had dances up in Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, New York, New York] and, you know, but our main function was identifying young, up and coming artists who would be presented in their formal debut recital at Town Hall.
Speaker 1: So that's where you met your wife?
Speaker 2: That's where I met Goldie [Goldie Dumpson], yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I was gonna ask you what was her name.
Speaker 2: Goldie.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one daughter, and her husband's sitting over there behind you.
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, and what is it--what's your daughter's name and your son (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jeree [Jeree Dumpson Wade]--
Speaker 2: --in-law.  Okay, and your son-in-law?
Speaker 1: There he is, what's your name?
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Adam [HistoryMaker Adam Wade].
Speaker 1: Adam himself is an actor and singer, by the way, my daughter is a singer and Adam is a singer and actor and producer.  Like when are you going--aren't you leaving soon?
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Yes, the end of next month.
Speaker 1: End of next month--
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Going to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: He's going on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Three month tour is it?
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Six months.
Speaker 1: Six month tour.
Speaker 2: And he's gonna be in 'The Color Purple,' is that right?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: He's gonna be in 'The Color Purple' in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Oh is that--yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 373230
Speaker 1: What presidents have you met or worked for or advised?  Do you remember working with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What are the--
Speaker 1: --Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]?
Speaker 2: Kennedy I was appointed to--that's on the wall inside there--when Kennedy was president I was very active in work against narcotics.  We had quite an epidemic in this country of youngsters, teenagers getting involved with narcotic drugs.  And he set up a commission against narcotics [President's Advisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug Abuse], and I was appointed to that commission, and of course, met with the president several times.  I don't know of another president other than that one, with whom I've had any close contact.  I've been on commissions named by them but I never even saw the president, was sworn in and that was that.
Speaker 1: All right, when you look back over your life, tell me what is the most important thing that you feel you have done?
Speaker 2: Hm, the most important thing is help rear a daughter [Jeree Dumpson Wade] who's the limelight of my life and her husband's [HistoryMaker Adam Wade] life, her mother's [Goldie Dumpson] life, a great human being, talented with her own--in her own right, and I would say a beacon light for a lot of other people who look at her, watch her and her--and she and her husband pursue their own profession in the theater.  After my family, I would say the greatest thing that I'm most grateful for is having become a social worker.  Because it was through that profession, my profession that all these other things I've talked about have come about.  It was in response to my commitment and my responsibility, my commitment to the profession and my responsibility as a social worker that all these things that you have written down there on paper and so forth have evolved.  They would not have happened, they would not need to have happened, the doors for their happening would not have opened, been opened if it hadn't been my--for my commitment to my profession to the tenets of my profession, to my vocation as a social worker.  Whether it was teaching, whether it was foreign or in another country, whatever it was, it started with my commitment as a social worker.  And that would--that's where--that was the foundation, that was the rock, that was the mission that says, "Go forth and do it this way, that way."  You know, "Relate to these people, don't relate to those people, be a Democrat and not a Republican," (laughter) yeah.
Story_ID: 373231
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important?
Speaker 2: Oh, honesty, that's one.  It's come back to honesty again.  One of the values, what values, what's the rare values that I could--I can't even think of values now.
Speaker 1: Well, you said honesty, why is that so important to you?
Speaker 2: No, that's important.  There was a--who was it who said, "To thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man," [Polonius in 'Hamlet,' William Shakespeare].  So honesty, first of all being true to one's self is very important.  All others come from honesty, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: To thine own self be true, then you get to the points of loyalty, and spiritual commitment and--but they all come from being honest with yourself.  Who are you and what do you stand for, and whatever you stand for has to be honest to yourself, to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man.
Speaker 1: Tell me Dr. Dumpson [HistoryMaker James Dumpson], do you have grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Do I have?
Speaker 1: Grandchildren?
Speaker 2: No grandchildren.
Speaker 1: No grandchildren yet, but this interview is gonna be seen by future generations, what would be your message to the future generation?
Speaker 2: I just said it, to thine own self (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Be true?
Speaker 2: --be true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man.  And if you're true to yourself that takes into your profession, that takes in to what your religious convictions if you have any, maybe you don't have any, be true to yourself.  That would take into, all those things like marriage and fatherhood and motherhood, citizenship, but to thine own self be true.  And it may say, I'm never gonna marry, I'm never gonna have children, or I'm gonna have children, I'm not gonna get married and have any children, I'm gonna be religious or I'm gonna be an atheist.  But to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man.
Story_ID: 373232
Speaker 1: I know that your concern and your life's work around social work and understanding children and, you know, how they live--what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns, my concern is, and therefore my hope, that the American society will provide all the opportunities that every child needs in order to realize his or her own fulfillment.  Now that's a broad mandate.  Each child is endowed with certain capabilities and certain limitations, certain hopes.  Each child, black, white, Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, each child has that potential, and for each child I would hope that society would provide those opportunities and those resources beginning with parental guidance and richness that will make it possible for that child, individually, to achieve his or her own potential.  And there are a lot of potentials, there are some children who can't go beyond the fifth grade and there're some who could get Ph.D.s.  There are some could be great actors, great singers and there're some who'll just be ordinary good parents.  But whatever their potential, that society will assure that that child achieves his or her potential.  White, black, Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, none of the above, but that that potential be there for every--that's every child's right.  And it's every individual's, our responsibility to make sure that that right is observed and realized.
Story_ID: 373233
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life would you change anything, would you have done anything differently?
Speaker 2: No, not at all, not at all.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: No, every turn I've made, every place I've been, every job I've been in, every person with whom I've related, I wouldn't change a thing.
Speaker 1: So, if you haven't, if you wouldn't change anything and your life has been very fulfilled, how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I really hadn't thought of leaving yet (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We don't want you to leave, but, you know, we have two questions.  One is what legacy would you like, you know, what do you want your legacy to be and how do you wanna be remembered.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: They're really two different questions, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're different questions.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The legacy is done, is made.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 2: I'm not gonna do much else.  You know I've been a teacher, a government official, a father, a--that's the legacy.
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: That's given.
Speaker 1: --that's why I said how do you wanna be remembered, meaning, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: He was a good guy.  He was someone whom I could trust, someone who, pardon me, who understood my situation, whatever that was.  Someone who was entitled to whatever good things people say about him, and fail to remember those things that may not be good, because as a human being I have good and bad.  And, the good we leave behind us and that's what I hope people will remember.  The bad I hope goes when I go, that would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to speak about?
Speaker 2: No, let me ask my son-in-law [HistoryMaker Adam Wade].  Is there anything you think I should have talked about that I haven't talked about?
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  Not to my knowledge, it was very informative for me.  I learned things about you that I didn't know before.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Well, if there's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think that's--
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: I just hope that five years from now that you'll come back and have this interview again.
Speaker 1: And I hope so too, and I hope to be here to do it.
Speaker 2: Okay that's why I said, I hope you'd come back five years from now to do it.  I will have learned a lot in the next five years that I will look at my life experiences and share differently than I have now.  I will take out some of the things that I've said that you and I thought important today because I will replace them by some other things that've become more important.
Story_ID: 373234
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Picture of my mother.
Speaker 2: What is her name?
Speaker 1: Edyth Frances Dumpson [Edyth Smith Dumpson].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I don't believe that.
Speaker 2: It's amazing that you still have a picture of--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: It's amazing that you have a baby picture.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sure is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is James R. Dumpson [HistoryMaker James Dumpson], myself as an infant.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right, this is a picture of His Eminence, Cardinal Spellman [Francis Spellman].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  O'Connor [John O'Connor].
Speaker 1: O'Connor, God rest him.  O'Connor, and myself with His Eminence.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my daughter, Jeree Wade [Jeree Dumpson Wade].
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Aboard a cruise ship.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Aboard a cruise ship.  Know the year?
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  I do not remember.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  The cruise was going to the Panama Canal--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Is this your wife?
Speaker 1: That's Jeree, that's my daughter.
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  That's my wife.
Speaker 1: That's his wife.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  She belongs to me now.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it, hold it please.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my daughter, Jeree Wade.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and myself when I was appointed as his commissioner of welfare some years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself being sworn in by the president of the United States [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] as a member of his commission on narcotics [President's Advisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug Abuse].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's the president--
Speaker 1: President Kennedy.
Speaker 2: --President Kennedy, swearing in of his commission on narcotics, the year I don't remember.  And I was a member of the commission that the president appointed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a picture of Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and myself, at a point where Mrs. Roosevelt was making a speech, I don't remember the year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the president of Fordham University [New York, New York] and three deans, to the extreme left the current dean--
Speaker 2: Got it?
Speaker 1: --Miss Mary Ann Quaranta, and to the extreme right, myself, three successions of deans of the Graduate School of Social Services [sic. Graduate School of Social Service], Fordham University.  With the president of the university.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Mayor Robert F. Wagner [Robert F. Wagner, Jr.], mayor of the City of New York [New York], swearing in the first black commissioner of welfare of the City of New York and indeed of the United States at that time.
Speaker 1: And that was you?
Speaker 2: That was James R. Dumpson.
Speaker 1: (ADAM WADE):  Russelle with an E.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This was a picture of the president [sic.] of the United States, Robert F. Wag- what's his name?
Speaker 1: Robert F. Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Robert F. Kennedy, members of the cabinet and James R. Dumpson at the swearing in of the president's commission on narcotics.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, this is picture of the attorney general of the United States, two other officials and myself, at a swearing in of the commission against narcotics.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, he never did get president did he?
Speaker 1: Nope, he didn't make it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the mayor of the City of New York and, what's his name?
Speaker 2: (ADAM WADE):  Jackie Robinson.
Speaker 1: Jackie Robinson and myself.
Speaker 2: Which mayor is that?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the award from the Association of Black Social Workers [National Association of Black Social Workers], United States, in 1978.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  One second.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the dean of the school of social work, president of Hunter College [New York, New York] conferring the honorary doctorate degree of doctor of laws.
