Story_ID: 654118
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Tommy Hooper [Thomas Hooper]. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Fatin Shahid Dantzler [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler], F-A-T-I-N, Shahid, S-H-A-H-I-D, Dantzler, D-A-N-T-Z-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: My name, Fatin, means clever and smart. And, it was given to me from my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] and it is an Arabic name, as I said, that means clever and smart. And, I like to believe that I am living up to that title.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, all right. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 12/7/73 [December 7, 1973], and I was born in Camden, New Jersey at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital [Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center].
Speaker 1: And, sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess I have few occupations in some way but, I guess, most people know me as a singer.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May the 22nd of 2012.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on Baltimore Avenue at my business, the Philly Media Shack [Media Shack].
Story_ID: 654119
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: No problem.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Wow, the simplest questions always are the hardest, I suppose (laughter). Gosh, a favorite food; fried chicken, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I feel so bad about having to say it, but, yes, I like fried chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. Now, do, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year has to be the summertime.
Speaker 1: All right. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a favorite place that I have been. I wouldn't say that I was on vacation when I was there. So, I would like to return on vacation, and that would be France.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep it one hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which means, keep it real, basically.
Story_ID: 654120
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [David Williams, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We'll keep 'em separate, then put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's name is Delica [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], D-E-L-I-C-A, Andorra, A-N-D-O-R-R-A, Dantzler was her maiden name, D-A-N-T-Z-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born February the 6th. She's twenty-three years older than me. So, I'm not sure of the year. I was born in 1973, so she would've been born in 1950, '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: About 1950. And, where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: At Pennsylvania Hospital.
Speaker 1: Now, did you give us her maiden name?
Speaker 2: I did. Maiden means pre-married, correct?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes. Her married name was Sulaiman, S-U-L-A-I-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, I really only know my mother's father, and my mother's grandmother. My mother's mother passed away when she was around eighteen, nineteen years old, I believe. So, I never met my grandmother, my maternal grandmother. But, I did grow up with my mother's grandmother. She was around my life quite a bit and as well as my grandfather, who remarried after, of course, her mother had passed away. I know that my grandfather was a deacon in a church as well as a singer who used to run with Sam Cooke, and James Brown, and different artists back in the day. And, had his own gospel group, The Vocalaires. I know that my mother has five brothers and sisters, or a brother and four sisters. Also, you know, they're very, you know, into the church and things of that nature. But, in terms of the musical part of my family, I don't know how deep and historic the music is in my family. But, I do know that music has always been a part of my life and my upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any--well, do you know where your, your mother's grandparents were from?
Speaker 2: I would assume that they would have been from North Carolina because the Dantzler family tree, for the most part, has a lot of history from down south. So, not positive, but I would definitely assume it was either North or South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay. Could be North or South?
Speaker 2: It could be North or South, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Carolinas I should've said.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories that are passed down on your mother's side of the family about the end of slavery, or Reconstruction or any, you know--?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, none that I can remember about slavery or anything that was passed down to me, discussed, or at least, that can physically remember at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, is there a story about how the family migrated from the Carolinas to, to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: None that I would be aware of, unfortunately.  No.
Story_ID: 654121
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Glassboro, New Jersey, not in Philadelphia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes. So, her, her upbringing for the most part was in Glassboro. She went to Glassboro High School [Glassboro, New Jersey], and Glassboro State College [Rowan University, Glassboro, New Jersey] as well.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Glassboro?
Speaker 2: G-L-A-S-S-B-O-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, she graduated from Glassboro--
Speaker 2: State.
Speaker 1: --High School?
Speaker 2: Glassboro High School, yes. And, went to Glassboro State.
Speaker 1: And, went to Glassboro State?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, did she, you know, enter into a profession via her college (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She did not. She became a mother, and a homemaker, and reentered school later on in our upbringing as we were, you know, getting older, and got a degree and started doing social work and things of that nature and working for the department of welfare [Philadelphia Department of Public Welfare] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. Here in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So, are there any stories your mother told about growing up that you remember?
Speaker 2: About growing up--well, my mother's mother was murdered, unfortunately. So, I know that that is a story that I can remember. I can remember stories that she told me about concerts and things like that she might have taken me to when I was young or in her womb still. She tolds me--she tells me story about how she took me see Pharoah Sanders when she was young. And, fell down the steps and from the--for the rest of the concert that I was kicking real hard, kicking real hard, kicking real hard, you know. Tells me about, you know, her going to see Miles Davis and a lot of the different things that her and her partners, my aunts, and you know, god moms and things like that used to do when they were growing up. And, of course, the story of how she met my dad or, you know, the times that used to have, and relationships that they--things that they would go through. Nothing stands out in my mind specific, like complete detail, more so that just those vague conversations about like, this happened or that happened. I remember how sad my mother tell- my mother tells this story. It's a very interesting situation that right now I'm working, ah dang, I'm working in my mother's kitchen, and wow--can I cut (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, I was asking you what stories your mother may have told about growing up (unclear), and you said, it's just like a montage of things that happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah. It's just, very vague, I mean, unfortunately, that I don't remember a lot of specific stories that my mother told, you know. I know that she was happy and free and she enjoyed herself very much in her upbringing. And, that she was an only child, you know. So, being an only child is--she was an only child too, my grandmother who passed away. And, my grandfather ended up having other children with, you know, his wife, which became her brothers and sisters of course. But, so, growing up as an only child and then losing your mother, you know, she was like a loner. And, she was alone a lot and, you know, really felt that heartache of the one that she loved so much, you know, being taken away from her so early on in her life. And, so, interesting that she would have six children, me being the oldest, you know. And, pouring all of her life and love into us as children, you know, is very interesting to me. It's very interesting that, how that, flipped around in her life.
Story_ID: 654122
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is David Starkey Williams [David Williams], D-A-V-I-D, Starkey, S-T-A-R-K-E-Y, Williams.
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure his date of birth or his place of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think he was older than your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], or?
Speaker 2: I believe he's five years younger than my mother.
Speaker 1: Five years younger, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. I've actually never physically face to face met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, as far as you know, was he from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, sir. I believe he was from New Jersey as well. His family lives in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: From, Glassboro [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: More than likely, they were from Glassboro as well, yes.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, well, what do you know about your father's (background noise)--? What do you know about your fa- (background noise)--
Speaker 2: There's a reason for that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right. So, what do you know about your father's side of the family? Have you met some of his relatives or anything?
Speaker 1: I have met his sister. I've met his mother, Rose [ph.], and a few of other, other family members. I don't have an active relationship with that part of my family, unfortunately. Early on in my life, I guess my grandmother, or his mother was, you know, trying to establish a relationship with me or--a little bit. But, since I've grown and growing up, I have not really reached back for that part of my life for various reasons. I have communicated with my father over the telephone and through letters and things of that nature. But, I think that it is best for us to stay apart. It just has not gotten to a point in my life where I feel that we must connect. I have had a father figure in my life. My mother's ex-husband [Gerald Solomon], and my brothers and sisters' father who has really stepped into that role. He recently passed away about two years ago now. But, you know, he was a very strong presence and force in my life and I just haven't really wanted for more of that. I mean, I do feel incomplete in some ways of not knowing all of, you know, just as I sit here and not knowing all of this family history of my father's side, in some ways make me feel a little void in my life, you know, that, that there's some parts of my life that I am not familiar with. Or, what makes me up. But, it doesn't make me feel incomplete. I mean, I may feel a void, you know, because there are certain things that could be filled in. But, I don't feel incomplete. I don't feel that my life is in a disarray because of that.
Story_ID: 654123
Speaker 1: Tell us about your stepfather.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, my stepfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Gerald Solomon. Ayyub, people call him Ayyub.
Speaker 1: Gerald--
Speaker 2: Ger- Gerald Solomon. Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: What was the last name?
Speaker 2: Solomon.
Speaker 1: Solomon, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, they call him Ayyub?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. A-Y-Y-U-B. Yes.
Speaker 1: Y-Y-U-B. Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a good man. He was a very strong and determined person, and just about his family, you know. He really loved his family, you know. He came from a big family. He did everything in his power to make me as a young boy feel like his, his blood, like his son, you know. And, him and my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] had five children together. But, growing up you, I never felt the feeling like he was my stepfather, you know. I always felt like he cared for me. He wanted the best for me. He did everything in his power to teach me all of the things that I needed to know. He took care of my family and I have nothing but respect and, and reverence for him and his teachings. You know, sadly, you know, throughout our life he was committed to jail and that was a big thing in our house. And, you know, I had to grow up fast because dad wasn't around anymore. And--but, when he came back into our lives, and even while he was out of our lives, he was such an active presence. And, it's funny, you know, even though it's just through letters and telephone calls and things like that, we feared our father from behind bars. We feared him being upset or having to get in our world or discipline us. Even from worlds away, I suppose in a sense, because of his presences. It was so active and he, he--you knew that he cared. You knew that you would be in trouble even though he couldn't physically whoop you or put the belt on you, per se. "Like when I get out, you in trouble," (laughter) kind of thing. So that was, I think that says a lot about a person, you know what I mean. And, as a man, in raising my own children now, you know, thinking about that a lot, it centers me and makes me think about him. And, you know, wanting to be the very best for my family in good times and bad times, when I'm right there, when I'm not around, if something were to happen to me, so they know who I am and my presence in their life. And, that they always hold it near and dear to them and, you know, that I'm guiding them in the right way, you know, like I say, I think that he's giving me a lot of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Give me a lot of that.
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background? Where was he born and when was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. His birthday was October 31st. He was sixty-three, I believe when he died. No, sixty-five, excuse me, I'm sorry. He was sixty-five when he died. So, he was born in about '46 [1946], '47 [1947], something like that, I would presume. Pardon me if I'm wrong. Do the math.
Speaker 1: So, about 1946.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, he was about four years older than your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, he was born here in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yep. He was born here in Philly to Marion [Marion Solomon] and Harold Solomon [Arra Solomon], and one of about ten kids. He was a chef. He went to the [U.S.] Army. He was in the Marine [U.S. Marine Corps]--not the Army, excuse me. He was in the Marines. So, you know, he was a war veteran. He was a Muslim, and--
Speaker 1: Do you know how he became a Muslim? Was he born into a Muslim?
Speaker 2: No. I--he wasn't born into being a Muslim. He--in the '70s [1970s] and '60s [1960s], you know, like a lot of the guys here, around the country, you know what I mean. The Black Panther movement [Black Panther Party] and the Farrakhan--not Farrakhan, Elijah Muhammad and all of those guy in the Nation of Islam and all of that. It was a very big force in black communities and young brothers and things like that in the ear- late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. So, a lot of 'em were coming into their own and trying to identify with different religious things and things of that nature. And, so, I'm not positive exactly how he came into Islam. But, you know, I would presume, you know, that it was from, because those were the early Islamic things that were happening in this country. I could presume that everyone was starting to get to know about and follow (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was he, was he in the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Probably in the very beginning and then went to Orthodox Islam.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. (Unclear). So, he was a Sunni Muslim?
Speaker 2: Yes. He was a Sunni Muslim.
Speaker 1: All right. So, did he go to a mosque and everything?
Speaker 2: He did. He went to lots of mosques.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 654124
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] met your biological father [David Williams], and a story about how she met your stepfather [Gerald Solomon]?
Speaker 2: How she met my biological father, I think she was introduced to my biological father from my god mom. I don't know if they went to high school together or something of that nature. But, my god mom, Sahfee [ph.], from what I remember is the person who introduced her to my father. Where that was and how, all of the circumstances that surround it, I'm not really positive. How she met my father, my father, I mean, my stepfather, he was in jail at the time. And, my uncle, I believe, a uncle of mine introduced her to him. And, so, they started communicating, you know, through the phone and letters, I suppose, while he was in jail. And, then my father--my stepfather broke out of jail to be with my mother. Yes. He broke out of jail to marry my mother or to be with her and to raise a family. And, they moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and started a family and da, da, da, da, and, and ended up moving back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he ended up going back to jail.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an incredible story.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was. And--yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is true love I guess. So, he broke out of jail.
Speaker 2: It was true love. He broke out of jail. (Laughter) He broke out of jail for this woman. My mama's a good girl (laughter). He put a lot of pressure on his self with that one. But, you know, I think it also speaks to who he was as a person, you know what I mean, and what he wanted to do. And, you know, not that I in anyway advocate someone breaking out of jail or going to jail for that matter. But, the thought that someone could be behind bars and be in love with somebody and like be so torn, the thought that I have to be with them. I want to be with them so bad that I--I'm gonna do everything in my power to get out of here. Even in knowing that all the pressure that that's gonna bring once you--if you do make it out, you know what I mean. And, then you're gonna have to live on the run and all of those things, 'cause he did that for many years. And, made kids with my mother and started a family and trying to get back acclimated to society even with that on this back, with knowing, yo I'm a fugitive, you know what I mean. And, no, it's not something to be proud of per se, but it speaks and it says a lot about him as a person, to me, you know what I mean. He did his time, and then he went back and he had to do the time for the time that he spent from breaking out of jail, you know what I mean. And, did it ha- I wouldn't say happily, but he did it like a man, you know what I mean. And, took what he had coming, you know. He had to, he had to, he had to wear that, you know. He had to, he had to live through that. And, my mother rolled with him. You know, she, she rolled with him. She die hard, and loved him, and you know, and dealt with all that came with that. And, I think that says a lot about her as well as a person. But, it was deep (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654125
Speaker 1: Do you know what he [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon] was incarcerated for in the first place?
Speaker 2: Robbing banks. I believe he robbed a bank, and that was the situation.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, how old was, were you when your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] married him?
Speaker 2: How old was I?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I guess I was probably two, two or three, probably about three years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe four at the most.
Speaker 1: And, how long did he stay out before they, they--
Speaker 2: They split?
Speaker 1: Before he--?
Speaker 2: How long did he--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, stayed--?
Speaker 2: Out of jail?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Broken out of jail before they came to get him?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Probably about seven years, seven or eight years, I presume, 'cause I guess I was around seven or eight, seven or eight when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia]. We moved to Atlanta. Broke out of jail--we couldn't stay in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] of course, you know, cops gonna be on ya. So, you know, we moved to Atlanta, and we stayed there for, for about six or seven years, I suppose. And--maybe six years. And, we moved back to Philadelphia I believe because his parent, one of his parents [Marion Solomon and Arra Solomon] was sick. And, he just couldn't take it, and you know, he wanted to be near them. And, I guess thought that the heat was off or something of that nature. And, came on back, and got, I guess he got told on or something happened and you know, one, one night in the middle of the night, a nice group of fellas came to the house. I don't--I wouldn't call 'em nice, but, you know, a couple of gentlemen, brandishing weapons and standing on the ceil- on the roofs of all of my neighbors' houses and all of that, came a--dragged my dad out naked and back to jail. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now, did he escape from a facility in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Probably in Pennsylvania. I'm not sure exact which facility he was in at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I'm sure it was a state prison of some sort.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, how long did they keep him before he got out for--?
Speaker 2: Again?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Again?
Speaker 2: Funny things is I know he only had a little bit of time left when he broke out, which was weird. So, he ended up, of course, doing a lot more time than the time that he had left over. So, it, it might've been nine or ten years, you know, that he was behind bars again.
Speaker 1: And, you said, your mother stuck by, stuck by him?
Speaker 2: She stuck by him. By the time he was released, they had broken apart. But, she stuck by him for seven, eight years of that time. You know, just really trying to hold on and you know she, she wanted to do it. She, you know, she loved him, you know, and she wanted to raise his children the way that he wanted them raised. And, wanted to do him justice because--and, I would say that it probably in her mind, that whole thought of somebody breaking out of jail and you know doing everything, made her feel like that was all for her. Even though that it had to be some selfishness in it for himself as well, and he had to deal with that, you know, because that's what he wanted. Even though he felt that that's what she needed or what he wanted to give her, you know. He was still not a free man and he was trying to live a free life. And, so, you know, my mother got caught up in that. And, you know, I think that they both found themselves in that place for a reason though, you know what I mean. And, they were for each other at that time, and you know, you just never know who you'll end up with and why and how much you'll love them, and how much you'll do for them. And, I think they just, you know, they did all that they could for each other. But, the funny thing is that even after they split, their relationship has to be almost like a model for how relationships should be with husbands and wives who have shared children who are no longer together. Their respect for each other, their love for each other, their parenting as a team, even though they were not connected as a team, you just, you couldn't understand it. You just couldn't understand how they knew how to do that. Like, what was it about them special that made them feel like such good parents, you know. Even through all of the mistakes and the flaws that they had within themselves, I still feel like I had the perfect upbringing, you know. I feel like I've learned all of the lessons that I needed to know even without my dad being around, you know. I just, I don't feel inadequate. I don't feel like there's something that I was missing because they, they grounded me. They strengthen me. They taught me. They made me feel like I could do whatever I wanted.
Story_ID: 654126
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about their talents their dispositions, their personalities, their, their--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], naturally. Because I don't really know my father [David Williams]. We're talk- when we talk a lot about my father, I'm talking about my stepfather [Gerald Solomon] unfortunately. But, my mother is a loner. My mother's to herself. She's quite. You know, she talented, people love her. But, I'm, I'm that way. I'm a loner, you know, in a lot of ways. I think that people like me but I'm reserved. I'm to myself. I'm not--even though I'm a singer and you know, I get on stage and you know, I guess I command attention and things of that nature. But, for the most part, I don't have a lot of friends, you know what I mean. I keep to a close knit circle. I'm very about my family. I have six kids. My mom had six kids. My dad, has eight kids. He kept going, you know what I mean. But, so, a lot of things that I see similarly, I feel like I take after my mother. But, you know, I'm sure my biological father, that--you know, he was singer. My mom used to say, he used to always sing to her and things of that nature. And, you know, he wanted to be famous. And, he got caught up in jail life and things of that nature too, which is a part of the reason that we don't have a relationship, you know what I mean. But, he didn't do what my dad did. He didn't make me feel, and he didn't reach out for his son the way that he should've.
Story_ID: 654127
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters and name where you fall in the order.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of my brothers and sisters. My oldest--next brother is Mustafa [Mustafa Sulaiman], my youngest brother's name is Musa [Musa Sulaiman]. My three sisters are SuArra [SuArra Sulaiman West], Tasnim [Tasnim Sulaiman], and Shahada [Shahada Sulaiman Monson]. And, then my dad [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon], as I said, kept going and so I have two other siblings, Yaseen [Yaseen Sulaiman], and Yusef [Yusef Sulaiman].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, now, so when you were growing up, your household consisted of basically you and--
Speaker 2: And the five--
Speaker 1: The first set?
Speaker 2: Well, well, we wasn't all there all at once. Because, you know, my youngest brother is about ten years younger than me, so, you know, he didn't come along 'til a little later.
Story_ID: 654128
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory or some of the things I can remember, playing with toys. I can remember eating from my tomato tree that was in my backyard over on Haverford Avenue [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I can remember peeing on myself at school. I can (laughter), I can remember going to the ice cream man all the time and yelling out to my grandmother [Dantzler's maternal great-grandmother], "Ice cream, ice cream, ice cream, the ice cream man is coming." And, my aunts never let me forget that, that that was my, my big thing. Yeah, I would say those are kind of like my, my memories of being a child child.
Speaker 1: No. I was asking about your earliest?
Speaker 2: My earliest child memory, that was, that was the ones that I mentioned first. I was saying like the tomato tree in my backyard and eating tomatoes, you know that I would just go a pick. And living on Haverford Avenue. You know, walking with my grandmother and my mom [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], hanging with my aunts. You know being in the back of cars with cigarettes smoking (laughter) going on and stuff like that. You know, before all the laws were out about, you know, you shouldn't have cigarettes with your kids and, and in closed up windows with your kids and things like that. But, no milestone like childhood memory--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --comes to mind like--
Speaker 1: That's, that's fine.
Speaker 2: You know, something specific that happened to me. I do remember I was in the hospital. I had, when I was very young, I put my finger underneath of the sewing machine. And, I had to go to the hospital because the, you know, they had, so I probably was like two, two or three. And, I kind of remember that.
Story_ID: 654129
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up? Did you grow up in that same place, lived in the same place the whole time or did you move? Well, you moved to Atlanta [Georgia], we know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: We moved to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I grew up, you know, early in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], a little bit in Camden, New Jersey, when we--when I was first born. Then we came to Philadelphia, and we moved to Atlanta when I was around seven years old. The, living in Atlanta, I remember a lot about. And, we moved to Alabama as well, for about six months before we moved back, excuse me, to Philadelphia, being on the run.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Can you describe for us the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights. Sights is, you know, the streets, the water, water plugs, parks. Smells is TastyKakes and hot pretzels, you know, Amarace- Amoroso's rolls [Amoroso's Baking Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], bread, you know, these are the companies and stuff that are, are in our communities that we, we--you know, that you can smell the cheesesteaks and things of that--water ice on--these are all there. That's Philly life, you know, that's the growing up here in Philly. In Atlanta, I can remember the sights and sounds being trees, and open space, pecans, throwing up sticks in the trees and getting pecans to shake down and fall, and playing basketball and early rap music, things of that nature. Boxes out on the streets and, and break dancing, and you know, learning how to break dance. And, being sent to the store and stopping the break dance with your friends and things like that, you know. I remember all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you're born in 1974--
Speaker 2: I was born in 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay, '73 [1973], that's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: They got this wrong here.
Speaker 2: December 7, 1973.
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973] in Camden [New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a very good year, very good day.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, is there a story as to why your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] was in Camden then instead of--?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I mean, well, Glassboro [New Jersey] is not very far away from Camden. I'm not sure why she was in Camden when she had me or what the exact situation was. I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that my god mom lived in Camden. So, she could've been hanging out with friends and da, da, da, da, and just that was the nearest hospital [Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital; Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center, Camden, New Jersey] or something like that. You never know how when a woman is having a baby, or if that was the hospital she was scheduled to have me in, or what. You know, that's a good question, and I will ask it and we won't have it here though.
Story_ID: 654130
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, what were some of the musical influences around you?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up some of the musical influences around me. Growing up, early hip hop was a very big deal. You know, Run-DMC, Kurtis Blow, and (background noise) the Beastie Boys and all of that kind of stuff when that was, when it was brand new. I, I remember that. But, also, of course, my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] was very into music. And, Muddy Waters, and Peabo Bryson, Donny Hathaway, and stuff like that. Alice Coltrane, John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Lonnie Liston Smith and, Marvin Gaye. I remember the day Marvin Gaye died. I remember that feeling, hearing the music all over the radio. But, I, I loved everything growing up. I, you know, I, of course, enjoyed my mother's music and the music that she loved and was playing around the house. But, of course, whatever was new and what was coming out and was young and felt rebellious or, you know, something that you need sneak and listen to. You know, I was into that stuff too. As time grew on, yeah. I think that my mother gave me a deep appreciation for great music. You know, whether, like I said, the Pharoah Sanders concert, I was in her belly, you know and (laughter), kicking around 'cause she fell with me, you know. And, now, and 'The Creator Has a Master Plan,' one of my favorite songs. You know, Leon Ware and Pharoah Sanders. And, it just like so much great music that I know was going through my ears, going through my heart, going through my mind when I was not necessarily processing what it was. Even though I might've enjoyed it. I might've liked it, but it was just feeding my spirit. It was feeding my spirit and it came out of me in the future, you know what I mean. It was like, it was always there, but I didn't know that it was there. And, and as I got older and really, really, got into music, I leaned on a lot of that and went back to it, and, you know, and realized how much I really appreciated that. And, I think that became more of what I was into than what was my generation- generational music. I don't think that I abandoned my generation's music for that. But, somehow that music spoke to me more than my own generation's music, which is why eventually I think that we [Kindred the Family Soul] would infuse more of that into what we do than what was happening currently.
Story_ID: 654131
Speaker 1: Now you had unique experience of being brought up in a Muslim household.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, did you go to the mosque regularly (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, certainly, certainly, certainly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. So, that's an interesting dynamic in terms of growing up Muslim when I'm a singer, number one. And, my [maternal] grandfather's a gospel singer and you know, the whole tradition of gospel music and all those different things. And, you don't really sing in the mosque. You don't sing hymns and you don't sing spirituals and things of that nature. You do sing prayers, I supposed, or you do rhythmic things that are, you know--Arabic is spoke--is read in the mosque. And, you pray in Arabic and things like that and it has this rhythmic tone that's very sing alongish. And, there's a thing that you--the call to prayer which is called adhan. And, I remember I used to like to sing that a lot, ironically. But, I, I--so, the whole learning and developing and growing your voice in church like most kids do, I suppose and, most, not most singers do, I suppose, I didn't grasp that there. But, I think that, again, the same way that I say that the music of the old was in me all the time and I didn't realize that, that is in me as well because it makes up who I am as a person. From my family, and you know what I mean, my upbringing, as well as from my ancestry, you know what I mean. That that's in my blood. That singing is in my blood. That the spirit is in blood. And, that love is in my blood, and just the, the need to, to want to express myself in that way is in my blood. And, I just kind of just look to my influences, look to the people who were doing that and tried to learn from it, and grow it and develop it on my own. And, so, it's always interesting that people, you know, naturally think that your foundation is the church, per se, when you are a singer, you know what I mean. And, that has to come from somewhere, you know. And, I think it does. And, it still comes from a similar place, but just not that same place that a lot of others might have grasped it.
Speaker 1: I was thinking too, that a lot of the musicians that you mentioned, you know, Rahsaan Roland Kirk, Pharoah Sanders, I don't know it he was--ever became a Muslim but he had a lot of Muslims that played with him. And, had albums dedicated, like 'Jewels of Thought' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Idris Muhammad and things like that. Yes, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Idris Muhammad. Right. A lot of the musicians in those days, [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner was, were Muslims. They became converted to--
Speaker 2: To Islam.
Speaker 1: Along the way.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Makes sense.
Speaker 1: A lot of 'em were from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah. Hey man, it was running wild (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I just don't, I don't know how that fits into all of this but it is kind of, it seems like it does--it's worth mentioning.
Speaker 2: I know, I don't deny it.
Story_ID: 654132
Speaker 1: So you basically grew up in Atlanta [Georgia], you know?
Speaker 2: For the most part, I grew up in Atlanta. I grew up in Atlanta from around eight to twelve. And, then eight--seven to eleven, or eight to twelve, something like that. And, then we came back to Philly. So, Philly still is my, Philly is everything, you know what I mean. All of my relationships, everything for the most part was, was--what's more interesting (unclear), then I moved back to Atlanta when I was nineteen and stayed there for twenty-four. So, it's like, two separate times in my life that Atlanta played a part in my upbringing and my coming of age, I, I would say, you know what I mean. And, both times I think that they fed me similar things, I suppose, you know what I mean. Just fed me similar things. That opportunity to get away a little bit from the hustle and bustle of the streets and the city life and to go and be around some trees and open space and fresh air and different kinds of people, southern hospitality, you know what I mean. When I moved back to Atlanta when I got older, of course, that was for the music and that was becoming a music mecca and being around all of these different musicians and stuff before the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] scene had come back together. You know, of course, Philly is known for music. But, you know, there was a while where--a period where things were stagnant and I had to come back. And, I came back to be a part of that and get that developed.
Story_ID: 654133
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? You started school here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: I did. I started school in Philadelphia. The first school that I can--I guess, I can remember going to, I guess, was the Islamic center, which was an Islamic school, you know, when I was very young that's what school I'm saying I can remember peeing on myself. Then, I went to Walton School [Rudolph S. Walton School] for elementary. I went to Fitzsimons Junior High School [Thomas Fitzsimons Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Then I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is the Walton School here in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: It is here in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: All right. And, then, now, did you, when you left Walton, did you go to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: When I--no, Walton is fifth, fifth grade, I believe, fifth and sixth grade. So, that's coming back from Atlanta--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So, I guess, I was in Atlanta, now that I think about it from like four to eight, not what I said. Now, you're getting (laughter), you're bringing it back. So, I was there for about five years. So, maybe, yeah, from four to nine or something like that. And, when I came back to Philly, I went to Walton, and that was fifth and sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, where was your--what school did you attend in Atlanta when you went back--?
Speaker 2: When I went to Atlanta, I attended Dean Rusk [Dean Rusk Elementary School]. And, I broke the light on the ever glowing light as a kid that was outside because I was rebellious and bad. And, they had this ever glowing light that used to be outside of Dean Rusk Elementary, and I put it out. And, I went back there recently and noticed that it was no longer there. I am so sorry Dean Rusk. I apologize and someday I'm gonna come back to that school and put up another ever glowing light for them, 'cause the kids deserve it, and I should not have done that.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: But, I was young and dumb and stupid--
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: --at the time.
Speaker 1: So, you were at Dean Rusk--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from kindergarten through--?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say it was kindergarten. I'm not sure of the da- when I--I remember Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' was out 'cause I remember we watched it when I was at Dean Rusk. So, that was first, second, maybe third grade or something. Then, we moved to Alabama for a little while and went to a school there. I don't remember the name of it. But, the only school that I remember going to in Atlanta was Dean Rusk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I might've went to daycares or stuff like that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: What school in Alabama--did your stepfather [Gerald Solomon] feel like some heat from somewhere and decided to move?
Speaker 2: Yeah. When we moved to Alabama for six months that was like, "All right, they might be on us. We gotta move around a little bit." And, I can talk about all of this now because, you know, he did that time and shouldn't be no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. So, you're in school. What part of Alabama were you?
Speaker 2: Anniston, Alabama, if I'm not mistaken, is where we lived.
Speaker 1: That's the famous place where they burnt the bus during the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That is.
Speaker 1: Anniston (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anniston, Alabama.
Story_ID: 654134
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school up until about tenth grade. I enjoyed school. I mean, I thought it was cool, you know. I did well in early school, six--'til about sixth or seventh grade. And, the, you know, as teenagers and young people do a lot of times, especially without a parent around, your father or something like that, you start to veer off, slack off a little bit. I started to really get into the music and really started thinking, now, you know what, I can do that. By the time I got to ninth grade, I was playing the saxophone, and singing and doing, and you know, I wasn't thinking about school as much as I should've been.
Speaker 1: Well, in school, did you have favorite subject?
Speaker 2: In school my favorite subject might've been social studies. I liked English. I liked history. I liked science. But, I would say, maybe my favorite probably, 'cause I would have to think back to certain teachers and things like that that really made me--and, my English teacher Miss Millender [ph.], I really loved. She was really, really, really good, really good. I learned a lot from her. I'd say, English and science, English and science.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Were there any, so, Miss Millender was a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: She was.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you involved in any other activities in Atlanta [Georgia], like the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America], or Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]?
Speaker 2: I think I was boxing in Atlanta a little bit. And, I got in the ring after training for a good, you know, being, being, going back and forth to the gym for a good three to five months or something like that. And, then I got into the ring with a boy and he beat me down, and I never returned to the ring anymore. I like to win. I like to do something I feel like I can do well and I ain't gotta get beat up at, you know. And, I think that that was--that might've been the precursor to why sports was never my thing, you know. Just, I just, I wasn't an active, you know, physical kind of guy in that way, you know what I mean. I thought I could be. I wanted to be. You know, I see all the other guys who can do it. But, it's like that's not where I found my strength. I guess my strength was more inside and I had to find what that was. And, it eventually became music.
Story_ID: 654135
Speaker 1: How do you think growing up as a Muslim kid influenced your perspective on life?  You know, at?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting because, you know, when we were growing up as, as young Muslim kids like, you know, it definitely wasn't as prevalent as it is now. Everybody knows what Muslims are. Everybody knows about Islam whether they think it's good, it's bad, or whatever indifferent, you know, people are familiar with it. So, it's not as--eyesore, per se, as it was then to people. You know, so, when you're walking around with a little kufi on your head or your sister got a kimah on or something like that. And, people making jokes, or making fun of you and things of that nature, and you're young and you don't understand why that's happening. And, it makes you feel insecure about who you are, you know, that was interesting, you know what I mean. That was an interesting lesson to learn because you felt different. And, you felt like, out of place in certain instances. We didn't celebrate Christmas and Easter, and certain holidays that other kids who, who we were, you know, right next to and playing with and stuff, that they did. And, they didn't understand that, understand why. And, even though we were being told why, we didn't understand, per se, why, you know what I mean. So, you have to learn and grow and develop and get to a maturity level where you understand what it is that you're believing and what your parents are trying to teach you, you know. And, so, that, I think that probably heavily influenced my observations of the world and how I think about things, you know, when I think back to that. You know, just that we grew up with--felt like to us at a disadvantage, you know what I mean. Or, we grew up, again, like--not like everybody else, you know. So, that was an adjusting period, you know. And, then when things happen like, you know, our father [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon] got, you know, taken away and da, da, da, and then all of the other kids and how, you know, how they played on that, you know. And, joked us, and made us feel small and belittled in a lot of ways. It was difficult, you know what I mean. But, thankfully we had a great mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], you know. And, a great father as well, you know what I mean, who just always instilled in us pride, you know, resilience and, and just to not be ashamed of who we were, you know what I mean. And, to--made us realize that we were special, and not special in the sense of we were special 'cause we was different than anybody else. But, we was special, and that we was loved, and we were appreciated. And, that I guess was enough to counterbalance some of the stuff that was doing on. It didn't make it always comfortable, or make it always so that it was not on your mind. But, it definitely calmed the spirit, per se.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was it harder to do that in Atlanta [Georgia] or in--?
Speaker 2: Well, in Atlanta, we lived in an Islamic community. So, no, it was easy to, I guess, it wasn't as difficult because you were around other young Muslims and, and Muslim people and things of that nature. When we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], again, it was, it was, it wasn't as common. It wasn't commonplace. It wasn't like, today, if you go outside, today you're gonna see Muslims everywhere in Philadelphia, you know what I mean. They're, they're everywhere. This is like a little Mecca here. So, you know, it's not as big a deal. But, you--again, like I said, in Atlanta, no, it was, it was not difficult. It wasn't difficult and, and I didn't, it didn't bring it, it didn't make you think about it as much. Again, because it was a new young Islamic community and everybody around you was like you.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: And, nobody made you feel who weren't--who wasn't like you, like, "Well, what are you--who's that?" 'Cause they were used to it.
Story_ID: 654136
Speaker 1: Yeah, before we leave Atlanta [Georgia], I, I know your wife [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] had said, she, she thought it was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], but you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's H. Rap Brown. H. Rap Brown became Imam Jamil Al-Amin [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], and he was running the community in Atlanta. So, that was the leadership, I suppose, that we were underneath, or that my family was underneath, was Imam Jamil Al-Amin's leadership who would become the imam of--over a large community of Muslim throughout the Northeast.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you know him enough to comment on what he was like?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew Imam Jamil very well. Yes, I did. And, he was a very good man. A very strong and stern man. And, I think that he did a lot of good for a lot of those brothers. And, he brought them to a pl- a lot of them had gotten in trouble with the law. A lot of them had been those kinds of guys in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] like him. And, misunderstood or whether they were misunderstood or mischaracterized or just people didn't get them. Whatever the case may be, you know what I mean, there were a lot of those kinds of brothers and he brought a peace over them. And, he got them into their religion. And, he got them into praying. He got them into doing community work and all of those different things. And, it was a very peaceful and loving community that we were a part of. I saw nothing negative, nothing crazy, no, you know, it was nothing like that. So, you know, Imam Jamil did eventually go back to jail and he's in jail now, underground, in Arizona [sic. United States Penitentiary, Administrative Maximum Facility, Fremont County, Colorado] for impersonating a police office or something like that in Alabama. But, I don't know all of the specifics of, you know, that. But, you know, he was good to us. He ran a community store which was a few blocks, like a block away from the mosque. And, I worked in the community store. And, I remember, you know, making my early money and you know having that job, and you know, that--he was--I remember Kareem Abdul-Jabbar coming to the mosque and different things like that. He just, we was revered and people loved Jamil. People, people loved him, you know what I mean, and that--I, you know, just a sad situation that ended up happening to him. You know, 'cause I think he could do a lot more justice and good outside of, you know, being in jail, than he can being in jail. But, you know, that is what it is, and you know, it is what it is.
Story_ID: 654137
Speaker 1: Now, when you were living in Atlanta [Georgia], you were a little kid, but I think Maynard Jackson would become the mayor of Atlanta (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maynard Jackson, yep. [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 1: Atlanta was like a boom town for those (unclear) people.
Speaker 2: It was. It was.
Speaker 1: So, and you mentioned Michael Jackson. There was a story, I think, behind Michael Jackson but I think I changed the subject or something. But--
Speaker 2: I remembered that 'Thriller' was out when I was going to Dean Rusk [Dean Rusk Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], so that had to be what, '83 [1983], '84 [1984] or something like that [sic. 1982], so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, was popular culture music allowed in your household?
Speaker 2: Yes. Popular culture music was allowed in my house. And, we did listen to music. I think that my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] stopped listening to music as much when we moved to Atlanta. Only because she was mothering, and doing, and da, da, da, da, and she wasn't a young person with musical taste as much anymore. She was a mother with musical taste. So, that might've evolved and then she was in a community and different things like that. But, I don't think that it had anything to do with we don't listen to music anymore. Music has always been a prevalent part of my life. But, just that whole thing of, I guess it's that, when you're young and you're in the club. It was like, you young and you go to concerts, and you do all of these different things. Then you have kids. Then, you don't go to concerts as much, and you don't go to the club as much, and you don't do what you're young friends are doing. And, my mother had to grow up fast because she started having a family in her early twenties. You know, at twenty-three she had me and about twenty-seven, I guess, she had my brother [Mustafa Sulaiman]. And, so, then, then, (laughter), had four more kids. So, for the most part, she's been doing that. But, like I said earlier, you know, I remember the day that Marvin Gaye died, and hearing Marvin on the radio all day long, you know, in Atlanta. I remember listing to RTI--is it RTI, WRTI [WRTI Radio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or is it Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark Atlanta radio. RTI is here at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. But, Clark Atlanta Radio, CLK [WCLK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], and you know, all of the jazz and the, you know, R and B stuff, and stuff that would be playing on the Saturdays and Sundays; and you know, it was always a part of our life, yes.
Story_ID: 654138
Speaker 1: So, when you moved back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was that, how did you feel about coming back to Philadelphia after in--?
Speaker 2: To be honest, I can't remember specifically how I felt about moving to Atlanta [Georgia]--I mean, moving back to Philly. I don't know if it was a thing, "Well, I'm going to miss my friends or we gotta go back." But, I knew we were from Philly, you know what I mean. I knew that we had loved ones and things like that up in Philly. It wasn't anyone specifically, I guess, that I was looking forward to, when we get up there, we're gonna be with them. And, I don't, I can't remember if it was anybody specific that I was feeling like I was leaving behind. But, I knew that it was necessary. I knew that I did know that. I did understand that enough at an early age even when--because when we moved to Alabama, it was just me, my father [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon] and my brother [Mustafa Sulaiman]. My mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] didn't go to Alabama for some reason. And, I don't know if that was just them separating us, or da, da, da, da. So, that was an interesting dynamic. Yeah, that an interesting dynamic.
Story_ID: 654139
Speaker 1: Back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now, now you all had just gone through a family trauma.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you're going back to Philadelphia. Did the authorities mess with your mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] at all in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Well, the family trauma came when we got back to Philly. It didn't come before we got--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) back to Philly. It was like we were living back in Philly for, honestly I don't remember how long we were living in Philly before he was taken. But, it wasn't a long time, you know what I mean. Just a, maybe a couple of months or something to get set up and you know what I mean. And, we got set up and shortly afterward, you know, they came in and swooped in and got him. So, that was, that was sad, you know, just a sad day. And, when I remember back to that day, I just remember feeling like, man, now I gotta be a man, you know. Now, it's time for me to be a man for my mom and for my brothers and sisters. And, I remember putting on my dad's jacket that day and going to school. That same jacket that he should've had on. And, going to school and feeling like, I'm going to be him. And, I'm going to take care of this for them.
Speaker 1: How old were you? You think you're about--you say you're about--?
Speaker 2: I'm assuming that I'm like eleven. You know, about eleven. That's what I think. 'Cause I know I was in fifth or sixth grade. Probably fifth, not sixth just yet.
Speaker 1: Ten or eleven?
Speaker 2: Ten or eleven. Ten or eleven (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were the oldest?
Speaker 2: I was the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: And, the school was right on the corner of my block. I could just so remember that. I remember that my dad [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon] had some change in his pocket of that jacket. And, that change, you know, became mine. And, I put on that jacket and--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school in Philly when you got back?
Speaker 2: Walton [Rudolph S. Walton School].
Speaker 1: It was Walton School. Okay. Are there any figures at Walton, people that, you know, were mentors to you, or?
Speaker 2: Ms. Breen [ph.] at Walton was my first music teacher. And, she is the reason that I started playing the clarinet and the saxophone. And, I like to credit her with really making me feel serious about music. And, helping me to start to discover that part of my life that would become what I feel is my life's purpose and mission, you know, which is to do music and to, God willing, spread love through music and messages of hope and, you know, love, and--
Speaker 1: So, after your father was taken, you, you know, you're, you have the sen- did you get a job or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I didn't get a job, per se. No, I didn't get a job. I mean, I was too young. I probably started like bagging groceries at the, at the grocery store, you know, trying to make change here and there for myself. And, then, eventually, started working at the Dell [Dell Music Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and maybe got an anti-graffiti network job to, you know, to take graffiti off the walls and stuff like that. Well, that was probably when thir- by the time I got to thirteen, fourteen and I was going to farm with my grandmother [Dantzler's maternal great-grandmother] to pick blueberries and strawberries. So, as a young, young person, yeah, I had hustle, you know. I knew that I needed to go out there and get money 'cause mom couldn't necessarily pass it off to me now daddy's gone, you know what I mean. There's no real big money coming into the house. So, if I want some money, and you know as young, young man, you want some money. You know, you wanna be able to do some things and so I knew I had to go out there and earn that.
Speaker 1: Was your, was your mother working as a social worker during this period?
Speaker 2: At that time, my mother wasn't working. My mother was more involved in our school and our life, you know. She was not working. We were probably on welfare and things of that nature, you know, just getting by until she could or felt the need that she had to, you know what I mean, to do that. And, eventually, like I said earlier, you know, my mother went back to school and got a degree and started working ironically for the department of welfare [Philadelphia Department of Public Welfare], you know what I mean. The same people who had been helping us, I supposed, she went to work for them to help other people. Because she was familiar with the system and understood it and felt like that was something that she could do to help people who had been in that same situation that she found herself in.
Story_ID: 654140
Speaker 1: Now, you went to middle school at a different school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Fitzsimons middle school [Thomas Fitzsimons Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Fitz- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bill Cosby and myself, Fitzsimons.
Speaker 1: It's called Fitz?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Fitz, F-I-T-Z, Simons, S-I-M-M-O-N-S [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay. I think most of us would say, Fitzsimmons. But, it's called Fitzsimons.
Speaker 2: Fitzsimons, yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Maybe it's just one M. It's possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They always said it Fitzsimons to me. So, I never heard Fitzsimmons.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, that's, now this is in, is this in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's in North Philadelphia. Right around the corner from Walton School [Rudolph S. Walton School].
Speaker 1: All right. And, you said, Bill Cosby went to school there?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: All right. And, so, now, in middle school you're playing your instrument now?
Speaker 2: I was playing the saxophone in seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Did you have musical hero?
Speaker 2: At that time, my musical hero probably was Michael Jackson. I mean, you know, he was everybody's musical hero. Like, who didn't love Michael Jackson? Now, we all wanted to be Michael Jackson. And, even though I was playing the saxophone his influences was probably a lot more prevalent than Charlie Parker, or John Coltrane at that time. So, you know, we wanted to be Michael Jackson. We didn't wanna be [HistoryMaker] George Duke and, or Gerald Albright or anything. We wanted to be like Mike, you know, so. You know that was what it was, you know, his--just, he was the biggest thing going.
Story_ID: 654141
Speaker 1: Where did you start high school?
Speaker 2: I applied to the creative and performing arts high school [Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and was accepted and went there for ninth and tenth grade. And, was kicked out for eleventh and twelfth.
Speaker 1: All right, now, tell us the story now. The creative and performing arts high school is a magnet school, right?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: You had to test to get in.
Speaker 2: You do.
Speaker 1: So, were you a good student?
Speaker 2: No. I was good sax [saxophone] player though. I mean, a decent sax player, decent enough to further your education at the creative and performing arts high school. I mean, when you're a young musician or an actor, or creative writer, or all of the different things that you--you still based--judged on you're an eighth grader, you know what I mean. I wasn't, of course, I wasn't John Coltrane as a sax player, you know, young. Even though there was some young kids who, who were really damn good at the school too. But, you know, I was, I was decent, you know. And, I could definitely be taught and so that's why I was accepted into the school. But, once I got to the school and seen, you know, all of the stuff that was going on, I got distracted. I really wanted to be a star and I stopped thinking about the sax as much and starting thinking about singing. At that school, Boyz II Men was--The Roots were, The Roots, Amel Larrieux, Bilal would later go there. You know, so many different actors and actress, Joey DeFrancesco, Christian McBride. Joey DeFrancesco was a piano player. He was on tour with Miles Davis when I was in ninth grade. He was in twelfth grade. He was running around with Miles Davis right before Miles passed away. Chris McBride would go on to be like one of the greatest bass players in the world. The Roots, you know, big hip hop group. Boyz II Men, the biggest. And, all this was happening all at the same time. And, it was like, of course, this was all before all of it exploded. But, it was just like the talent pool. And, those are the talents that you know of. You can just imagine of some of the talent as well that you didn't know of that you were amongst. And, it just like it was feeding your creative energy, like, "I need to be like them. I need to do this, I need to do--," it was like, and so, that's why I think that I lost focus on schoolwork, you know. And, not to blame, of course, I'm not blaming that on those people being talented. But, just the thought that I wanted to be talented too. And, I knew that I wasn't as great a sax player as some of the other sax players, you know what I mean.
Story_ID: 654142
Speaker 1: And, I felt that I could sing. I was rapping and doing lots of different things. I thought that I could sing, but I wasn't, at Creative and Performing Arts [Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for singing. I was there to play the sax [saxophone], you know. And, these other guys, again, just like I felt like I couldn't hold a candle to them as a sax player, I knew I couldn't hold a candle to these singers as a singer. And, so, I started trying to develop my voice and what have you, kind of outside of the school. And, started hooking up with producers and musicians and stuff like that and playing and, and recording, and you know, eventually found some traction there and started writing songs and performing, and--
Speaker 2: How did you, did you have anybody there to shepherd you through that kind of stuff (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely. It was a good brother by the name of George Williams [George Williams III], who lived across the street from me, whose father was in the group called The Tymes back in the day. 'So in Love,' [sic. 'So Much in Love'] was one of their songs. (Singing), "So in love" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. That's one of the great songs in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, great songs of the '60s [1960s]; the doo wop groups.
Speaker 2: (Singing), "(Unclear)."
Speaker 1: (Singing), "Belong together." Caesar [Al "Caesar" Berry], George, all those guys man, they was really good guys.
Speaker 2: So, George Williams of The Tymes?
Speaker 1: George Williams' son, not George Williams of The Tymes. But, George Williams' son who was a singer himself and his mother, Vivian [Vivian Williams], who lived across the street from me, you know. He was into the music and he saw that I was taking a liking to it, and he kind of took me under his wing. And, he mentored me, you know. He taught me about Peabo Bryson, taught me about Donny Hathaway, and Jeffrey Osborne, and different singers that I hadn't really gotten into. You know, Teddy Pendergrass, Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes, stuff like that that just was like, ooh, you know, and it was really striking my interest. And, for whatever reason, again, like that was stuff that I just had not been familiar with, per se. And I started learning that, and going and re- I remember one of the first songs that we recorded was 'Reach Out and Touch (Somebody's Hand).' That's a great Ashford and Simpson song [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson], ironically. And, I would become a singer with my wife [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon]. That's even more interesting. My father [Dantzler's stepfather, Gerald Solomon] used to always say- saying, "As a thing starts is how it'll end up."
Speaker 2: Okay. So you--
Speaker 1: That's my life.
Speaker 2: Okay. So, you were going to studios--
Speaker 1: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and trying to see what you could do?
Speaker 1: Rapping, singing, just doing whatever, you know, in the beginning. Just trying to get my feet wet trying to learn, trying to grow, trying to become an artist. Trying to figure out what kind of artist I was. I knew it was in me. But, I didn't know, who I was or how to identify what that is yet, you know, and that took time. It took a lot of time, and lot of molding, a lot of shaping, a lot of mentoring, a lot of learning, developing, growing and practice.
Speaker 2: So, you're like fourteen, fifteen?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 654143
Speaker 1: Did you have good te- teachers and mentors in, at the--
Speaker 2: Performing Arts [Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: --at, at the performing arts school?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Rodgers [ph.] was my music teacher at Performing Arts. He was a good teacher for me though like ninth grade, you know what I mean. I think that he, he cared and wanted to see us do well. But, by tenth grade, because I was rebellious and I wasn't coming to school or doing what I should've done, I think he kind of, he might've given up on me. Which is the reason why they kicked me out of school because it was his decision to, to let me go. And, I think that that was a good decision now that I've gone through all of those different things. Because getting put out of Performing Arts for not doing my schoolwork, not not doing the music because this again, it's a magnet school. It's about the music, you know. And, the emphasis is not on your other classes at Performing Arts. I had to be honest. The emphasis is not on it, but it doesn't mean that it's not important. And, it doesn't mean that you don't have to stay on top of that. And, I think that that's where I got lost. That I did not stay on top of that part of my education. And, I veered to thinking that the music was going to be the only thing that I needed to be focused on. And, because I was no longer really as focused and interested in the sax [saxophone], you know, by tenth grade and I was more into my voice and trying to sing and da, da, da, da, that that fell apart for me, you know. But, leaving that school and then being sent to Overbrook High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is where I ended up graduating high school from, just gave me everything I needed. The confidence to do--and, then I went into another magnet school which had, basically had a music program. And, I was in the choir and things like that, and that's where I flourished, that's where I grew. I mean, and then I wasn't around so much, I hate to use the word, but, competition. Because even though that school was a magnet school, it wasn't an arts school. So, it wasn't all artist.
Speaker 1: You're saying Overbrook at that time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Overbrook.
Speaker 1: That was a magnet school?
Speaker 2: It was a magnet school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: So, it had a music program, engineering program and different things of that nature. But, it was not a creative arts magnet school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there a specific incident that got you kicked out of the other--?
Speaker 2: Out of Performing Arts?
Speaker 1: Or, just the, or just the grades?
Speaker 2: Well, the--yeah, your grades, you know, when they come back on that last marking period and you didn't do well, I think I had some Ds and things like that. They was like, "You know what, we don't need you here." And, you know, in terms of playing that sax and being in the orchestra and all of that, they couldn't use me anyway 'cause I wasn't, I wasn't there, you know. I really wasn't there. Again, that was good decision. At that time I didn't see it. I didn't understand. I didn't wanna leave my friends. I didn't wanna not be a part of the cool kids club and go to neighborhood school. But, it was the fork in the road for my life in a lot of ways, you know, and I'm very happy that it happened that way.
Story_ID: 654144
Speaker 1: So, who was it at Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you considered like a teacher or a mentor?
Speaker 2: Mr. Allen [George E. Allen].
Speaker 1: Mr. Allen. Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Allen was my music teacher, my vocal teacher there. And he, again, was another very strong mentor who brought in so many life lessons and, of course, my musical history, or my musical taste and musical education, he fed that so much with the stuff that he taught us, and you know, learn--that was the first time I started singing choral music, choir again, 'cause I said I did not grow up in church. So, it was like, we were singing in conjunction with a lots of other individuals, learning different kinds of songs then I was fam- I was familiar with. You know, stretching my vocal abilities, learning harmony, and melody, and things of that nature that just were, you know, just extremely valuable, extremely valuable.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: He just took a really personal liking to me and almost like held my hand through high school, through the eleventh and twelfth grade, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever think about any other career other than music?
Speaker 2: No. (Background noise) No, I did not.
Story_ID: 654145
Speaker 1: So you were focused on music completely; and when it was time to graduate, was there anything significant that happened in school at Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you were a part of before we graduate you?
Speaker 2: Significant what like--well, yeah. I mean at, my first show (laughter) at Overbrook was a talent show and I sang (laughter), I sang 'I Wanna Sex You Up' by Color Me Badd. And (laughter), I came out on stage, I had a little cane and a nice suit on and I went to sing and all of the girls went crazy, and it was like, this is it. I'm not going backwards. I ain't playing that saxophone. I ain't playing the clarinet. Nothing el- I'm just--I'm a singer. I know I can do this. This is it, you know. And, I went to school not too long ago to do a career day or something like that. And, was talking to the kids from that stage and just telling them, you know, that feeling. It's just like I cannot believe that this was the training ground for everything that I'm doing now, you know what I mean. And, it was this moment here that made me have the conf- or that gave me the confidence to do this. And, it was like, from here on out, like, I'm going to do this, and I know it. And, that was my first time performing (background noise) as me, you know, like in front of everybody. Like not in a group, not on a cho- you know, in a choir, and my voice can be low and you don't hear me da, da, da, da, it's like, it's all me. And, everybody's focused on what I was doing. It was just a great feeling. And, then later I would sing, 'It's Written All Over Your Face' ['Written All Over Your Face'] by The Rude Boys another time. And, you know, some of my other guys did--the musicians and stuff and we would play and go and do other high schools and stuff and put on our little show. And, then all the girls would go crazy and we would be singing the popular hits of the day and (laughter), it was, it was nice. It was, it was a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Good times.
Speaker 1: So, were you were in a group in high school?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in a group, per se, but there was a group of musicians who were, who was around me, Little John Robert [sic. Lil' John Roberts], Jermaine Childs, and Damon Bennett, and Lawrence Pitchburg [ph.], and Alfonzo Jones [ph.], and Hayward Hamilton, not Hayward Hamilton; Hayward [ph.], I can't think of Hayward's last name, I'm sorry. But, just different guys that was real good and you know, they would play the music and we would go around. But, we wasn't concentra- like, we weren't a name or a band. It was just, we was a group of guys who just really liked what we did. And, whenever we could find someplace to do or rehearse and practice, and da, da, da, and then show people what we was doing, we would do that. It just, it's kind of like jamming, you know, just jamming together. We like to jam together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get to a group 'til a little later on.
Speaker 1: Did you consider going to college?
Speaker 2: I venture to say, not venture, no, I did not think of going to college. I think that by the time, by the time I was graduating high school, I was hell bent on music, music, music, music, music. I didn't think I needed anything else. I really didn't think I needed anything else because it felt as if I was making it already. And, you know, you go to college, or what it seemed like at that time, you go to college so you can get a degree so you can go make it. And, I'm like, "Look, I'm already making it," you know. That's what it felt like at that time, you know. Unbeknownst to me how much time that goes in between the time of you making it, you know what I mean. And, different skillsets that you might've needed to have to fall back on in case things don't work out that I would have done differently, possibly now, if I had it to do over.
Story_ID: 654146
Speaker 1: So you weren't in a group per se, but you could make money doing what you're doing?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: I mean, in high school.
Speaker 2: In high school, no, I wasn't making money doing what I was doing making music, per se. I was just, again, jamming, having a good time, trying to get girls to scream and, you know, that kind of stuff. That was, that was enough money for us then, you know what I mean. Just the thought of, we doing what we love, we're doing what we like, you know, we in the basement putting on a Michael Jackson show. And, I'd put on some pants and do the moon walk, and da, da, da, da, and the drummers there, we was just was, was having fun. And, then we could go out to other schools. I remember specifically like playing Dobbins High School [Murrell Dobbins Vocational High School; Murrell Dobbins Career and Technical Education High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know what I mean, and playing "Poison." Wow! That's even more interesting. Singing the songs of the group that I would end up, by the time I was getting out of high school writing songs for, you know. So, while I was in high school, I was doing they material, you know, trying to be hip, trying to be cool. And, by the time I was graduating, we was working with these people. So, it was, again, a probably further reason why I thought that I was making it. And, that I was on my way and did not need to focus my attention on further studies.
Speaker 1: Oaky. All right. So, you graduated from high school in 19--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [1992], I graduated from Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-two [1992], okay.
Speaker 2: In June of 1992 I graduated Overbook, and in June of 1992 my first CD [compact disc] that I had written songs was released. Maybe five or six days later.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you had written, you wrote these songs--?
Speaker 2: I wrote and produced these songs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With a partner, Lionel Caviness.
Speaker 1: What was your song writing routine? How did you--?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say we had a routine. By that time, I felt that I had grasped what it was to write songs. And, I initially wrote the songs that would come out on this album for myself and my own group which was Side by Side. So, by the time I was seventeen and about to graduate high school, yes, I was in a singing group. And, that singing group was called Side by Side. It was three guys, Corey [ph.] and Wally [ph.], as well as myself. And, we were running around and doing concerts and stuff like that by that time as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, what song writing, what theme, what was the theme--?
Speaker 2: The song writing process?
Speaker 1: Yeah. What was the process and what was your themes like? What were your--?
Speaker 2: My themes? I guess, my themes were always love, and you know, hooking up with a girl, you know, "What's up with you? Don't you wanna be down with me?" Blase, blase, blah, the regular stuff because I hadn't had a lot of experience in relationships and things of that nature. So, I was pretending that I knew what I was talking about. Not necessarily speaking so much from experience but what I thought people might want to hear and what seemed, you know, appropriate, I suppose. So, you know, the themes were definitely, you know, girlfriends, boyfriends, and you know, hooking up. I didn't have a lot of break up songs 'cause I didn't have a lot of break ups, per se, at that time. The songs that I wrote on Bell Biv DeVoe ['Hootie Mack'] that ended up coming out were called, "Please Come"--wow, that's more interesting. It was called, "Please Come Back." So, it was a break up song and "Lost in the Moment." "Lost in the Moment" was more of a song about being lost in the moment of lust and passion and blase, blah. And, "Please Come Back" was about a girl, I guess, who had broken up with a guy and he wanted her to come back, so. But, again, that was not from experience, it was more from, you know, just the thought of this'll be a cool tune. "Please come back into my life again." (Background noise) "Let me know you want me as your boyfriend." That was, that was the kind of--that was the hook of the lyrics.
Story_ID: 654147
Speaker 1: Right out of high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you write for Bell Biv DeVoe on an album, 'Hootie Mack,' and you also, you're, you earn a gold record.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: When I went to California to do the songs with Bell Biv DeVoe, I remember specifically that I bought a souvenir gold record and brought it back to my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] and told her that, "I'm gonna replace this with a gold record." Because, it was something about, you know, working with Bell Biv DeVoe at that time, because they were really, really hot, you know. They were like a really huge group going into that second album. Unfortunately, you know, they had gone like three or four times platinum on their first record, 'Poison.' And, then the 'Hootie Mack' record only went gold. So, you know, went from 3 or 4 million copies to five hundred thousand. Now, for them, that wasn't a win. But, for me, as that being my first product out, and it being on Bell Biv DeVoe, and making a gold record, it was the biggest thing in the world to me, you understand what I'm saying. And, I--of course, we felt for them that they didn't reach the heights that they had reached before and that they had to deal with the issues of like, you know, these songs for whatever reason didn't carry them as far, you know, as they would've liked them to. But, we were, we initially were slated to do the only two ballads on the record. And, at the last minute, because they wanted to make sure that they could sell the copies and we were unknown--unproven producers, even though they, they liked the material, they went with a Babyface song, because Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] was hot as well, to do the single. And, Babyface's single ["Something in Your Eyes"] is probably the reason why the record actually did as decent as it did. Because they had a Babyface song, and that got radio play and da, da, da, da, da, and blase, blah, so. Babyface where ever you are brother, thank you very much. And, we got that gold record and it probably wasn't really on us, and it probably really wasn't on BBD. It probably was on you. So, we wanna thank him (laughter). He's such a great songwriter, we need to thank him anyway.
Story_ID: 654148
Speaker 1: Now, did you work with The Roots?
Speaker 2: I worked with The Roots quite a bit. But, that was after I had moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and come back from Atlanta that I started working with The Roots. Of course, again like I said, I went to high school [Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with The Roots so, I was very familiar with them and their group as it was evolving and becoming a group. And, when they first got a record deal and put music out when I was in Atlanta, I would just kind of try to promote their music because I just loved them, and they were my guys--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --and Boyz II Men had done really well and they were like, to me, I thought they were the best hip hop group in the world and were gonna be, and so. Yeah, you know, we, we definitely, we caught energy again when I came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's get you to Atlanta now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, you go to Atlanta in ninety- is this '93 [1993] (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I go to Atlanta in 1993, like, shortly after that music was released ['Hootie Mack']. And, in 1992 and '93 [1993] that's when LaFace Records moved to Atlanta. Hence, Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], and L.A. Reid, and the TLCs and the Dallas Austins, and the Kris Krosses, and Usher Raymonds [Usher] and all of that stuff was happening, you know. And, L.A.--Jermaine Dupri, and all of that stuff was really starting to fester and happen in Atlanta, '92 [1992], '93 [1993], '94 [1994], '95 [1995]. And, that's when I moved down to Atlanta because I wanted to be a working producer. I wanted to be a working songwriter. I wanted to try to get my career really off and running. And, it just seem like at the time, like, Atlanta was the new Hollywood for musicians, you know what I mean. And, so, I hustled down there. And, me and Lionel [Lionel Caviness] got on the bus, and we moved in with his parents for a little while. And, you know, we just started trying to write songs and get with everybody that was in town, and hooking up with everybody. We ended up hooking up with like Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid], and Dallas Austin. And, of course, you know, LaFace Records. And, you know, staff producing and writing, and just getting our feet wet, and getting the experience that we needed, and making the contacts, and trying to become as resourceful as we possibly could, you know, to be a part of that scene.
Story_ID: 654149
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you if you had anything produced in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Nothing that we recorded and wrote and produced was actually released commercially that we did in that three or four years that we were in Atlanta, unfortunately. We tried--not, not to us not trying extremely, extremely hard. And, we worked with everybody, you know. We worked with the LaFaceses [LaFace Records]. We worked with the Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid]. We worked with Dallas Austin, Usher Raymonds [Usher], Donell Jones, the TLCs, you know, everybody. But, like I said, a lot of things that happen in the studio stay in the studio. Only certain things make it to the radio or make it to the records, you know what I mean. But, it was a wealth of experience and it definitely gave us what we needed in terms of the seasoning and learning the craft. And, so many people who were open and honest and shared information and, you know, invited us in and embraced us, you know, helped to formulate a lot of the relationships as well that we have now.
Story_ID: 654150
Speaker 1: Now back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Is this '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: No, I came back to Philadelphia, I believe, in 19--late 1995.
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995], okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. And, started pretty much immediately working with The Roots because by this time The Roots had released their first record [sic.], 'Do You Want More?!!!??!.' And, they were starting to be known as this new like, backpack neo soulish kind of thing happening. By this time, Erykah Badu and D'Angelo has come out and they had just recently worked with Erykah Badu. So, a lot of the young artist like Erykah Badu were starting to come after them for production. But, because The Roots were a hip hop band, you know, they didn't have a lot of experience with writing R and B songs, or soul songs, and things of that nature. That was not their expertise. So, they kind of pulled me in because they knew what I did and because we had, of course, a mutual respect and creative energy with each other that, this energy with each other that, you know, we will work well together. And, of course, we had our own relationship of going to school together [at Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and things in common. But, so, we just started working with different artist. They had a group by the name of the Jazzyfatnastees, which were four females [sic.] who were from California who they had brought to Philadelphia to start working on an album for them. So, I kind of, drove, drove deep right into that. Started helping them to write songs and things like that. So, whenever production was needed, Bobby Womack would come or [HistoryMaker] Eric Benet or different, different people that they might be working with or whatever. I would automatically kind of just get thrown into the mix to help out; Common, just so many different people would come to Philly and just wanna, you know, get a little taste of The Roots and this new live hip hop band and blase blah. And, infusion whatever elements of that that they could into whatever they were doing. And, you know, by default, again, I was included in a lot of that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So--
Speaker 2: As well as performing on their records, of course, as well.
Story_ID: 654151
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997] you met Aja.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: All right, this is your wife, [HistoryMaker] Aja Graydon.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, tell us how did--you all met and what happened.
Speaker 2: Well, I met Aja, I went to New York [New York]--there was a loft that The Roots had at the time where they were doing a lot of their production and jam sessions and things like that. And, they had--I guess, Aja had reached out to them or her record label at the time had reached out to them about writing some songs for her. So, she had come to town to, you know, check them out and see what their production and things like that was. And, they brought me up. When I got there she was there with another guy, it was this other guy, Eugene [Eugene Hanes], I believe his name was Eugene, and he was there to help her to write the songs that the--her label had sent. But, I was like The Roots' guy. You know, like The Roots felt comfortable with me being the guy to help her out with the songs. So, that was kind of a little conflict. There was also this thing like where the dude had written like some risque song for another artist, which we definitely did not see Aja going in that directions. And, so, we were all kind of concerned. "Well, do y'all want him to write one of them kind of of songs for her because that ain't gonna even fly on The Roots production," which was weird, you know. Again, not disrespecting him in any way because, you know, he, he made his money, he did his things, and you know, he got a hit song. But, it definitely was not the kind of hit that I felt like this girl, who could really sing, who was really awesome, would be into. But, I, so I, when I got there again, I, I remember she sang a Donny Hathaway song or something like that, and I might've sang a Donny Hathaway song. And, you know, we just had a mutual respect for each other's voice immediately, and we kind of hit it off. And, I don't know what happened with Eugene, but somehow he got filtered out. And, she just started coming to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and New York, and Philly and New York, and Philly and New York, and we just started working on songs for her and her project. And, kind of one thing led to another and we started liking each other, you know what I mean. And, you know, of course, we have both been in those kinds of situations before. You know, you work in close proximity with people, males and females, somebody gonna like somebody, you know what I mean. But, it was more than just liking her when we really started to realize how much we had in common and how similarly we thought about so many different things and just, we was connected. And, we were connecting a lot more than the music was connecting. And, I think that we were both in similar places in our life, as well, that we had been music for quite some time, even though we were young people, and had not had the success of the music that maybe we had thought we going to have by that time in our careers. And, again, even though we were young, we had been doing it and been around stuff and people and da, da, da, da. And, we connected from there and it was just like, well, maybe music is not what's going to take us where we gonna go. And, we started thinking about our relationship and hooking up and like the seriousness of that. And, like, maybe you--we're just on this path to meet each other kind of thing and get together. And, then we'll be a collective and then we gonna retire the music and just get the picket fence and get a regular job and start raising some kids, you know. 'Cause mom [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman] always use to say, you know, not just her mom [Susan Knox Graydon] or my mom or whatever, just, "You might need a regular job," you know, that whole thing, that music might not wa- work out, you know. Those kinds of things were always in the back of your mind. And, so, because, I think our love and our affection for one another and as well as this connection was so strong, it was so strong that it made us feel like, you know what, "Let's think about us and stop thinking about this music so much." And, we put our music on the backburner and got married. And, I got a regular job. And, started leaving music alone. I really thought that we were, I don't know if I thought completely we were leaving it behind or we were abandoning it--abandoning it or something. But, it was just like, the purpose of life felt like it shifted to family life at that time, you know what I mean. And, it wasn't as hard to say goodbye to it as I thought that it was going to be for that time. And, we rolled with that, and we had a son [Aquil Dantzler]. And, like I said, I started--and we got married, had a son, and I started working a regular job, you know, selling appliances (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what is it--what did you do? You said, you sold appliances?
Speaker 2: I--yeah, I was, I was an appliance salesman. I end up being a manager at an appliance store. It was called American Appliance [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. You know, the funny thing is it's right down the street from this business that we're in today [Media Shack, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know. Less than about a mile or two down the road. And, all here of businesses (laughter), they've all been on this block. So, it's so interesting to me like the other part of my life, you know, where I have to have another business outside of music in some way, you know. Not have to, but I do, you know. And, I've had stores, and now I have this place. And, but, they've all been on that road to Amer- towards American Appliance (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what, when did you all get married? Nineteen--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], September, 1998 we got married.
Story_ID: 654152
Speaker 1: (Background noise) In '99 [1999] something called the Black Lily showcase opens.
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: Now, what was that about; and what, how did that fit into what you all were doing?
Speaker 2: The Black Lily showcase to me was something that kind of morphed from the '96 [1996], '97 [1997] time that I was with The Roots, and working with them and what have you. And, that they used--like at their loft and at Ahmir's [Ahmir Khalib Thompson] house, Questlove. They used to do these jam sessions and everybody would come and all of the rappers and all of the musicians and da, da, da, da where everybody would be there. And, what would happen was a lot--because The Roots were a hip hop band and there were a couple of singers that were around but they weren't as plentiful as the rappers. And, but, what happens is at these jam sessions that the rappers would hog up the mics [microphones]. And, so, like I said, these girls, the Jazzyfatnastees who The Roots had brought to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for us to work on, you know, pre me and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] getting married. They just did not like the thought that they could rarely get on the mic. So, they created the Black Lily event to be like their jam session that was for all females. So, because it was lot--lots of male rappers but very few female rappers at that time. So, they felt like, you know, then at least we'll be able to get off our singing thing as females. And, it was also at the time there was this thing called the Lilith Fair, which was festival of all female artist. And, the Black--hence the Black Lily, you know, but a lot of those artist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like the black version of the Lilith Fair.
Speaker 2: The black version of the Lilith Fair. Which I don't think anybody has ever talked about, so. But, so, that was their black version. They wanted alternative kinds of female artist, black, you know, to be at this event. And, not just black but, you know, of course, they were black so naturally. So, they started that and it was interesting because at that time me and Aja were not Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul], of course, you know. But in terms of--by the time they started it, it was around the time when I believe I lost the job at American Appliance [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I working--this regular job where we're trying to get away from the music and do the regular thing. And, I got wind of that they doing this or doing that, da, da, da, da, and this a female event. And, I think maybe one day I came home and told Aja about it. And, was just like, "Look, you should go," you know. We got a kid [Aquil Dantzler] and I done lost my job, I felt bad like I, I just knew I could do this. And, I think a part of losing the job was that whole you needed to get back into what you do really well, you know what I mean. Maybe I sabotaged myself, I don't know. But, just the sign in it to me was, this is not gonna be what I really love. I might--can do this, I do well, and can make a little dol- money, but it's, it's not what I've been dreaming of and what I really want. And, but, I was telling Aja again because, you know, I felt like I had suppressed, or we had suppressed, you know, the whole thought of, you know, you wanted to be a star. I wanted to be a star. We both wanna sing. We both wanna write. We both wanna do, you know what I mean. But, now we're not doing that, and I done lost this job. The Jazzees done started the Black Lily, You need to go on down to the Black Lily. You know, I didn't know what was gonna become of it. I didn't know if it was just gonna be a thing where she would sing every now and then. And, then feel good that she was singing again somewhat. Maybe not necessarily be an artist but, you know, something to try.
Story_ID: 654153
Speaker 1: So I think she went to it [Black Lily] a couple of times, either in the Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or New York [New York] one and, you know, I g- and she liked it. And, and then I might've gone to it and seen what was happening. And, again, because I was--had a relationship with these people, all of the rules per se, didn't apply. Like, even though it was a female event, they might've let me do something or something like that. And, you know, a lot of the musicians, of course, were males but the artist out front were females. But, because again, like I say, I'm, I'm a part of the community of it, they might've let me do something. And, I don't know when it was that me and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] decided, "Hey, you know what, instead of you doing it or me doing it, why don't we just do it together?" But, that conversation eventually was had. And, it was like, instead of being two individuals, or you doing it sometime and me doing it sometime or whatever, we both love this and like instead of--and, that's, that's gonna tear us apart. Where you trying to do this and me trying to do this over here, we got a family, and da, da, da, we're go in different directions. Like, why don't we make a collective and we'll speak louder that way. Now, everybody always knows the two of us and then they'll just have to get to know us together. You know, like, you know, and so, we tried that. And, in the beginning it was still like Aja and Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] on stage. Like, Fatin do a little something. Aja do a little something, and we might try to come together da, da, da, da. But, we, we didn't have no clue on how to be a team, you know, or how to be a group. And, I think it was once we decided we can't be Fatin and Aja, we need to come up with a name that will collectively say who we are. That--and, we looked the thesaurus one day or whatever and we're trying to find some words that might be synonymous with, you know, what we were about. We was married, we was together, we're trying to do it, you know, as a collective da, da, da, da. And, just happened on the word kindred. And, it was like, "Hm, that's nice." So, we told people, "Hey, we Kindred." And, people, people liked that. People responded to it. And, it was like, "Hm." And, it felt good. And, we didn't become the Family Soul 'til later on because we had to trademark the name and there were other groups and entities and stuff that had the name Kindred. And, so, we added the Family Soul to further identify with the music as well as who we were, you know, and so that people would get that. And, also I love the monikers of back in the day, the MFSBs, of course, the Sly and the Family Stones, and I wanted a big name. A powerful--Earth, Wind and Fire. I wanted that kind of name that, you know, resonated and that felt like it was something, you know. It was bigger than you, you know. And, I, I really think that Kindred the Family Soul says that (laughter). And, you know, so, that, that stuck. That stuck.
Story_ID: 654154
Speaker 1: Black Lily has--was described by Jill Scott as a place where you come in as an amateur and leave as a professional.
Speaker 2: That's accurate. That's accurate for everybody who I know who performed at the Black Lily, very much so. You left as a pro, you came as an amateur. There were some of us who were pros even in our amateur stage, but the seasoning, you know what I mean. The coming into your own really was established at that place, you know. The weekly doing a show when you didn't have a song on the radio for the people to know the song to go back to see you, the only time that they heard it was that night. And, then they wanted to hear it so bad that they would come back the next week, and the next week, and the next week, and the next week, and the next week. It built character. It built showmanship. It was our launching pad. It gave us everything. We never had a demo, you know, like most artist, they have a demo and that's how they, you come to know their music, you hear this little tape. Our demo was, "You gotta come and watch us perform." And, that wasn't just us, that was, you know, all these other groups. And, that's how people came to know 'em. And, and most artist, these days, they don't touch the stage until they had a hit song. They might be touching the stage for the first time and you see 'em on 'David Letterman' ['Late Show with David Letterman'] or something. Like, making their national television appearance and they ain't performed nowhere but in their rehearsals for that appearance, understand what I'm saying, or in the garage. We was in front of people week to week, you know. Probably sometimes more than some of the artist who had songs on the radio and hits because they didn't have nowhere to play and da, da, da, da, because we have made a lane for ourselves. Or, we had created an audience for ourselves and, you know, had been crafting it, and honing it, and developing it, and you know, and people was embracing that. And, that was, that was great.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is something, it's almost like a movement in some ways--
Speaker 2: Absolutely like a movement (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in that, it came together for one purpose but it end up just taking on a life of its own with Black Lily.
Speaker 2: The Black Lily is very similar to the Harlem Renaissance and the peers of Motown [Motown Records]. And, you know, all of the times when creative people come together, they always come in packs. The jazz, you know what I mean. It's like they always comes in--they always, a whole bunch of cats was real talented that everybody know each other, you know what I mean. The Black Lily was not different. The Roots, the Philly movement, the Philly music, you know what I mean. The Black Lily is just an event, you know, that was hap- that happened at this club call the Five Spot [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. But, there's so much other energy that goes into the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] story and everybody being together at the Black Lily, or the Blue Funk and, you know, all these other little different events and stuff that used to happen. Wilhelmina [ph.] and Warmdaddy's [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and all these place that we would congregate and get together, but it also came from the churches. All of the musicians there, that's where they congregated. That's where they knew each other from before they would come and play for these artist and stuff like that. So, we was just a community of people that were connecting kind of at this place, you know what I mean. They were all kind of getting together at this place to jam, you know what I mean. They call came from different places and some of 'em know 'em here, here and there and there and there. But, that became our central kind of like meeting place, you know.  And, that was movement's hub, per se. Even though everybody who was a part of the movement wasn't on the stage necessarily or didn't necessarily always get an opportunity to perform, you know. Jill Scott is credited with saying that, but Jill Scott might be one of the people who, when people talk about the Black Lily that they think of first. But, she did not perform at the Black Lily like as a residency on--all the time. You know, she would only come through every now and then. By the time that that was really established and really going, Jill was already going. And, doing, you know, other kinds of things. So, you know, it would only be on a, on occasion that she would come there. But, because she's Philly's kind of, I guess, biggest known artist of this time, naturally they, you know, associate her with it, you know, probably a lot more.
Speaker 1: So, I got a note here that she was there, India.Arie, Floetry, Bilal, Alicia Keys, but who were the regulars? You know, who--?
Speaker 2: The regulars at the Black Lily was the Jazzyfatnastees, Floetry, Flo Brown, Lady Alma, Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul], 3 7000 9, which was Nou [Nou-Ra] and Dan [ph.], Slick and Rose, initially. Did I mention Flo Brown? I believe I did. It was girl name Sakeenan [ph.] who was playing it quite often. Aaries was another group in the city. All of those, about those nine or ten groups were the consistent--Jaguar, did I say Jaguar Wright? Those were the consistent artist. You know, those were the ones that probably got the most out of the Black Lily.
Speaker 1: Now, did Black Lily have a liquor license? Did they sell--?
Speaker 2: Black Lily wasn't a club. The Five Spot was the club. So, yes, the Five Spot had a liquor license and liquor was being consumed at the Black Lily.
Speaker 1: At Black--okay, so Five Spot was the--
Speaker 2: The Five Spot was the club that the Black Lily was held in.
Speaker 1: Okay. The Black Lily (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, that burned down.
Speaker 1: --was an event?
Speaker 2: The Black Lily is the event. Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right. Okay. So, all right, so, that's like once a week?
Speaker 2: Once a week. Every Tuesday.
Speaker 1: For how many years did this go on?
Speaker 2: From '99 [1999] to about 2002; 2002, 2003?
Story_ID: 654155
Speaker 1: This is a period of time, like you said, you mentioned the Harlem Renaissance which is, but, maybe the Black Arts Movement phase, well, you know, like with Baraka [Amiri Baraka] in Newark [New Jersey], or Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] at the Afro-Arts Theater in Chicago [Illinois] where people would come and doing something all the time and groups perform. So, did all these groups really become professional and do something--?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, Floetry has gone, Jazmine Sullivan, I did not mention Jazmine Sullivan, how did I forget that? Yes, all of them have gone on to do bigger and better things. But, of course, some of them have become more successful than others. Some of them are more household names than others. But, they've all garnered that same experience and that experience has pushed them to do more in the musical realm. People know of Floetry. They know of Marsha Ambrosius, and Natalie [ph.] who be- you know, Marsha, which was nominated for about nine or ten Grammys [Grammy Awards] last year. Of course, they know Jill Scott. Jazmine Sullivan was nominated for nine or ten Grammys. People know India.Arie, Raheem DeVaughn. People know Raheem DeVaughn. People know Bilal, please know Musiq Soulchild. People know Kindred the Family Soul. You know the Jazzyfatnastees have released some records, please know of them. Jaguar Wright has released records, people know of her. Lady Alma is a international artist. She's not a household name, but people know of her. She has fans. People love her and respect her and revere her. And, all of the musicians and the different people who used to play at the Black Lily are now playing on television and playing with all the major artist, playing with Jay-Z, Mary J. Blige, playing on 'American Idol,' playing the, the NAACP Awards [NAACP Image Awards], emdeeing [sic. emceeing] the awards, and different things like that. All these little cats and stuff that was coming there every Tuesday now have careers because they dedicated time and energy and, and put themselves in a place around like minded people. And, rubbed those elbows and touched shoulders with individuals who would go on to do bigger and better things. And, they aspired to do it as well and it--they caught that bug. And, they went and worked harder at becoming what they were looking at and what they wanted to be from what they was around all the time. And, that, I just can't even say how much the Black Lily or that event, and that opportunity that so much of us, so many of us being able to be together and learn, develop and grow like that, what it did for all of us. We're still seeing the effects of what it did for all of us, almost every day.
Story_ID: 654156
Speaker 1: Your wife, Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon], was saying that your vision for the group started growing more and more spectacular with--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --she said with horns--you wanted to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --add like legions of (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, much like I said about the group name and, you know, MFSB, and Earth, Wind and Fire and Sly and the Family Stone. You know, I seen those guys concerts. I seen what they used to do, and it wasn't small. It wasn't little. It was big. It was intricate. It was exciting. It was explosive, and I wanted that, you know what I mean. I needed that. I felt like, you know, we were a family group and I had all these family members and different people around me who I wanted to let them express themselves as well through what we were doing. And, I just didn't see any reason to cut it off. It's just like, "Look, the more the merrier. Let's make this thing big." Let's make this thing big. And, that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: That's what we did.
Speaker 1: Typically, who would be on stage with you two?
Speaker 2: Four background singers, three or four horn players, a rhythm section, guitar, bass, drums, keyboards, and maybe an organ, or, you know, (laughter) percussion. It was just whatever, man. Just, somebody play the triangle. If you play it good and you got some (unclear) you can throw in there, come on up. It was that kind of thing, man. And, just like--but, everybody fit like puzzle pieces into what we were doing. And, we all (laughter)--it was--that was a good time, you know. That was a really good time. And, I really wish that that vision as much as that was a strong and engrained vision in my mind at that time that I could've stayed consistent with that vision. Or, that the music business didn't in some ways make me have to alter that vision, you know. Because it has, you know. And, it's all good when we're doing it in a club and we ain't all--ain't nobody making no money and we ain't gotta travel, we ain't gotta go nowhere and all of those different things and we just gotta be here very Tuesday, everybody come on down. But, everybody can't go to London [England]. Everybody can't go to Australia. Everybody can't go to Florida. Everybody can't go to California. Everybody can't go to Canada, you know. We can't take fifteen people with us, you know, to make a couple dollars. Unfortunately, we just couldn't, you know what I mean. And, I'll never forget that that kind of came to a real deflated--the whole big band thing got deflated once we did our first tour. We did a tour where we were doing some shows with Teena Marie, and ironically, the person who said this ended up playing in my band. It was bass player. And, he was the bass player from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. His name was Doug [Doug Grigsby]. And, Doug was like, "Who's Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul]?" And, we was all backstage, we was all backstage and everybody raised their hand. And, it was like, you know, a good thirteen people (laughter), and everybody raise their hand. He was like, "Y'all ain't never gonna make no money." I didn't understand it. I thought he was, I really thought that he was disrespecting us or trying to make feel like we was less than Teena Marie at that time or less than a group. But, what he was just basically trying to say was that, you know, you can't be Kindred and be thirteen people, you know, out here right now, you know. You--that's not gonna work. The record label [Hidden Beach Recordings] let us know that as well, you know. We can't take on thirteen people, you know what I mean. Like, its gon- Kindred is you and Aja, you know what I mean. Like, we knew that. But, the Family Soul and the unit and all of that felt like, this is us. This is our presentation. If you look back to our first records and everybody's on the--not everybody is not on the cover, but everybody's inside of the art work and da, da, da, da. It was like, we are a band. We're not banded, you know. We're a band. And, that was what I wanted to project and for people to see and come to know us as. And, thankfully, that is how people came to know us and get us. But, unfortunately, it's been a very rough road to keep that idea and vision (gesture) at all times. You had to be, you had to adjust in the music business. You have to learn you gotta adjust.
Story_ID: 654157
Speaker 1: --To when singer Jill Scott discovered you all and introduced you to [HistoryMaker] Steve McKeever.
Speaker 2: I feel it necessary to clarify that Jill Scott did not discover us.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Well, hey--
Speaker 2: I mean, I feel--but, that is, that's the noted way that the story is told throughout the press and I don't fight it, per se. But, you know, we were all performing in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. We all knew each other and we were performing at the Black Lily. What Jill did do for Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul], no doubt about it, was she screamed from the rafters and told lots of people when she didn't have to, about Kindred. You know, whether it was in press, in interviews, and I can remember specifically Steve McKeever who we did eventually sign with [at Hidden Beach Recordings], telling us how much she would do this, you know. When she was on her promotional tour and what have you, like, when people was like, "Well, what's happening back home?" "Y'all gotta see Kindred. You gotta see--." And, she did that so much, I think, that it also got into Steve's head. And, so, her doing it around and being at an Essence luncheon or telling somebody, da, da, da, da. It was like, he like, "I gotta see this group," you know what I mean. And, so, he came to Philly--her and her husband. Because her husband at that time, Lyzel [Lyzel Williams], you know, they were very active in, you know just telling people about us. And, to me that doesn't mean you discovered us, but you definitely were instrumental. She was very instrumental in our getting to the label that we would sign with that, you know, ended up putting out our first record ['Surrender to Love'], which is how the public discovers us, I suppose. So, not, it's not in any way to take anything away from her. Of course, we are very appreciative and grateful for what she did. But, I don't believe that she discovered us. Discovered is Suzanne de Passe, I guess, discovered The Jackson 5 and took them to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, you know what I mean. It's like, she found them somewhere in a small club. We knew Jill. We had known Jill for quite some time. We just happened to be doing this event and she liked us so much that she would tell other people about us, da, da, da, da. So, again, thank her, and we thank her for that.
Speaker 1: Okay. I got it. So, but, this is, this is in 1999 when she intro- Steve McKeever approached you all about a contract?
Speaker 2: I would think that that was sometime in 2000. Because we didn't sign the contract 'til the December of 2000. So, sometime in, in--then. Sometime in 2000 is when we probably forged that relationship.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So, 2000--
Speaker 2: And, then our first record didn't come out until 2003 of--March [sic.].
Story_ID: 654158
Speaker 1: Now the first record ['Surrender to Love'] basically was material that you'd already developed at Black Lily, right?
Speaker 2: Correct. A lot of it, not, excuse me, not all of it but, definitely there were a good four or five songs that we were performing and what have you. Like I said, we never had a demo, per se, so we didn't have these songs recorded. But, we had worked them out. And, we had arrangements and we, we knew what we wanted to do when we would go into the studio to record them, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, what were these songs? A lot of what you all do is about the content, you know. I mean, its music and, its music and content. I mean, you really thing about the content 'cause the content--
Speaker 2: The message is in the music, you know. Much like [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble on the sound of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which is what we were brought up on, or I was brought up on that as well. And, I remember that mantra very much so. And, in our music we definitely are striving to put the right message or good messages, and, messages of hope, upliftment, love and, you know, all of those things that come along with that. As opposed to destructive behavior and things of that nature. We wanna put that into the music because we wanna put out into the universe what we would like to come back. So, we think about that consciously and set out to do that every time that we make music. Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, how would you--what was the creative process like to come up with the material?
Speaker 2: Free. Free and easy. I mean, you know, I can't remember racking our brains to come up with things. We just kind of let the inspiration hit us and feed us. And, because our first album didn't come out for three years, we had a lot of time to record, you know what I mean. So, and, because by the time we had a record deal, we had a good half of album that we kind of felt like we knew what we were gonna do. So, you only really had to come up with another half (video disturbance) for almost close to three years, you know, that the process didn't seem tedious. It did not seem difficult. You know, there were a lot of starts and stop and goes, and stop and goes and things like that. And, there were different times when we would have to bite the bullet on, that the record label [Hidden Beach Recordings] might have other ideas for how sonically they might wanted certain things to sound. Because, you know, we knew what we wanted to do but we were so used to hearing it live, we didn't know about how that would--not we didn't know, but we didn't know how that was going to translate to making a studio record which we knew we had to do 'cause we weren't making a live album for everybody to get to know us. We were making a studio project. And, even though some people knew the material and the way that they were used to hearing it, we needed to figure out how we were going to make this material make sense for the people who hadn't hear it. And, orchestrate it so that it could be timeless music that people would wanna hear again and again and again and again and again and again for, God willing, forever. That was something that I guess, that's more of the hard part about it. You know, getting to understand that and coming to those realizations of, that everything that you think may not be right and that there would be people with expertise and things of that nature that will have things to share with you that you would have to be open to embrace and understand. And, it's not always against you or, you know, to stifle your creativity and all of those different things that most artists feel, you know. But, at the end of the day, it is a product and it's gonna be a product for a company, you know. It's not just yours anymore, you know what I mean. And, everybody gotta kind of agree on that. That was probably the thing that was the hardest. The music flows, you know. The music is, is us. It's a part of us. All we need is some good music to sing to, you know what I mean. And, we can do that easily, you know. We can be inspired by all of the different things that's going on. We got a big family. We live in America (laughter). It's so much going on. So, you can, we can come up with the material. We can come up with the stuff. But, it's just like how it's done. How sophisticated I supposed was the thing that we had to learn to, to get better at.
Story_ID: 654159
Speaker 1: So you signed in 2000--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with Hidden Beach [Hidden Beach Recordings]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, your first album ['Surrender to Love'] comes out in 2003?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was, well, what happened in those three years?
Speaker 2: A lot happened in those three years. We had another baby [Nina Dantzler], of two thousand--September 11th [September 11, 2001] happened, you know what I mean, which slowed a lot of things down in the country, in the world. And, shoot, it took a good year or so, it seemed like for things in America to get back on track in some ways. And, for people to even be caring about putting out music and da, da, da, da. It was interesting. So, you know, a lot of that happened. But, a lot of developing and growing and getting prepared to be putting out a record. Though we might have thought we were ready. You know, I think that that was valuable time for us behind the scenes of, you know, developing, nurturing and continue to grow, and like I say, get ourselves ready to go and do what we were gonna be doing in 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, the recording. And, we was recording, we was recording all the way up until probably February, no, January, December or January of 2003. And, then the record came out in March [sic. February]. So, we worked, you know. And, they kept us working and we did, you know, quite a bit of material as well that didn't make the album, you know what I mean. And, so, we, we was in there.
Speaker 1: Now, was it, you know, was it easier to work with Hidden Beach in terms of the content and how it was gonna be presented?
Speaker 2: Hidden Beach gave us a lot of freedom, can't deny that, you know what I mean. They saw us as self sufficient, they, they trusted and respected what we had done, and who we were. But, they did not give us complete autonomy, you know what I mean. They knew that, you know, [HistoryMaker] Steve McKeever, of course, was an executive at Motown [Motown Records] and MoJazz [MoJazz Records] and now he was running a new company. He had a successful artist with Jill Scott, and had other successful artist he had work with. He knew how to guide and shape, or so, of course he, that experience told us that he did, you know what I mean. So, we tried to trust in that. But, it was still conflicts, you know what I mean. We definitely had conflicts. There were things that we wanted that they didn't want. Or, that they like, that we didn't like, you know. But, at the end of the day, I think that the project, especially the first project, I'm proud of it. I'm happy with it. I didn't agree with every single decision that we had to make sonically or different things that we might have did to change certain parts of the music. But, as I look back on it, I'm proud of it. I'm proud of the work that Hidden Beach did with it. I'm proud of what Steve McKeever's direction was and I'm proud of what we brought forth. And, I think that we wouldn't be here without it. So, to not be proud of it or (laughter) to have some problem or issue with it almost seems asinine. So, you know, and it gave us a lot of room to develop and to grow from as well, you know. But, while being a signature piece it's something that we can definitely say, "That's us." We could never say that that's not us even with things on it maybe that we didn't like or da, da, da, da. "The drums could've been this, or the bass could've been here, or the mix would've been that." But, it's like, it's Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul]. It's Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon]. And, to that, we all can be proud of, you know, the record label as well as Kindred. Because it all represents work that we all put in.
Speaker 1: I know one of the, the biggest hit probably on it is "Far Away."
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, now, was that written by, who wrote "Far Away"?
Speaker 2: Most of the lyrics of "Far Away" are written by Aja. I might have a couple of little things in there, and the music was written by Elise Perry. Elise Perry is a good friend of Aja's, songwriter and producer, and what have you in Washington, D.C. But, the development of the song like the song-song, that's Kindred. You know, like we developed the song, we developed the song, we developed the song, we developed the song, and of course, then it went through a lot of transitions musically to become the song that it became and that people love. But, you know, the original idea and concepts and stuff, really belongs to Aja and Elise.
Story_ID: 654160
Speaker 1: In May after the album ['Surrender to Love'] was released, you all shoot a video for it ["Far Away"].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you shoot it at the Black Lily showcase at the Five Spot [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right. So, how was that? That must've been a great occasion.
Speaker 2: Looking back on it now, it's like, wow, that's one of the only things that we have--I mean, of course, we have footage and film and stuff like that, but, you know, for the world to see, they got to see that we was doing all the time. And, what our story was, all in that video, you know what I mean. It was like, you know, we would leave our little kid to go down to this club, you know, hop in the trolley and you know, leaving them with mom [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman]. Or--our mothers, our mothers is in the video. All of our friends are in the video, Jill Scott, India.Arie, Musiq Soulchild, the Jazzees [Jazzyfatnastees], everybody's in the video, you know, Lady Alma. And, of course, the--not, of course, those are the name. But, the names are not even (laughter) in some ways not even as important and all of the people. The audiences, the audience that use to watch us every day, or every time that we would perform at this place, came back to watch us shoot our video. It was like, it was surreal. It really was surreal, you know, and (laughter), yeah, it was, it was surreal. It was really nice. It felt like art imitating life, you know, as they say. Just really proud that we have been able to incorporate so much of our reality into what we do. That's it's never been fantasy. It's never been made up. It's never been shock value, or something that we're just dong to try to grab people's attention. We're just telling them who we are. And, people, that resonates with people and they embrace that. And, they see themselves in who we are. Because we see ourselves in who they are. And, I think that's how music should be. That's how art should be.
Story_ID: 654161
Speaker 1: Now did you go on tour for this first album ['Surrender to Love']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did a lot of promotional touring and radio and, you know, travelled the world. Yeah, we travelled the world. We got a lot of great opportunities and opened up for a lot of great people. And, we're on a lot of festivals, and the Essences festivals [Essence Music Festival], and you know, what was it, the Saint Lucia Jazz Festival, and going to all the islands. And, we went overseas, went to London [England], went to France, went to Africa, you know, we, we did it all from making some, some little songs in a little room. And, you know, we was travelling the world and starting to realize and actualize a lot of the dreams that we had had as children. But, we were realizing those dreams together, you know, not Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon], not Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler], like how we had thought that things were gonna go. But, as a collective. As Kindred the Family Soul, as well as with those guys. And, you know, and that big band and what have you for a good period of time. And, you know, we covered a lot of ground and we made a lot of noise, and we had a lot of good times.
Story_ID: 654162
Speaker 1: You all received a Soul Train Award nomination [Soul Train Music Awards] for best R and B soul album for the first album ['Surrender to Love'].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, so, but, there's a story behind about what happened at the Soul Train Awards is what I understand, so.
Speaker 2: Well, I know we lost to B2K. I remember that. I don't remember what other story (laughter), we lost.
Speaker 1: I know you, I know Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] was saying that they had broken up by then, and (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right, yeah. Well, yeah, the group, the group who we lost--what was that, what was, I don't even remember what that--it was best R and B by a duo or group or something like that. And, we lost to B2K and they had broken up and Raz-B accepted the award. And, we were real pissed, 'cause we just knew we were really good and it felt like if they weren't in the category than we would've won it. But, it was just kind of like the whole thing of the young teen heartthrob group, you know, it was like The Beatles being in, in a contest with Ashford and Simpson [Nikolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] I guess, you know what I mean. Like, maybe that's kind of weird to say but at the time The Beatles was smoking (laughter), you know, it was that kind of thing. It just, we just didn't have a chance in that one, you know what I mean. But, again, the honor was an honor, you know what I mean. If--we grew up on 'Soul Train,' we performed on 'Soul Train,' we, you know, we got to do 'Soul Train' two or three times, and they always embraced us. Don [Don Cornelius] always embraced us. So, that really felt like a really cool reward event without the award, you know what I mean. That they had acknowledged us. That was the reward, they had acknowledged us. And, we was nominated again for a BET Award [BET Awards] or whatever, and lost that before we got to the building, so. It is what it is. Now, I've start to understand more that this is not about awards. And, the award is the reward. The reward really is what we get all the time from the people who embrace the music, you know what I mean, who love the music, who keep us going, who come to our shows, who tell us the stories about how, what happened to their children, or what happened to their dying husband, or what have you. Or, how this song got them through. That's the reward. That's the award. That's reward, and the award. You know that people embrace and acknowledge that what you're doing means something to them and that it touches them. That is the greatest gift, more than the money, more than the awards, more than the fame, all of that. It's just that knowing that you are touching people, connecting with people, and making a difference in someone's life somewhere. It just means everything.
Story_ID: 654163
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005], two things happened; you--I think Kindred the Family Soul produced 'In This Life Together.'
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Which is a--it owes it's title to a book by [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee--
Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about their lives together.
Speaker 2: Yep. Ossie and Ruby, as a black couple in the entertainment industry there are not a lot of examples to look to as a successful black couple in the industry of the arts. They're one 'em, you know what I mean. Of course, we, we had Ashford and Simpson [Nikolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson], you got Camille [Camille Cosby] and Bill Cosby, and couple of other ones, you know what I mean. But, with the history and legacy and the advocacy and all of the different things that they had done in their career's time just spoke to us a whole lot. And, I got their memoirs, which was called 'In This Life Together' ['With Ossie and Ruby: In This Life Together,' Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee]. And, was reading them and just seeing so many similarities in their stories and stuff. And, they're just another group of people who we aspire to be like. We wanna make a difference. We wanna make a change. We wanna be a part of people's lives beyond just our art as well, you know what I mean. And, make difference in other ways, and impacts in other ways. We don't know exactly know how that is going to happen or when it's going to happen. Or, you know, what is going to happen around. But, you can see a lot of that in their relationship and who they are. Of course, the Civil Rights Movement plays a big part in their story and who they were as people. And, the things that they had to do that take them outside of their comfort zone of just acting, you know what I mean, being there for the people, you know. That's important. But, they were together for over fifty years, you know what I mean. I mean, that says it all. You know, my grandparents [Dantzler's step-grandparents, Marion Solomon and Arra Solomon] were together for over fifty years, but they weren't in music, you know. And, I think that they are a great example as well. And, we just kind of lifted the title in hopes that in some way, like a karma kind of thing. Like, you put into the universe what you want to come back, again like I said earlier. So, hey, if we wanna be like somebody great like this, let's put it into the universe that we're like, or, of, you know, we want to be like who they have become, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a, that's something very ancestral about that. I mean, in terms of something very African about it.
Story_ID: 654164
Speaker 1: Now, the same year that 'In This Life Together' comes out, the last performance of Black Lily takes place.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, how do you--talk about the end of this.
Speaker 2: Well, well, the last Black Lily, we recently done or they, they've made a, or they're making a film ['Last Night at the Five Spot'] out of this event that you're talking about was our, my eighth year anniversary I believe it is. And, we pulled all of the different artist who used to perform at the Black Lily to come back. And, my wife wanted to have a party where we kind of got together or whatever. And, you know, at that time we had no idea that that was gonna be the last Black Lily. At that time, the Black Lily was no longer running. What it was, was more like a reunion of all of us who had performed at the Black Lily at this place the Five Spot [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It ended up being the last time that we would all get together at the Five Spot, even though it wasn't a Black Lily event, per se. We called it Kindred the Family Reunion. But, it was a reunion of all of, not only the people who have played on the stage of the Black Lily, but again, the people who had witnessed it; the audience, you know what I mean. 'Cause they were a pivotal, I mean, a very instrumental part and piece of what we all became as well. Because without their cheering on or booing or, you know, you know (makes sound), all of that stuff, it built the character. It built who we was, and we were all together on that one. And, you know, everybody came out to that and, everybody came out to that. That was a monumental day. A very big milestone moment in our lives. And, what it showed me more was where we had been, who we were and the relationships that we had built with so many people. 'Cause people came from far and wide to be there for us, you know. Not necessarily just for the Black Lily or da, da, da, da. But, for us because we asked them to come and they wanted to be with us. And, that they had meant something in our lives and we meant something in their lives and that was really special for me and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon]. And, it just, it filled us with so much love and joy. And, for that to end up being the last time that we would get together and then of course, I guess, you, you know the story about everybody else. But--that eventually, that club would burn down to the ground. And, so, no longer do we have the memory of the place. But, we always hold on to the memory, of course, of what we did there and the times that we had there. And, of course, that night probably being the most special night that we hold near and dear to our hearts.
Story_ID: 654165
Speaker 1: Now, in 2006, one of your, one of Kindred's songs, 'My Time' is named as the official song of the National Education Association's Read Across America campaign.
Speaker 2: Yeah. That was nice.
Speaker 1: And, so, how does that go anyway?
Speaker 2: Actually, the publicist for the, for the NEA or whatever, was a good friend of our who really loved the song 'My Time,' and submitted it or, you know, pitched it, submitted it, whatever the case may be, to the board and whatever. And, they liked the song, and they really appreciated it. And, that song wasn't a single. It wasn't like on the radio and things of that nature. And, even in the campaign, I'm not even sure how, how many people we touched or how much happened with that because I just knew of the campaign. It wasn't something that we were actively running around and doing, or going to schools, and reading or blase blah. It was just something, you know, much like 'Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow' ['Don't Stop'] was the President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] song. And, he would always have it going on, you know, that they just used it at different events and what have you. But, again, you know, for it to be a national campaign to be using a little group like Kindred [Kindred the Family Soul]. And, think that the song that we had come up with was something that would resonate across America. To be a part of something that big, we were really excited about it and very, very happy.
Speaker 1: I was telling Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] that 'My Time' sounds like the answer to a book written by a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] author named [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who writes children's books and we interviewed--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: --some years ago. His book was called 'Now is Your Time!' for black youth.
Speaker 2: 'Now is Your Time!,' I gotta go back and check that out.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, you know, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I absolutely will.
Speaker 1: --just thought I'd raise that.
Speaker 2: Hey, man, you know, the apple don't fall too far from the tree. We all from Philly. We're all being inspired. And, you know, you just never know, creative things, when you're thinking you're trying to put the right intentions out there, I think a lot of people think similarly, you know. We all think with the left and the right brain I hope.
Story_ID: 654166
Speaker 1: In 2008, now you had several, well, three children born before I believe. But, you had twins--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --born. Now what was (laughter)--you wanna talk about that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. We had twins on our fourth and fifth children. My daughter's Lanaa [Lanaa Dantzler] and Ain [Ain Dantzler]. We working, we were doing, and for about eight months we didn't know we was having twins. And, we found out right near the end that we was having twins. That was a shocker and a kicker for me, I'll tell you that. We should've named that album 'The Surprise' not 'The Arrival,' 'cause that's actually what those kids was (laughter), a big surprise. But, it like, we ended up, I mean, we were working on a record and what have you and ended up call the album 'The Arrival' because that's what we were waiting on our arrival. And, but, the girls, they just, I don't know, man they--that was amazing because, you know, I had had three children beforehand, and my wife [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] ended up having twins. And, she had vaginal birth and C section [Cesarean section]. And, I remember specifically just watching--how much respect that I gained for childbirth and for my wife on those children, you know what I mean. Of course, I had it for her on all of my kids. But, you know, what she had to go through to bring two children into the world, as well as, you know, watching her feeding two kids and having--it's like, it's, you know, a mom, they just give their all. And, my daughters required the all from my, from my wife and you know, she gave it to 'em and was able to do that. And, the strength that it took to be able to do that, I just, I don't know where it came from. You know, but, it inspired me to get on my Ps and Qs and to not be downtrodden by the thought of, oh, my god, we're having two kids instead of one. It's like, we're gonna have five kids instead of four. It's like, that was just major. It was just, it through me for a loop, but (laughter), thankfully we made it through, man.
Story_ID: 654167
Speaker 1: So, when 'The Arrival' comes out, 'The Arrival' marks the first album that's not produced by Hidden Beach [Hidden Beach Recordings], right?
Speaker 2: No. That's our last record--'The Arrival' is our third record. We did three records with Hidden Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, 'Arrival' is Hidden Beach?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. All right, so, in also, in 2009 you began filming a web reality television show call, 'Six Is It'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right? So--
Speaker 2: Well, we were trying to something a little groundbreaking. Trying to get in early on when a lot of the social networking and stuff was really starting to take its form, the MySpace and all of that stuff, you know. Of course, we had done videos. One of the things that our fans always ask us when they find out that we had a big family was, "How do y'all do that?" You know, like, "How? Like, I don't get it," you know what I mean. And, so, actually we were pregnant with our sixth child [Deen Dantzler] and--can we hold for a second? I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay. So, 'Six Is It.'
Speaker 1: 'Six Is It.' Everybody always asking us how do we do it? How do we do it? How do we do it? We were having our sixth child (laughter), we were having our six chi- we was always having a baby, until I got that vasectomy. But, we was, we was having our sixth child, and it kind of happened organically of how we started the show. Basically, I had went to tell my son [Aquil Dantzler] once we found out that we were having a boy. And, much like people take their cell phone or whatever and they tape little moments of their life with their little camera phone and they check, taking the stuff. We was doing that. And, I went to tell my son that we was having a boy. I found out he was on the football field. He was playing a game of football with his team. And, you know, I took my phone up to him to surprise him and I wanted to show his mother [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] what his reaction would be. And, you know, I told him that we was having a boy, da, da, da, da, and just like--he has four sisters. So, him knowing that he was having a brother, he just was so excited and it just was such a cool moment that I caught on this camera. And, when I showed it to his mom and da, da, da, da, it kind of felt like something that we should share with the fans, you know, for whatever reason. And, rather than share it with the fans, I guess, just straight the way it was, we edited it. Like to, you know, give it a little more theatrical presentation, I suppose. Put a little music behind it and you know, something like that, and when he jumped, it went slow motion. So, it just added to the moment. And, it was like, wow! That's so cool. It was like that's so cool and it was like, you know what, what we're gonna do is countdown 'til the baby comes, we're gonna show people what happens in our life, you know what I mean. A little bit, you know, I always say rather than doing it like where we dress up and, you know, when you know what we're gonna do and you know, we're trying to act it out. It was like we'll just turn the camera on ourselves every now and then when something's happening, we're at dinner or, you know, you're changing a diaper, or you're having a doctor's appointment, da, da, da, da. We'll just take some of those little moment. Same little moments that you would probably would tape and have for yourself and never put out as a TV show, you know what I mean? That's what we were trying to do. So, it just caught on, you know what mean. It really caught on and people really enjoyed that and really like it. And, even though it wasn't the beginning of reality TV, it was cutting edge and kind of new for our medium and definitely web show new for an artist to be doing it. And, now, it's almost like it's the norm. If you're trying to put out a record, then somebody trying to put a reality show together and do this, da, da, da, da. And, but, it was never on no, you know, we need to be more famous. Everybody's gotta do, it was like, it was just an organic kind of thing that was an extension of the music, you know what I mean, like videos are an extension of the music. But, this was a way what we could kind of show you how we were making the music, how we did when we wasn't making the music and blase blah. And, hopefully, answer that question that people always was asking us. And, we did three seasons of it, you know. And, it got, you know, rave reviews, and a lot of hits, and lot of people watch it. But, now, it's different, you know what I mean. And, now everybody wants to do a reality show. It's so much of it, and almost feels like, you know, I don't wanna do it because people feel like you suppose to or that's what you have to do or whatever. So, we've been taking our time with it. And, I'm not really sure rather or not we will revisit that and redo it anymore or whatever. But, it, it went really well, and I think we covered a lot of great subjects and what have you in it. And, of course, it's like available on the Internet. So, people can go and see at any time and it will always be there, you know, because once you put something on the Internet, you know how that go (laughter).
Story_ID: 654168
Speaker 1: You all have a unique kind of situation as, I think as you put it one time, you're like, you're just the neighborhood R and B--
Speaker 2: Your friendly neighborhood R and B group [Kindred the Family Soul]. Yes, sir, that's us. We're Mr. Rogers and Mrs. Rogers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like to think of us that way. I think that we're just open, accessible and we're your, we're your neighbor friends. We just happen to be singers, you know what I mean. Like, in our community there's a great doctor, there's a great dentist, there's a great lawyer, and they all live on the block. And, we just happened to be, I'd like to believe, the great singers, you know what I mean. And, we live in the community. We live in the neighborhood and we're amongst the people. And, we feel very confident and comfortable with that. And, that is every grounding because one minute we standing on stage with Mary J. Blige or, you know, whoever, Aretha Franklin, who--it could be whoever, you know what I mean. And, next we hanging out with Mr. and Mrs. Smith, you know what I mean, on the block. And, talking to them about what's going on in their life and what's happening in their day. And, we can easily be in both of those worlds without feeling out of place, you know, without feeling like we don't belong. And, that is, I think it's good. I think it's a testament to who we are and who we were raised to be.
Speaker 1: And, years ago people had access to the black celebrities in their community, because they lived in the community.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Nowadays, it seems that the aspiration is to--
Speaker 2: Move from the community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) get beyond and out. Not even just because you're an artist--
Speaker 2: I think I learned a lot of the whole community thing from [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble. Kenny Gamble is like another mentor to me and what he's done for his community in South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and staying in this community that he grew up in and rebuilding it, is like the highest inspiration. And, that's what I would like to do. Unfortunately, I haven't made the kind of mark that Kenny Gamble has. So, I don't have that kind of funds behind me to go in and do those kinds of things. I like to believe that if I did that I would, you know what I mean. And, it starts here, you know what I mean. And, doing whatever I can. And, I don't have to have those kinds of funds in order to make a difference either, you know what I mean. And, I feel that I am doing that. I've built businesses in my community, you know what I mean. I do my best to help people in my community. I support my neighborhood business. All of those different things and it starts there. And, God willing, if I get the monies that I need to be able to revitalize different things in my communities and the places that I've grown up and that I love and respect, I'm gonna do that.
Story_ID: 654169
Speaker 1: When did you meet [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble and?
Speaker 2: I met Kenny Gamble in 1991 probably for the first time, 1991. I've worked with Kenny Gamble. I've worked with his artists.
Speaker 1: And, you were then, what? You were only like (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--
Speaker 1: In 1991, you were like--?
Speaker 2: Seventeen, seventeen, sixteen--seventeen probably. You know, I was introduced to Kenny Gamble. I worked with his artist, the Girlies [ph.]. I worked alongside Dexter Wansel, and Bunny Sigler. And, you know, but these are things that I guess we didn't talk about because I jump around (laughter). But, you know, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I, I'm a part of the fabric of all of it, you know what I mean. Not just The Roots, the Kenny Gambles, the Philly International sound [Philadelphia International Records], the Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince [DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince], and their production company, Touch of Jazz [A Touch of Jazz]. I worked amongst all of them, you know what I mean. I, I've worked in conjunction with, worked alongside, you know, been mentored, been embraced, you know, from all of the Philadelphia musical community for the most part. Because I'm a young person who aspired to do and reached out and, and they gave back of themselves to me. Just, Kenny is just a really great guy, a really great guy. Great family man and of course, great songwriter, you know what I mean, great executive, you know what I mean, great philanthropist, you know. But, just somebody you can talk to, somebody who again doesn't make you feel like, he's Kenney Gamble, you know what I mean. When you sit with him, you feel like it's your grandpop, or your, your dad, or whatever and he just openly sharing with you. And, this is a millionaire and he's sitting there talking with people and does--never makes them feel less than, small. That's important. And, just speaks volumes about people who have that kind of position, you know, who have achieved that kind of success who are not ashamed or afraid or unwilling to embrace the next generation, to share with the next generations to give of themselves. I, I've learned that lesson from people like him over and over and over again.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, so when people, I think I told him when we interviewed him that, you know, when people ride home on Sunday afternoon from church or meetings or where ever they're at, to the pancake house and back home again, they listen to Kenny Gamble.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: 'Ain't No Stoppin' Us Now'--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --when we graduate and all these, you know, these songs are--
Speaker 2: So many life moments are--go right hand and hand with Philly International, and Philly songs, and that's what we want. That's what we set out to do, you know. We want that same thing. I said earlier, the message in the music. We want our message in our music but we also want people to--be the backdrop to people's experiences, you know what I mean. That means everything when somebody says, "Hey, my child was born and your song was playing," or, you know what I mean. Like you said, "I graduated to 'Ain't No Stoppin' Us Now.' And, we sang that." It's just like, "'Sadie Mae' [sic. 'Sadie'] when my mom died, somebody sang that," or, "that makes me think of my mom all the time, and, 'I'll Always Love My Mama.'" Or, you know, just, hey man, you do yourself a great justice by making music that is going to be relevant and relative to people's lives forever. And, not that you know exactly how to do that. But, if you, if your intention is to do that and that's what you're setting out to do, you know what I mean, and you put all of your all into it, God willing, that is what will come back from, from it. And, I just really believe that that's what they wanted and that's what they tried to do. And, again, from them doing that, they have inspired a generation, and generations of other individuals who wanna do it too, who wanna be just like it. And, everybody don't get to sit with Kenny Gamble and talk to him and feel that energy and da, da, da. But, I have had that opportunity and I know that that is in my spirit. And, it is working on me and I'm out here trying to be busy and do whatever I can to be like that, you know. You just, you wanna be like that. You wanna, you wanna make an impact. You want people to remember you that way. You want people, when they talk about you, to be talking, I guess how I'm talking about him. Because, why wouldn't you (laughter) want that? Why wouldn't you?
Story_ID: 654170
Speaker 1: How were you able to resist or the pit I think, well, I think there is a pit because everybody got their choice, but the path that a lot of people your age took in terms of your music and the message? A lot of messages are not so positive.
Speaker 2: I venture to say that, I'm very fortunate that me and my wife crossed paths, and that fork in the road pulled us together. Because, if we weren't, we probably both would be different kinds of artist. I don't think that we would be lewd and nasty and disgusting artist that I would not proud to tell my mother [Delica Dantzler Sulaiman], my music, and blase blah. I think that our upbringing still sort of speaks to who we are as individuals and as artist. But, it's like the purpose of our music became different than just singing songs about girls and love and I wanna hook up with you kind of thing because we were a family. And, the music that we put out it, I guess, it forced us in some ways to be more than mundane or different than other people. They couldn't accept that the same way from me and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] singing like some of them sing, you know I mean. Because y'all are husband and wife, what y'all talking about. Like, so, it, it kind of pigeon hold us in some ways that, you know, we had to be who we are. And, again, not had to be, 'cause everybody has a choice. But, it made you feel like the only thing that makes sense, for real, for real, is for us to be doing this the right way. And, putting out the right messages and blase blah, and we learned all of this already. And, this is the kind of music we love, why would be do something different? The mere fact that our music is considered soul, I suppose--in a lot of instances considered more soul than it's considered R and B. R and B today is more hip hop with singers, you know what I mean. They, they sing rap. You sing rap. That's how--that's what R and B is today, you know. I'm singing a song like, that the same rapper would rap the lyrics that I'm singing, and then it'll be a rap song, you know what I mean. I'm talking curse words. I'm speaking to the chicks and calling them out their name. And, I wanna sex her and do this and da, da, da, da. That's your rhythm and beats, we cal- I mean, rhythm (laughter), rhythm and beat--is it rhythm and beats? Or, (laughter) it's no longer rhythm and blues but basically, you know what I mean, it's just like that's what it is, you know. So, we are happy that we're included I guess in the soul category or the neo soul category, and the instrumentation and orchestration and all those things are still considered hand and hand with our music, you know. Which places us in a more classic place of the R and B artist of yesteryear as opposed to the R and B artist of today. So, we get that respect, and we get that, that love. But, they're also different things that kind of ostracize us from young R and B music, per se. Because it automatically lumps us in, with the artist of course, who are older than us and artist who have done what we're trying to do, per se. Whereas, you know, the young hip, hot, R and B stuff is on the urban channels and we're on the urban AC [adult contemporary] channels, you know that I mean, with a more sophisticated audience. Which we have no problem with because we like to believe we sophisticated too. But, you know, it is what it is.
Story_ID: 654171
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite song or favorite track of yours that you--?
Speaker 2: This'll be a cliche answer of course, you know, but, basically, you like to think of your work as a body of work. And, one thing that bothers me more than anything, to be honest, is that--because an ar- I like to believe an artist's best work is very rarely the song that everybody loves. That everybody knows, and that every loves. It's very rarely, what, if you talk to that artist, they think that that, this is my best work. But, every artist no matter how big their catalog is, no matter how many great songs they have, somebody love this one song by them, you know what I mean. And, they're always known for that one. When they pass away or anything happens, it's like, "Throw on 'I Will Always Love You.'" That's, to me that's not Whitney Houston's greatest song, you know. I know you're not asking me about Whitney Houston's, but I just saying that, you know what I mean. It's just like, but maybe it's her biggest. It might be the one that everybody knows. So, I would definitely not say, you know, the one that everybody knows. Even if I were to mention a song. But, I think, our best materials has yet to be written, you know what I mean. I think that we're still discovering what's going to be our very best. I think that every time that we do something, there's room to grow and get better. So, I can't see how that could be the best, you know what I mean. Like, that's something else to get better from, you know what I mean. To give you a template to say, "Oh, I've done that. Now how can I do better? How can I do, you know, something different?" And, I mean, but not even just better, but just, how can I further contribute more than what I have contributed? I think that's the, you will always wanna be contributing. I wanna contribute to music's library, to music's timeless library and make some songs that will be here forever.  For as long as sound is around, and we can listen to it. I would like to be a part of that, you know. And, of course, if I'm not here to experience it, I would still like my family and my heirs to know that granddad or whoever I will be to them da, da, da, he made this. And, and grandmamma, grandpapa, you know, Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] and Fatin [HistoryMaker Fatin Dantzler] they, they did this and they wanted us to get something from it and to, to experience it and for it to uplift us and to, for us to feel good; and that's what you want.
Story_ID: 654172
Speaker 1: Now, what are working on now? You mentioned a movie at one point about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  What we're working on right now is we have a current album out right now, 'Love Has No Recession.' This is our fourth CD [compact disc]. But, we, we're sitting right now, we're conducting this interview in a place called the Philly Media Shack [Media Shack, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which we own. Which is basically a postproduction design house to do visuals and graphic design and arts packages, album arts packages, videos and things of that nature. All things media for artists and ourselves and corporations and things of that nature, campaigns, whatever the case may be. We're working on a play, which--a theatrical play that we're working on. I have a couple of film projects kind of in the works. One of those films is 'Last Night at the Five Spot,' which is what we discussed earlier. Which is that document- documenting the eight year anniversary that we did at the Black Lily, at the Five Spot club [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], our Kindred the Family Reunion thing, with all these different individuals who performed that. So, we've been working on that kind of for a couple of years and trying to get everything going. But, it's, it's really taking a lot of shape and form and almost, almost ready. Couple of other things that I'm doing, we're shooting videos on other artists, our peers and things of that nature now. So, I'm getting behind the scene and behind the cameras of other artist careers, you know that I mean. And, and spreading our wings and just, you know, trying our best to be well rounded because the business at this stage, you know, is much different than when we released our first record ['Surrender to Love'] in 2003. A lot has changed. The music industry it in a much different place. So, now, you need to be well rounded. Now you need to have other skills beyond just the skill of making music and putting out records. You have to understand that it does not stop there. And, we're just doing our very best to navigate that terrain, you know, which, you know, thankfully we have a lot of experience with a lot of other different things as well. But, just applying the science that we know what we're doing from the music to other things as well and embracing other people. And, bringing other people into the fold to become umbrella companies and what have you. And, realizing that there's much more power in working with a team of individuals than it is apart. Much like me and Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon], you know what I mean, we're applying that science, I suppose, to what we do in other ways as well. And, just trying to become resourceful and a powerhouse.
Story_ID: 654173
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Man, my hopes and concerns for the African American community are vast, I suppose. I would like to see us rise as a people. I would like to see us become more educated. I would like to see us, see the best in ourselves, to stop seeing the worst in ourselves. I would like to see us stop black on black crime. I would like to see us all extend to higher positions, and higher consciousness, you know what I mean, so that we can be better people. I would like to see us tap into our ancestry. I would like to see us know that we come from kings and queens and start to identify with that. And, and realize how important and how valuable we are not only to society but to ourselves and to our communities. So many different things I wanna see for the black community. I want us to the black community. I want us to be a community, you know what I mean, who respects each other, who works with each other, who doesn't find fault with one another, who embraces each other, completely, you know. Black African, black Haitians, black Jamaicans, black--people from America, you know, everywhere, you know what I mean. So, that we realize that we are all cut from the same cloth and that we all can work together, work alongside each other, and that we, we're of each other, you know. We are of each other.
Story_ID: 654174
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could redo it?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No. No. Everything that I've done has given me experiences that I would not trade. No, I wouldn't do it differently. I mean, there are mistakes, I suppose, that I have made that I wished that I didn't make, you know. Naturally, who doesn't have that, you know what I mean. But, in retrospect now that I've gone through that, you know, I realize that those mistakes build character, they gave me experience to know what was good, what is bad, what's right, what is wrong. And, they made me into who I am. There's not a lot of things in my life that I regret. There's not a lot of things in my life that I regret. There's situations and scenarios again that I wish that I had not done certain things, per se. But, I don't regret, and I don't wish to do over, per se. I just hope that in the time that God gives me ahead of my life that I will get better at what I'm doing and that I will be pleasing to Him and of service to others appropriately.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you still a practicing Muslim?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 654175
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I presume my legacy is going to be in my children, number one, you know what I mean. Because I'd like to believe that I'm raising dynamite children. Really great children that we're gonna try to put everything that we possibly can to culture them and love them hard and give them all of the tools that they will need to be successful young adults. But, you know, I make music with my wife [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon]. I mean, that is the legacy of I've done commercially and you know, to the world I suppose. I've travelled the world making music and trying to lift people up and give them joy and backdrops of their experiences as well. So, God willing, that will be, you know, a part of my legacy. But, I hope that I'm still writing my legacy and what I will leave behind and what people will remember me by the most. I hope that it's, it's still happening and that I will get the opportunity to do more.
Story_ID: 654176
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. My oldest son is Aquil [Aquil Dantzler]. He just turned thirteen. My oldest daughter is Diya [Diya Dantzler], she's nine. (Background noise) My middle daughter is Nina [Nina Dantzler] and she's six. And, my twin daughters are Lanaa [Lanaa Danztler] and Ain [Ain Dantzler], they're three. And, my young son is Deen [Deen Dantzler] and he's two. And, they're a handful. A very big handful. My son, Deen, is like my road dog, my little partner, and my little, my little joy. The twins are very special little girls, very outgoing, very talented, wiser than their years and like old, little old souls. They sing a lot and make songs up and (laughter) just, just very active. And, Nina, my daughter, Nina is very similar, very outgoing, very alive. She's a dancer now, going to dance class and stuff like that. My daughter, Diya, is into designing clothes and you know, I really think that she may have something there. And, they all sing and like music, of course, because music is everywhere and all around our house. But, I'm not positive if any of the kids are really adamant about, like I wanna do what mom and dad does, per se. My son, the oldest son, he's into football and basketball. And, you know, of course, he's the sports guys. He wants to do what dad didn't do, per se. And, I like that in a lot of ways. So, he doesn't have to get compared. I mean, you think about that a lot of times, the kids who come up behind musical parents or whatever, like that's their journey, you know what I mean. You always gonna be Such and Such's kid or whatever. So, like, that's a little weird, you know. I think that they could be super talented and could do whatever they like to do. But, I don't think that in any way we're not pushing them so, you know, "Come do some music." And nobody pushed me. I don't think anybody pushed Aja [HistoryMaker Aja Graydon] to do music either which is like it's naturally something that we progressed to and we just had an affection for and then people supported it, you know what I mean. And, that's what we wanna be for our kids. We wanna see what it is that they really wanna do and what they really gravitate towards, and then God willing, be supporters and facilitators of it for them. All of my kids are, you know, really great kids, very well rounded and very talented. And, I'm not really quite sure, you know, what they're going to do, but whatever it is, God willing, it's gonna be great.
Story_ID: 654177
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) As a guy who loved his family, who put his best foot forward to make his life better, who was a giving person, who gave of himself freely and openly, and a guy who made great music that people loved. And, just always did his best, you know. I just always did my best and (pause) I don't think too much more than that to be honest, you know. I really hope that the work that I will do before I go will speak for itself and that it will remain in the universe as good works (background noise). I really hope that God is pleased in the end, you know. Of course, you want people to remember you and you want them to have good memories of you. But, ultimately, I think that we all return to God and He needs to be pleased with the work that we did here. And, I hope and pray that I, I get that, get--do that. I hope and pray that I'm able to do that.
