Story_ID: 298727
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer.  This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer for The HistoryMakers.  I'll have you introduce yourself.  State your name and spell it out for me.
Speaker 1: Cool, cool, cool. Kool Moe Dee, AKA Mohandas DeWese [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese].  M-O-H-A-N-D-A-S, DeWese, D-E-W-E-S-E.
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is December 6.
Speaker 2: November 6.
Speaker 1: November 6?  December 6.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's December.  Okay, sorry (laughter).  All right, December 6.
Speaker 1: Yeah, today's date is December 6, 2005.
Speaker 2: Location of this interview?
Speaker 1: We are in Alpine, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: And your occupation?
Speaker 1: Right now, I am actually in the studio, so I can say this again.  I am hip-hop icon, rapper, writer, and producer--television producer.  I got a little TV show getting ready to pop, so we'll see how this all works.
Story_ID: 298728
Speaker 1: All right, so we'll start with five sort of People magazine type questions, just to feel you out.  Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, favorite food.  Seafood, salmon.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is actually--that's hard, that's like two--I would have to say if you're talking about color in terms of clothing to wear, white.  If you're talking about color in terms of vibration, purple.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year would have to be summer.  I'm born in the summer, and I actually love the summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm not really a traveler.  The place I had the most fun was actually Amsterdam, Holland [the Netherlands] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is what it is, it is what it is (laughter).
Story_ID: 298729
Speaker 1: So, we're going to start.  We're going to continue to talk.
Speaker 2: Cool.
Speaker 1: We will talk about you as a child, but before we do that, I want to go back to your mom.  I want to talk about your mom a little bit.  Your mother's name and her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Mother's name, Josette DeWese.  Date of birth, just five days ago.  I came in town for her birthday, actually, December 1.
Speaker 1: Now tell me, what was your mother like?  I mean, and by that I mean, what stories did she tell about her own childhood when she was a child that you remember?
Speaker 2: My mother actually is, it was almost like the comedy, comedic star that didn't happen, hilarious around the house.  She and my father [William DeWese], but she in particular, had one of the most extensive vocabularies I have ever heard.  I know for a fact my father read the dictionary.  So, you know, when they went at it and insulted each other it was always quite wordy.  "Don't capitulate," blah, blah, blah, blah. "You trying to euphonize and tell me--what the--."  You know, you had to read to keep up with the insults (laughter).  So, the insults just wouldn't be "Hey mama," oh, no, very, very wordy.   Eloquent, you know, in that sense.  The one thing I also got clearly from my mother besides her sense of humor was the fact that she had an approach to life that was simultaneously optimistic and pessimistic.  Ambivalence was the first thing I noticed about life.  People can have great hearts and great intentions and not have great follow through and still--circumstances can still turn out good or bad depending on how much of the follow through comes through or whatever.  And the one thing I would say is that my mother comes from, what I call, the generation of the free hustler in Harlem [New York, New York].  I remember a time, and it's getting back to that now, which is so ironic.  The hustler was absolutely viewed as somebody that was the pillar of the community that actually had a heart.  I remember clearly drug dealers in the neighborhood telling us to go to school, almost like disciplining us on some level.  And that just wasn't possible in the '80s [1980s] and definitely by the early '90s [1990s].  And now it seems to be going back to that on some level, which is, again, ambivalently good and bad.  So, to have my mother, who absolutely drank, who absolutely smoked, who absolutely got high, but still feeling all the love that came off of her--to me I hated the drug and drinking aspect of it, I hated to even talk to her in that space, but she was always trying to drop wisdom while it was happening, almost in a don't do what I do kind of thing.  You know, so that part was there.  It was like--and she would own it in the sense that this is weak.  And I'd be like, "If you know it's weak, why would you do it?"  And then you know, she wouldn't really skirt the answer, but she would say things like, "Well, because I like it," (laughter).  It was just frank, like, what?  (Laughter) And you know, then she'd make a joke, "Well, you know, Jesus turned water into wine, so it must be something good in it."  You know, instead of--you know what I mean, so there's a humor in that or whatever.  So, I thoroughly enjoyed growing up with her or whatever.  She would do things to embarrass me.  You know, she loved Groucho Marx, and like I said, she was just a comedic type of woman.
Story_ID: 298730
Speaker 1: And I remember her [DeWese's mother, Josette DeWese] coming to pick me up from school back in the days when she still had to pick me up from kindergarten, you know.  And she would like walk like Groucho Marx and do the thing and walk, and I'm like, "Stand up."  And she didn't care who would looking.  I'd be like, "How can you just be this way?" (Laughter) "How can you not worry about what people think?" And the one thing I have to say is that there was a strength that she instilled in me in that one aspect alone.  For all of the drinking and the drugs and the stuff that I didn't like, and partying and the hanging out--because I also digress for a second--my mother had me when she was twenty.  Now, by today's standards that might be, you know, natural, normal, or even old on some level.  But, what I still think it did was, in the twenties is when we're really coming into our own and starting to find ourselves.  A lot of times with women, and especially in the black community at that particular time, it felt like they didn't really--they loved their children, they, you know, were not sad that they had them, but it felt like they still wanted to do more.  And the responsibility of children takes a lot of that away.  And I felt a tinge of this frustration where, she wants to party, she wants to hang out or whatever.  And you don't have the money to pay a babysitter, so, you know, you go into the latchkey kid thing, you know, which was attached to a job or working back--according to what America tells it.  But the latchkey thing also has a night life aspect to it.  So (laughter) you know, if your mother's out, "Okay, y'all go to bed, go to sleep," or whatever.  But I know you want us to rush and go to sleep so that you can go out or whatever, and you feel comfortable knowing we were asleep.  But then, you wouldn't go too far.  So, you know, it's always like some kind of rain on it.  She couldn't just go and party the way she wanted to.  And I could feel that my mother was the equivalent of the hustler slash party animal type.  She loved doing what she was doing.  So, we went and stayed at my [paternal] grandmother's [Beatrice DeWese] house.  She'd have the whole weekend off and, you know, it's no telling what she'd do that weekend.  And then, you know, Monday morning it's time to go to school and she's doing what she's got to do make us get to school or whatever, but I could see the hangover.  You know, and again, like I said, I was a very analytical child, so I can watch the nuances of people's body language and tell, "Oh, she's had a drink.  Okay, this conversation's going to go this way," or whatever.  So, one would romanticized, because as a child, all you know is the love.  By the time I was about ten, the analytical me started, and the confrontational me started.  So, my questions weren't just coming for information, it was almost a little more belligerent, like, "Why are you drinking?  Okay, you're drunk."  You know, I would say stuff like that, and get a smack, you know (laughter).  But who I was--who I was becoming was coming into fruition at this point.
Story_ID: 298731
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother [Beatrice DeWese] like?  You said you would spend the weekends with her.  What were those weekends like?
Speaker 2: That grandmother I'm talking about is my father's [William DeWese] grandmother [sic. mother].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother passed when she was twelve.  So, I had one grandmother.  And I actually come from a family of--I would call them functioning alcoholics because, to be honest, everybody--it was like drinking was the way you worked, and this is why I call it functioning.  My mother [Josette DeWese] took it to the tenth power, but the family--Monday through Friday you work.  Friday night to Sunday, you drink.  You calm down Sunday night because you got to get up for work and you work all week again, and Friday, you drink.  And they got together almost specifically to drink and talk and do whatever, because that's how they socialized.  The dysfunctional part in that is so much potential destruction in the weekend of drinking--name calling, and this and that or whatever.  And as a child, I didn't understand how you could be so tight, so close, and then so volatile, so angry and potentially violent, you know.  And I was like, if drugs and alcohol does that, I don't want any part of that.  So, again, in a backhanded way, it instilled all of the stuff in me that starts with the no drinking and no alcohol.  So, it was my grandmother--she was another one--she absolutely--most of the time I saw her, definitely she had a drink in her hand, if not drunk already--a lot of love, and I think this is back to that ambivalent thing.  I started noticing that life was ambivalent.  It didn't walk the line you wanted it to walk, it didn't formulate, you know, in a tunnel vision type sense.  It was just like, no, a person can be a great person and still do this.  You know, Malcolm X was Sonny Red [sic. Detroit Red], wow.  You know, I started finding out everybody's story has more layers to it.  It's the layers of life.
Story_ID: 298732
Speaker 1: You said your mother [Josette DeWese] wanted to be an actress.  Was that true?  Did she have--was her--did she want as a young woman to--well comedian, was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think my mother wanted to be an actress, and honestly I think, if I'm now analyzing it, you know, in revisionist history style, I think she could have been a great sitcom actress.  I don't know what her depth was, and her range (unclear)--I don't know, you know, if it would have been Cicely Tyson, but I definitely know she could have been Florida Evans [played by Esther Rolle on 'Good Times'], without question.  And I think that the one thing that we have in this generation that's a little different from the generations that preceded us, is the level of opportunity.  The level of opportunity that's here for me--which is why, again in retrospect, I couldn't be as attacking as I was as a child, because I didn't understand the parameters, I didn't understand the circumstances.  I did understand what you contributed to your quote, unquote non-manifesting of your dream, but older now, I'm like, wow, I see how hard it is to still follow your heart, believe in your dream, follow through on it, and see it through.  I think that a lot of times, you know, we put it in very, very vanilla packages and--hey, you can do anything you want.  But we don't really give you the road map to that.  We don't tell you about tenacity.  We don't tell you about discipline.  We don't tell you about focusing and taking every opportunity you can.  You know, that stuff is not there.  So, it was very easy for my mother's generation of aspiring artists even, to get disenchanted.  Now you add the partying and the drinking and the drugs or whatever, and when I do the history--and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones is another one of my mentors.  They hear all of this stuff about all of the jazz greats and how many of them were on drugs and all of that stuff, it's like wow.  The genius always kind of gets tainted in the personal side because they didn't give themselves--it's almost like shooting yourself in the foot.  You know, you have all this talent, but then the drug problem derails you, so certain people don't want to be involved with you.  You start not making dates.  And so I don't know how much of that--that's the one part I don't know, how much of the opportunity my mother actually went for.  I just knew that in the house, she would say that's what she wanted to do.  And I remember her favorite shows or whatever (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were her favorite shows?
Speaker 2: She loved 'Julia.'
Story_ID: 298733
Speaker 1: And she [DeWese's mother, Josette DeWese] loved the dark stuff, too.  There was a show called 'Dark Shadows' that used to come on.  She loved 'Dark Shadows.'
Speaker 2: That was one of my favorite shows of all time (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's like nobody knows what that show is, and I just seen it come on DVD now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Barnabas Collins.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And yeah, as a kid I loved that show.  I would rush home after school.  It came on at 3:30.
Speaker 1: She loved that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, you know, as a kid, like I said, you know, we didn't have like a bunch of TV, so a lot of times we were watching what she would watch.  And I, again, I was always interested in knowing how a person worked, how you thought, what made you tick, whatever.  So, I paid attention to what my mother wanted.  Sometimes I wouldn't even want to watch TV, just to see what she wanted to watch.  She loved '[The] Twilight Zone' which definitely created this thing for me--'Twilight Zone' and Alfred Hitchcock.  You know, anything that had mystery to it, she loved.  And then in the sitcom sense, she and my father [William DeWese] loved 'Sanford and Son.'  Ironically, I remember them thinking 'Good Times' was a little stereotypical, which is--I didn't even know how that one show became the show that, you know, "This is stereotypical," but for whatever reason, that was just it.  But, 'Sanford and Son,' you know, had some stereotypes in it too, but they loved--maybe it's because they loved Redd Foxx, maybe that could have been something else.  I didn't even--I never went that far with it.  But I remember them loving that.  And then ultimately I just remember her loving anything that had mystery or making her laugh.  So, you know, 'Columbo' was another one, you know.
Story_ID: 298734
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father a little bit.  Your father, what was his name, when was he born?
Speaker 2: My father's name, William DeWese, born on March 25, 1928.  Actually, he's like my--I would call him my hero slash anti-hero.  He gave me all of the heart, all of the courage, all of that stuff.  My father's pre-requisite, you know how everybody says, go to school, get good grades, don't be a punk.  That's the pre-requisite.  Oh, yeah, go to school and get good grades.  Oh, and don't do drugs.  (Laughter) You know, it's just like, don't be a punk.  If I came home and told my father I had a fight, and didn't fight back, that was the worst thing you could tell him.  So, that much I absolutely love--courage on top of courage, no back down in him whatsoever, I mean whatsoever.  Seven cops--"What, y'all ready?"  They have guns and the law.  "Okay, let's go."  (Laughter) And he's throwing the first punch, even, you know what I mean.  In--and, again, if he felt he was right, he'd fight to the death.  If the cops said, "Hey, get off this block, and he said, "Why?"  And the cops said, "Because I said so."  That's not enough, so get ready to fight.  You know, he'd start taking stuff off.  "Well, let's go then, I ain't going nowhere, and not only am I not going anywhere"--I don't know if y'all want me to use profanity--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: "No, motherfucker, what?"  Now he's agitating you, and I'm like what is this?  And he would say, "Go upstairs or go, whatever, whatever, because it's getting ready to go down."  Because his thing was, you cannot take advantage of me.  If I'm doing something wrong, "Yes, officer, no problem."  If I'm just sitting on my stoop and y'all say, "Okay, break it up."  "Break what up?"  And that would just be it.  Like, "All right, well call some backup, because it's happening."  And he would say, "Call back up." (Laughter) You know what I mean?  Like, and he would be willing--and I'm like, "Daddy"--especially in the '70s [1970s], "They will kill you."  "Whatever.  Don't let anybody ever take advantage of you."  Blah, blah, blah.  "So anytime they come in this block, they know what they gonna run into.  So, if they telling me that, they better be ready to fight, and if they are ready to fight, know how long the fight's gonna be and know that I'm not quitting, whatever."  "Yeah, well, they gonna have to subdue me the way they got to--" he wouldn't care.
Story_ID: 298735
Speaker 1: He [DeWese's father, William DeWese] actually went to jail on that one time, you know, because he struck an officer and seven of 'em--and what's so crazy is--
Speaker 2: And seven of them did what?
Speaker 1: They jumped him and, you know, subdued him and they were hitting him with the billy club and all that stuff, and--
Speaker 2: Did you see it?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because he made--"Go, get out of here."  You know, he wouldn't. So, we had to hear about what happened.  But still and all, the wildest story about my father, I remember that he was in a bar.  They were doing a raid, and he just didn't grasp the fact that you're in here and it's a raid, so that's what happens.  "I'm not doing anything, I'm not even drinking."  He wasn't even drunk yet.  I think he had just gotten there, and he was going to see a friend, and he was going to leave.  And, "All right bring it on" when they were coming in.  They were actually coming to get somebody else, but the way they used to do it back then was the paddy wagon, they'd put everybody on it.  His thing was, "I didn't do anything, I'm not wrong, and I have somewhere to be.  Therefore, I'm not just going away quietly, so let's fight."  And it turned from a raid into them focusing on fighting him, and even in that, because it was so much chaos, you know, people broken up, and like, "Calm down," whatever, and they got him out the back door.  He got away.  He goes away, they rush him down to the train station.  I'll never forget, this is 135th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard, New York, New York] where you had the train station south and north, the entrances--you go down the stairs and get on the train, or you can come up on the other side of 135th Street.  He goes downstairs, the train comes, and everybody's like, "Good, we got him out of here."  And the cops are looking, like, "Where did he go?"  It bothers him too much to be running away, so he comes up the other side, "Here I am."  "There he is," (laughter).  He winds up going to jail because they were looking for him.  He got away.  Just who he was, he would not back down.  And I genuinely have to say, I got a lot of that.  Of course, I hopefully enhanced the logical part of it--if I, you know, got away, I got on the train--but I understood he was definitely about the principle.  If he felt he was right, he'd die for whatever he believed in.
Story_ID: 298736
Speaker 1: Now where was your--were both your parents [Josette DeWese and William DeWese] born in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, go ahead, no connections to the South?  No one came up from the South, the grandparents, everyone?
Speaker 2: My mother's connection and her great-great-grandparents and stuff like that are from the West Indies.  And my father, from what I can tell, DeWese is a Dutch name.  And you know, I've done the whole thing and--go back, search and whatever.  It seems like that family was a family that settled in Manhattan [New York, New York] from the beginning.  So, I'm like, wow, his thing is really, really Harlem [New York, New York].  He's one of the--whether that name is, again, I'm not really that clear on the family history that way.  But it feels like his thing is definitely all New York.
Speaker 1: Where did they get your name from--Mohandas?
Speaker 2: My father was what I called the revolutionary in his mind. "I'm not assimilating under no circumstances.  My kids--." And, you know, his name is William.  "My children will not have any of the cliche, simplistic European names.  There will be no Williams and Johnnies and Bobbies.  Your name is Mohandas, named after Mahatma Gandhi [Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi].  His birth name was really Mohandas."  My brother's name is Gamel [DeWese (ph.)], named after Toussaint L'Ouverture and something else--the middle name from somebody in Africa.  And my sister's name is Tanyette [DeWese (ph.)], named after the country or city Tanganyika [Tanzania] and Jomo Kenyatta.  Put it together, Tanyette. I'm like, okay (laughter). So there you go.  And not even understanding, young, because in the beginning when you're a kid, I guess I didn't even have a chance to really assimilate, because for my name alone, it was like, "What, what is that?  How do you say that?  Mohandas?  Mohammad? What is that, Muslim?"  You know, people didn't know, so I was always even defending my name right off the top.  So, I didn't understand the value of that, again, until about ten.  But in the first grade, you know, six years old, I'm like, my name is not John.  I'm not like everybody else, what is this?
Story_ID: 298737
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: The earliest memories growing up in Harlem to me was the sense of community.  I didn't--you didn't--I didn't know we were poor.  You know, it takes a minute for that stuff to start, you know.  You know, you don't really have anything, but as a child, you don't really need much.  Dinner was there, it was fine.  You could go outside and run.  We're meeting new friends, you know, you're the new kid on the block.  So, you have to go through that whole figuring out.  You know, you walk in the park and see if you're going to get picked on.  I mean, all of that stuff was natural.  And like I said, because I was a thinking child, so to speak, I was like, okay, so how do you--you just got to do it, you got to just jump in.  So, I would just jump in.  "I got next."  You know, it's who's the new guy saying he's got next, or whatever.  So, I had heart, so to speak.  And then, in the back of my father's [William DeWese] head, I attached that don't be a punk to so many things.
Speaker 1: What things did you attach it to?
Speaker 2: If I don't ask to get in this game, I'm being a punk.  If I don't speak to the teacher about what I--I'm being a punk.  So, don't be a punk meant always have the heart to represent yourself and speak your mind.  So, at any point that I'm not saying what I need to say, I'm being a punk.  So, you know, I can't come in the park--oh, damn, I'm intimidated.  These guys are a little bigger, uh, oh.  That's being a punk.  All right.  And I would just start up.  It was so--it's why every fight that I had when I was younger was usually with somebody bigger and older.  Now this is my filter, because I'm starting--like I said, we talked a little earlier, and I'll break that down, too, about the ego.  My ego, which I didn't even know what that was at the time, understood early, what embarrassment was.  I would have not been able to take losing a fight to somebody my size, so I strategically only fought people older and bigger.  So, therefore, if I ever lost, I had a built-in reason--he's bigger, he's older, he's stronger.  I was supposed to lose.  However, the other side is, if I win this fight, I've actually conquered the giant, and this is going to be the one that's for self-esteem, which I didn't know what self-esteem was at the time.  But this is my young thought process.  So, going through that in childhood, it's almost like the peer group of friends, which was kind of strange.  They used to call us, we were the middle guys.  We weren't the nerds, quote unquote nerds, you know, the Poindexters.  And you know it wasn't computers at that time, but it's so funny how the black community tries to, at that time especially, associate intelligence with nerd, and ignorance with cool, and I really hated that, too.  I was like, okay, I'm as smart as the guys in the front of the class, and I'm as cool as the guys in the back of the class.  But what really makes those guys in the back of the class cool?  Okay, well they don't do their homework and they're not that smart, so to speak.  But then, it might be circumstantial.  Maybe the work is not hard, but he's hungry.  You know, I started figuring that stuff out, again, at seven and eight, nine, definitely by ten.  And for me, it was like, but I don't want to hang with the quote, unquote nerd guys because I'm not rushing home to do my homework, but I'm not staying out too late to not do it, either.  We're--I'm right in the middle.  So, my little core group was smart enough to do that, and cool enough to do that.  So, that was the balance.  And even the name, "Kool Moe Dee" [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese]--when hip-hop started six years later for me, from nine and ten, the choice of saying cool was about, it was about rebellion again.  What you're calling cool is not cool.  I'm actually cool.  No drugs, no alcohol, no drinking.  I definitely--you know, principles--I'll fight, I speak, whatever.  And I'm actually intelligent, and I'm going to make intelligence cool, that's what cool is.  So that was where the name even started from years later.
Story_ID: 298738
Speaker 1: So when you were a kid in the community in Harlem [New York, New York], what did the--who were the--you talked about hustlers before.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you know any hustlers?  Did you look up to them?  Do you remember hustlers saying, "Stay in school, Moe [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese]"?  Who talked to you in the community of Harlem at that time in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: At that time, the big name for us in hustler world, in the hustler world, was Nicky Barnes.  I've seen him drive through, you know, cars and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of cars did he have?
Speaker 2: Cadillacs.  I mean, he had a couple of them, actually.  You know, that goes back as far as it's going to go back.  And I just remember, not talking to him direct, but there was another guy named Bat [ph.]--I don't want to start doing name drops or whatever, but they were hustlers in the community that knew people who lived in our community.  You know, friends and sisters, and you know, somebody's dating somebody, you know, that kind of thing or whatever.  So, we got to see them.  And I remember, you know, they would call it hating now, I remember not liking something about it.  Something about it resonated with me in a negative way because I couldn't get past seeing the junkie on the corner and seeing the hustler in the car, and knowing that there was a connection.  He uses what you sell.  No, I'm not happy about him being here, and you're functioning, but I'm not really happy.  I'm like, I want to ask questions, I want to have a conversation.  Like, why do you do what you do?  And, you know, not being able to get those answers, and for that side to be glorified and this side to be--I remember kids like throwing snowballs at a guy.  Like, one day he's straight, and then, you know, we don't know, because the drug problem can happen, you know, in quantum leaps.  You know, he can be fine in January and then by April, he's out of it, and I didn't know what the hell that was.  And I was like, "Hey is that Mr. Johnson [ph.]?  He was cool with us, and what happened to him?"  Drugs.  And then to see kids go and throw snowballs at him, or pull his pants down, or push him down or whatever, and run and laugh.  Because you know, boys especially were mischievous, so that was fun on some level.  But, I remember feeling embarrassed or sad for the guy, because it would be somebody that we knew.  I think early, that was the other thing--I didn't have a disregard for people.  And I remember "Come on, get away from me now."  And I'm like, "That's Mr. Keith [ph.], you know him. Why are y'all--."  "Well, he's a nuisance now, he's drooling, he's dribbling.  He's asking everybody in the neighborhood for money."  So people were just pissed off.  But he became an outcast, and I'm like, but he was just so cool last summer, how did this happen?  So, I didn't like it.  And I remember the hustlers driving up in the cars or whatever, and women responding a certain way and little kids actually smiling or whatever.  And I would be sitting there just like curious, not angry, but just like, what is this?  Why, you know--what makes him hot?
Story_ID: 298739
Speaker 1: Did your family--was your family religious? Did you go to church?
Speaker 2: No, that's the other thing, too.  I was going to say that the weirdest thing--which we'll fast forward and digress-- sister's [Tanyette DeWese (ph.)] Christian, brother's [Gamel DeWese (ph.)] Muslim, mother [Josette DeWese] was Catholic, and my father [William DeWese] definitely didn't do any religion.  And I kind of took my father's thing.  But I took my father's thing in what I call, again, a more of a philosophical approach.  Religion to me, okay, is the most divisive mechanism on the planet and most wars are fought--okay, get that in the rhetoric sense.  However, on a more spiritual sense, I understand--I didn't necessarily understand it then, but I understand it a little bit now--it's about your connection.  If your mother passed, and reading the Bible calms you down and makes you--it's you.  It's actually for you.  I can't, I don't make that call.  And I think we get caught up in the rhetoric of the doctrine, the accuracy, and who, and the origin.  I can do that, debate all day long, but it still doesn't do anything philosophically for the spiritual side of the equation of what this person is getting out of it.  You know, that's like saying--hip-hop doesn't do what it does for everybody.  Some people, it's just for money.  For me, I can listen to an old Grandmaster Flash record and it can take me away.  It can take me to a place and calm me down.  So, even music doesn't have to be about the--oh, well, that's not real hip-hop, whatever.  It's like no, if I'm listening to Jay Z and it makes me laugh, I'm enjoying it.  You know, he--it puts me in a good mood.  It is what it is, the same thing works in my, again, philosophy religiously.  So I think what happened--I remember early, you know, we had the people, again.  We had the cool guys, and the nerd guys, then you had the church people, you know, the church girl.  And the first time I remember fighting the ambivalence of--it's four sisters, they all go to church.  One of them is a real hot ass, the other ones are real sticklers for the--don't do, don't do, don't do, whatever, and the other two are kind of on the fence.  So, I'm like, well wow.  Early again--the institution never makes the people.  The people actually make the institution based on who they are, the character of the people.  So one sister really is by the book and you know, there's just no way to talk to her, it's not going to happen.  The little fast ass is dressed up and putting on the stuff like everybody else, but she's in the staircase with Mark [ph.].  "Oh, my goodness, why is she--." You know, rubbing up and humping, because when you're young, it's no real sex yet, at least at that age.  So, for me, I approach religion in a very, very analytical way, because I wasn't forced to go to church, or whatever.  My mother went to services every now and then, which I also thought was crazy.  Like, okay, so you were hanging out all night last night.  You were drunk whatever and then you got up and went to church.  But you went to church because your friend was going to church, not because you really wanted to go to church.  And she definitely wasn't a diligent churchgoer.  And I remember my father making snide remarks about church.  You know, like, the one thing that he said that he couldn't get past was the whole paying tithes thing.  How can a reverend have a Benz [Mercedes Benz], a mansion, you know, a luxurious mansion, the fine suits or whatever, and he's taking ten percent of old Ms. Mays' [ph.] social security?  That don't work for me.
Story_ID: 298740
Speaker 1: What sort of sights, sounds, mainly for you, remind you of growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: My mother [Josette DeWese] loved jazz.  So, and in particular, she loved Billie Holiday.  I was aware of Sarah Vaughan and Miles Davis, really the females.  My mother was somewhat of a feminist, if I really think back.  Yeah, come to think of it, damn, Sarah Vaughan, Nancy Wilson--I don't know, she liked everybody, she just liked jazz in general.  But I have clear visions of my mother slightly enamored with liquor singing over a pot of stew, singing Billie Holiday.  And I just remember saying, "This is the drabbest music I ever heard--why would anybody play this?" (Singing) Like, "What is this?  No wonder you're depressed.  Why are you listening to that?" (Laughter) So, you know, then, of course, she wanted to give me the whole history of Billie Holiday.  And then when I find out Billie Holiday was a junkie, and when I started--so, again, there was this richness of historical data slash insight.  And my parents were very, very astute and very in tune to African history, especially African American history in terms of our culture, and they just expressed the importance of it to me.  And I remember, like, okay, so now I'm going to listen to jazz music because y'all told me all these stories about all these people, but I don't really like the music.  I'm eight years old.  I can't grasp it.  There's no beat, there's no drums, nobody's actually saying anything really.  You know, it's horns and (making sounds).  What is this?  And, right around, I would say, again, the [Muhammad] Ali fight--we just talked about it a little bit.
Speaker 1: But, talk about--go ahead, we'll go back to the Ali fight, because I want you to talk (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right around that time, it was so funny.  I remember it was this big stir because you know, Miles Davis walked into the Ali fight.  And I remember feeling like, okay, something must be more to this, because people really, really revere these jazz greats, or whatever.  And I remember we didn't have any money, so we didn't have a record player.  Everything was on the radio, whatever.  So, my mother found whatever the jazz station was.  So, I remember just listening to the jazz station to see, what am I missing?
Story_ID: 298741
Speaker 1: And Miles Davis--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --walks into the Muhammad Ali fight (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  The significance of what I meant by the jazz thing, I didn't really like the music, I didn't understand it.  I was too young, and like I said, no beat, no dance, no this.  And, I remember the Ali fight, there was a closed circuit television thing, and I guess it was showing at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York], or the Loew's [Victoria Theater, New York, New York], one of the two, on 125th Street.  And people are outside that aren't inside the thing yet, and you know, I guess that was closed circuit.  They were showing all the celebrities that are coming in, or whatever.  And Diana Ross, came, or whatever.  Miles Davis walked in and somebody yelled, "Yo, Miles Davis is at the fight, baby, oh yeah, Miles is here (unclear)."  I'm like, why is it so big that Miles Davis is at the Ali fight.  Like to me, it's about Ali, but people were--literally were like up in arms that Miles Davis was at the fight.  "Oh, man, I wish I was there," you know, that kind of thing.  And even like I said, Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] downtown on 34th Street, yeah, it was on 34th Street by that time still--that started compelling me to listen more again.  Like, maybe I'm missing something.  Then I started feeling like, I don't get this and I don't know why, and I need to know why, and I want to know why.  And I never grasped the musicianship, because I'd never taken music.  That was the other thing.  I played the flute, but the musicianship of what jazz greats did, I didn't understand it.  And the passion that my mother [Josette DeWese] had for it, it's like I kept, I almost force fed myself.  And then it was like, okay, I'm just not going to get this.  And what I like, you know, we listen to the music of the day or whatever, I remember my father [William DeWese] only liked music that had messages in it.  So he was big with Stevie Wonder, which is my favorite artist of all time.  Stevie Wonder and Earth, Wind & Fire are my one and two.  My father would listen and say, "You know what he said?"  And he would always say, you know, "James Brown, 'I'm Black and I'm Proud.'"  My father was--again, anything that had some kind of uplifting with it or whatever.  Miriam Makeba (singing) all of that stuff is in my head because they made--these are the songs that you should be listening to.  And pop culture is kind of like bubble gum.  You know, bubble gum wasn't the phrase they used, but that's the interpretation I have revisionistly [ph.].  So, for me, the music started having different significance.  I started listening for what people were saying.
Story_ID: 298742
Speaker 1: So, musically, the sounds that I really remember--Marvin Gaye, 'What's Going On,' like oh, okay, because then, it's like, this is quote, unquote music that I feel because I like the way it was put together.  I'm not dancing, and I'm not partying yet.  I'm still too young for any of that also.   So, all I really have is, what is he saying? 'What's Going On,' 'Mercy, Mercy Me,' 'Ball of Confusion,' The Temptations, you know. (Singing) "Eve of destruction, tax deductions." Oh, this is what's turning me on, what they're saying, what they're talking about.  They're actually trying to make a difference.  So, what became profound for me in music is everybody that had something to say.  And that's where you're going to (singing) a moment for when hip-hop comes.  It's fun, it's talking, it's frivolous, and it molds the message, and it's--there it is.  You can--you can say something--changed everything for me.  But yes, so the musical sounds--the long winded answer to your question-- the musical sounds for me were basically jazz early, and quote unquote revolutionary R&B.  Now, I still love the Jackson Five and all that stuff, because I was still young, and it still is what it is.  But I was very, very clear on what I considered depth and what I considered light and frivolous fun.  So, really, like I said, Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder, Earth Wind & Fire.  And then, you know, by about thirteen, fourteen and fifteen, I really did get caught up in the George Clinton P-Funk [Parliament-Funkadelic] thing.  It wasn't deep, you know, he had a few things in there, but I was like, the funk just took me over.  And I'm defining myself--and I liked Bootsy [Collins], and I liked George and, you know, 'Chocolate City.'  I'm--this is my thing, or whatever.  I don't know if I was ever going to be walking around with any feathers or anything on, but I love this music, so that's the musical influences early.
Story_ID: 298743
Speaker 1: This is a story about your father [William DeWese] naming you after Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi; Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi], and his relationship to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm X (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. And the [Muhammad] Ali thing.
Speaker 1: --and the Ali.
Speaker 2: Got you.  In the naming of me, Mohandas [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese], naming me after Mahatmas Gandhi, my father is also one of guys that--high school dropout. I call him, like I said, we call him a hustler slash baller, but he absolutely was a quote, unquote hustler.  But he was one of those guys that literally walked around with books.  'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] was like his Bible.  He walked around with that, and he would refer to it, and turn the pages or whatever, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And the irony of naming me after Mahatmas Gandhi is everyone knows that, you know, Martin Luther King kind of studied and got a lot of his philosophy from Gandhi.  And ironically, my father didn't really, really like Martin Luther King.  He didn't dislike him.  You know, he was like, "I respect any man, you know, that puts himself on the line."  But he was just like, "The Christian thing is just passive to me.  The whole turning of the cheek. What? Nah. Malcolm X, by any means necessary, that's where you need to be."  And he was on that side.  "You hit me, I'm hitting you back."  My father didn't have any understanding of turning the other cheek.  He said, on that alone, the Bible's done, (laughter).  He's like, on that one thing alone.  I mean, nothing else.  The turning of the cheek, get it out of here.  So, the irony in that to me was, he always felt that Malcolm X was more of a revolutionary.  And he always used to say, again, "Revolution and change only comes through a certain level of struggle."  Now what's so funny about that in the ambivalence of my and his relationship, again, is, and I use this for hip-hop, too.  I always said, we needed Will Smith and Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] for hip-hop to work.  And I always thought, we needed Malcolm and Martin for the revolution to actually--for any change to really happen, you need the guy that's going to turn the other cheek because he's going to get further in certain corners than you're going to ever get fighting.  And you need to know that the guy who will fight--because you know, fear and keep it calm is also one of our templates of, okay, we need to not go this far, and I think, in many cases, on both sides, especially from what I felt in the '60s [1960s].  I remember Christians who wouldn't vibe with Malcolm because he was a Muslim.  "Oh, that old hater Muslim, you know, that's the Muslims, they believe--." And I was like, but you're real comfortable with Christianity, as Jesus being white, you know that whole thought process.  Because all of this is on the cusp of the change, is what I call it, in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] or whatever.  And again, like I said, I'm only seven, so I'm hearing it.  I don't have much to contribute, but it's all going in the computer, and I'm asking myself questions and I'm asking adults questions.  And one of the things I used to get off on was being able to ask adults questions and watch them look like, how did you--I don't really have an answer.  Because adults, you know, at that time was like, "If I said it, it was law."  If I was a parent, or an uncle or a teacher, "If I say it, it's law."  And I would just ask the question, and really not being a smart ass, but like, so, you're saying basically that Malcolm X is following a group of hate, even though the people that profess to be Christians in the South are beating us and doing that?  You know, some of that's directly from my father, but some of it was my own embellishments.  I'm like, I really want to know, why are you so comfortable in that religion?
Story_ID: 298744
Speaker 1: Now, this isn't me being anti-Christian, either.  I was literally asking, and they didn't have a real answer.  And I was like, that's the one thing, too.  And the last thing I'll break down.  In the family dynamic, too, the one thing that bothered me about my father [William DeWese] and mother's [Josette DeWese] relationship is when they got into an argument, nobody would answer questions.  And my philosophy, whether it's relationships to this day, business, personal, whatever.  Being able to agree to disagree is fine, but flush it all the way out.  Answer the damn questions.  Don't leave it hanging, "Well what about you?  You do it, too."  "Okay, so what, I do it, too. Answer the question."  And I think that was something that really, really stuck with me early, because when I saw adults not answering questions, but having opinions that they held so close to their heart--like, how can you be that strongly--feel that strongly about it when you haven't even flushed out the answer?  You don't even know why, because you don't have an answer for why that was a hate group.  What makes that a hate group?  "Well, they're saying the black man is God, and (unclear), and I can't even understand that."  I'm like, okay, well not that I necessarily believe that, but on the other side, for all of the racism that we do see in America, coming from the quote, unquote Christian side, how are you comfortable with that on top of it?  The KKK [Ku Klux Klan] actually burn a cross, don't they?  "Yeah, well, you know, some people will do crazy things in the name of Jesus."  But, they actually believe in the same book, don't they?  "Well--." And I just--sort of hemming and hawing stuff, whatever, and like I say, I wasn't savvy enough to keep it going, but that was all I had, and that's what I would do.  So, I remember--and then I had to bring it to my father on the other hand.  I'm like, but, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, the whole March on Washington and gathering people up, 'cause remember, these people have been killed by the time I'm eight.  So, all I have is history and newspaper and people's feelings about it.  I'm getting it through the filter of what people felt about him.  And people were absolutely divided.  There were Malcolm [Malcolm X] people and there were Martin people, and my father was a Malcolm person.  And I kept saying, "Well, what's wrong with Martin?"  And he couldn't really, really articulate it other than he seemed passive, and for him it represented, "That represents the old nigger."  You know, we gonna just, whatever we got to do, that's--I said, "No."  It didn't feel that way.  When I, you know, saw the I Have a Dream stuff or whatever, to me it didn't feel like Martin was a punk.  It felt like Martin had a, again, a Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi; Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi] strategy.  When I did the report on Mahatma Gandhi at eleven, I was like, oh I get it.  The rebellion isn't necessarily always swinging.  Sometimes--okay, so he starved himself and all the stuff that Mahatma Gandhi did.  I get it.  Sometimes your statement is bigger in the not fighting, because it almost exposes the other side.  "Okay, I'm not fighting, and you know I'm not going to fight."  And the biggest thing that said, and the one thing that my father had to own up to--and I remember him like giving me the little--I was like but, I think the most profound thing in Martin's death was a non-violent person got killed with a violent death.  I think that he made a big statement in his death that way.  Because it's almost like showing how deep hate can actually be.  He was like, "All right, now you're on to something."  But again, he said, "You know, I respect him, I just, Malcolm was just more my cup of tea."  You know, and he gave me that answer.
Story_ID: 298745
Speaker 1: But to me, the synthesis of Malcolm [Malcolm X] and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is where the real revolution is.  You--again, that's like Republican or Democrat, or conservative or whatever (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I want to talk a little about your idols when you were a child.  And one of your big idols is Muhammad Ali.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, Ali.  And then Ali becoming Muslim was another thing, too, which is the other thing--my father [William DeWese] was like, "Well why aren't you Muslim then?"  "Well, you know, organization, following rules (unclear)--."
Speaker 2: Your father ask you that now?
Speaker 1: I ask him.
Speaker 2: You ask him.
Speaker 1: You know, my father passed.  I asked him when I was younger.  But we loved Muhammad Ali, and I definitely gravitated toward him.  Of course, the boxing and the flashy and the mouth and all of that, and ironically, he's rhyming.  "He must be (unclear), and he'll go down in four."  Okay, damn.  "You'll be a fool if you take your money and bet on Sonny [Sonny Liston]."  I was like, okay.  Something's (singing) there for that, too.  But I remember Ali becoming, and again, I'm still too young to grasp all this stuff--but him being stripped of his belt, and I'm not understanding why--well he don't want to go into the draft.  And I remember hearing him say, or they showed a news clip or something, because it's not the same kind of TV we have now, which is so hard to imagine.  You know, it was basically five channels.  You know, you got the ABC, NBC--you got WNEW [WNEW-TV; WNYW-TV, Channel 5], 11 [WPIX-TV, Channel 11], and you got Channel 9 [WOR-TV; WWOR-TV].  And then there was 13 [WNET, Channel 13] for--and that was it.  Six channels, and you got what you got (laughter).  And I remember seeing Ali saying, you know, "No Viet Cong ever called me nigger."  And I just remember that resonating with me like, oh, my goodness.  Yeah--he's saying, why would he kill somebody?  Why would he go fight somebody when all the racism is right here?  And it started turning me into this, the beginning of my non-patriotic, what's wrong with America thing.  You know, of course, that gets more sophisticated as we get older and--
Speaker 2: How old were you when that started?
Speaker 1: This is eight, eight years old.  Eight is a big turning point for me.
Story_ID: 298746
Speaker 1: Because the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] are starting, you know, on the heels of Malcolm [Malcolm X] and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] dying--the Black Panthers.  And the Black Panthers for me were tangible.  And [Muhammad] Ali represented a vocal version of black America's frustration.
Speaker 2: Why were the Black Panthers tangible?
Speaker 1: Because the breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program].  You actually saw them in the community, so you saw somebody you saw on TV, not actually the people.  But to see these guys on TV, and hear what they said about 'em, "A new hate group is sparking up, tune in at eleven [o'clock]."  You know, you tune in, and you see these guys and they got the jackets on, and they're doing the thing, or whatever.  And then you go outside and it's like, okay, so I heard it started in Oakland [California].  We got some people in Harlem [New York, New York] that's doing that same thing.  Oh yeah, those are the guys that give us the free lunch and the free breakfast.  I can't be mad at them for free lunch and free breakfast.  So then you sit down and talk to them and they tell you what's going on and whatever.
Speaker 2: What did they tell you? Did they ever sit down and talk to you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They absolutely was--in the cadence--"Well, listen brother, you know, the white man right now, what the government is doing--." You know, they would talk in that--that kind of irritated me to be honest, but (laughter) I understood the soul and cadence of the time.  But what I got from the Black Panthers ironically wasn't necessarily the revolutionary, violent stuff that everybody keeps focusing on.  I got the political savvy stuff.  It was like, you have to be politically astute.  You need to know who the councilman is.  You need to know who's making these decisions in your community.  And you need to know that you have a vote, you have a ballot, and you can--oh, shit.  Like, that came from them.  But we're not getting that on the news.  They're talking about the fists and the guns, and oh, there was a burn out and a shooting and they shot the cop. I was like, but when I talked with them at the breakfast program, they're giving us the free breakfast or whatever, and they're having the kids sit down, and they are actually talking to us about it.  "Okay, go to school, and the reason you want to go to school is because you know you need to get in the game in order to win. If don't--if you're not in the game, you can't win.  You need to have this in your back pocket, and you need to have the degrees, and you need to make sure, at least at that time, at least get a high school diploma, because that's how you get into the workforce.  And you're never going to change anything if you're not in the workforce."  I was like damn, like, the connection.  They had the most connectivity for me, 'cause Ali was on TV.  I didn't really get a chance to talk to Ali.  You know, he wasn't there.
Story_ID: 298747
Speaker 1: The most significant thing about my relationship with my father [William DeWese], as much as we revered and loved [Muhammad] Ali in that time period, after they stripped him and they finally gave him the belt back, and I remember my father telling me, taking a stand against the government at that level is so big.  He said, "You don't even understand."  I'm like, "Hey, he just believes in his principles."  He said, "No, but they're trying to stop him from eating and doing what he does."  And this is at the pinnacle, he's the best right now, nobody can beat him.  So when he came back three years later, or--yeah, two and a half or three years later, I remember clearly everybody--we took votes in class, how many people think Ali's going to win.  Who thinks Joe Frazier's going to win?  There was one girl named Helen, Helen Rodriguez [ph.], who picked Joe Frazier, and I just remember chewing her out.  "How dare you say Joe Frazier's going to win the fight?" You know, "Ali's the greatest," and this and that.  The fight night comes, we're standing outside, you know, 'cause we can't really--nobody had tickets.  We were broke anyway, and they had closed circuit at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] or the Lowe's [Victoria Theater, New York, New York] right next-door.  And I remember, again, I told you, I think, with Malcolm X, Miles Davis coming through, whatever.  And I remember that people did round by round, they're yelling it out.  "Well, that's one round in the books.  Ali looked good, baby."  So we just waiting and hearing, waiting and hearing, and waiting and hearing, and waiting and hearing.  And what's so crazy, it feels like that was a Monday night or something.  I got to go back and look at the timeline, because now fights are only on Friday and Saturday.  That fight felt like it was on a Monday or Tuesday, for whatever reason.  It doesn't feel like a weekend fight to me, because I remember, I got to go to school, and my mother's [Josette DeWese] like, "Okay, I'm going to let you stay out with, you know, these adults."  Because it was people--literally, it was an event.  Ali and Frazier was an event that people can't even imagine.  It's cold, it's March 8th, I never forgot that, and we're outside, and people are relaying what happened round by round.  So, when the fight ends, you know my father, I guess he went and saw it somewhere, or who knows where he was at, and you know, it was like a little block.  The neighborhood went, that's the other thing about the whole hustler thing.  Somebody that was a hustler in the neighborhood took like twenty kids and we stood outside, and you know, it was like, oh, we go here, and they're going to relay the thing to us, or whatever.  Ali loses, and everybody's up in arms.  "Oh, he got robbed.  They didn't want him--the white man didn't want him to win.  Joe Frazier's an Uncle Tom, see the problem is," this and that.  And my father comes home, and I'm like, "You heard what happened?"  He's like, "Yeah, come here."  I said, "They robbed him, they did this, they did that."  He said, "No, Joe Frazier won that fight."  I said, "What?  Everybody said--." He said, "Never worry about what everybody says."  He said, "And even to some degree what I say.  You'd have to see it for yourself, and I'm telling you, I saw it.  Joe Frazier won that fight."  I said, "But everybody's saying, how come everybody's saying he got robbed?" Or, "He got jerked," as we used to say.  He said, "Because people are emotional, and they can't see past the emotion.  We love Ali, so we want him to win.  And I want him to win, too.  Joe Frazier won that fight."  And he was like, "Truth is more important than all of the emotion in the world."  And that stuck with me.  So, I remember going to school the next day, like, Helen was right? She picked Joe Frazier?  And then I had to humble up, and again, don't be a punk.  So I had to go apologize to Helen for calling her stupid, "You're stupid for picking Joe Frazier."  And I was like, truth is more important, and not being a punk is more important.  So, these things again, in little instances, are showing up, and is building what I'm considering to be my character.
Story_ID: 298748
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you in school, elementary school? Rambunctious, quiet?
Speaker 2: Very, very, very--I was an average student, and I was very--I was obedient.  I was an obedient--I wasn't a troublemaker.  And I had some friends who, you know, I just wouldn't dare talk back to the teacher, I just wouldn't do it.  A, I didn't want to get the wrath of, you know, that was the other thing--my father [William DeWese], with all the don't be a punk, if the teacher does something out of line, either you come get me or you know, you speak up, but don't be no smart ass.  You know, he definitely instilled that stuff, too.  And then again, you know, just from my upbringing.  I just didn't have that in me.  Like, what am I going to be cursing at adults and stuff for?  Completely changed by 16, but up to 10 and 11 and 12, and all the way through elementary and junior high, I was like just the model little student.  Now, there was a chronic lateness based on, you know, like I said, the partying and stuff and one bathroom.  I never even understood the logistics of the bathroom.  I think my experience in childhood, because of the bathroom experience, and having a sister [Tanyette DeWese (ph.)]--I never have had an apartment that didn't have two bathrooms, because that's ingrained in me.  You need another bathroom just in case a woman's in the house (laughter).   My mother [Josette DeWese] and sister--I was like, "I'm going to be late, because y'all are taking too much damn time in the bathroom, let me go first."  And then, you know, "No, your sister's in there."  So, yeah, I was a pretty model student in that sense, but a very average student also, because I would always get lost in thought.  I didn't know about my creative side until a lot later, like I said, when hip-hop started, and I'm actually writing rhymes.  Digressing a second--it's kind of well-known that 'The Grinch Who Stole Christmas' ['How the Grinch Stole Christmas'] is kind of my first hip-hop reference, because, "You're a mean one, Mr. Grinch, your heart is no longer than an inch."  I hear the rhyme, and you know, I was anti-Christmas very early, so to hear that and see the Grinch, I was like, who's that?  That spoke to me, like, oh.  But, I didn't like his anger.  The Grinch and Scrooge--and I'm like okay, it's cool, and this is back in my ambivalence, it's cool to not like Christmas, but don't mess it up for everybody else (laughter).  I didn't like that part of it.  But the whole real meaning of Mr. Grinch and all that stuff, it really worked for me.  And what I noticed early in school, was I didn't--I focused to the point of interest.  It didn't have to be exciting, I just had to be interested.  And once I wasn't interested, I drift.  And, okay, okay, if I'm reading a story, 'See Jane' I'm like, no, Jane should probably do this.  And what if she did that?  I'm re-writing the story.  I'm reading. "Mohandas [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese]!" Oh, okay, yeah, you know, I'm and that thing or whatever.  So, I was definitely like a B student, B minus (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One thing I--
Story_ID: 298749
Speaker 1: You grew up at a time when people were color struck. You--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, you were chastised for being dark-skinned.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, on some level. It wasn't even really chastised, it was more like I was looked down upon, only in regard to the area of being attractive.  That's the other thing, I should say.  In that time period, at least in Harlem [New York, New York], because remember, the revolution is still happening, so 'I'm Black and I'm Proud,' "The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice."  That's also going on, too, but as a combatant kind of reflection--reflex, to, you know, whatever the other dogma is.  But the dark skin, light skin thing, it was just assumed light skin meant pretty.  Dark skin meant unattractive.  And that's more or less what the ridicule was about.  It didn't mean you couldn't play basketball, it didn't mean you couldn't run or whatever.  However, when it came time for the dancing, like--sent to the back.   Cute guys come to the front, cute girls come to the front or whatever.  So, it was--that was where the color struck thing was most profound.  And I think I remember, and which was so crazy.  I remember Richard Roundtree, John Shaft, you know, [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks.  The movie 'Shaft' comes out.  And he was also the Afro Sheen guy.  Richard Roundtree was the Afro--I remember people saying, "Oh, this is a fine chocolate man."  But it was almost like he was an anomaly.  But I clearly remember John Shaft coming up on the screen and women swooning when Richard Roundtree came on the screen.  I was like, okay, wait a minute.  He's definitely dark-skinned, what is this about?  Okay, so is it his features?  So, again, my brain is like what makes him fine, and the other dark-skinned guy not fine, or whatever.  And again, like I said, I would ask women and they couldn't articulate it.  They didn't know how to put it into words.  And I was like, this goes back to my need to have questions answered.  Even things that aren't answerable, at least say, "Well, there's no real answer."  You know, who's God?  Where is God?  Why?  You know, you can go down that rabbit hole forever, and never get a tangible answer.  But at least humble out and say, "I can't answer that."  And people will always try to answer it, or say stop sassing.  And I'm like, why am I being a smart ass for asking a question that you can't answer?  That's your ego.  You know, which I--once again, I know how to articulate any of this stuff.  So by the time, like I said, which created this little volatile person--that by the time sixteen comes, and hip-hop is here, and I--oh, there's a microphone--oh, I can speak, oh, I found it (laughter). This is it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your first girlfriend--
Story_ID: 298750
Speaker 1: High school is really, really the turning point for adolescence, with regards to the opposite sex.  If you look at all the coming of age movies from 'American Pie' today all the way back to 'Cooley High' back then, it's right around fifteen, sixteen, seventeen where, you know.  Thirteen is no more, "Ew, get away from me."  It's like, "Oh, who's she?"  You know, that starts to change, and you know, again, especially for those of us that are not on the pretty side of the equation according to what society tells you.  We have a lot more learning.  You got to get your savvy together, man.  Boys have to get their grooming together.  You know, your posture--you need to know how to walk, you need to know what clothes to wear.  You know, all that stuff is coming into effect around fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen.  And for me, seventeen was the first girlfriend, a girl named Rhonda Robertson [ph.], in Brooklyn [New York].  Never forgot her.  It was very, very interesting because she was two years younger than me, actually.  And I remember just feeling, I was shocked that somebody liked me.  Like the fact that her friend came and said, "Rhonda likes you."  Like, what?  Are you kidding me? I can't believe this.  And I remember all of a sudden, again, I'd just started, you know, the emcee stuff.  It's not defined yet, but I am, you know, dabbling in it.  And I'm in high school, and I go to Norman Thomas High School [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].  And I only went--this is the craziest thing, too, I definitely have to backtrack this.  Norman Thomas is 85 percent women.  I remember in junior high, you're filling out the application.  I said I'm going to go to Norman Thomas because it's 85 percent women, only because I want to up the ante on my little social interaction.  I want to make sure this will put the odds in my favor--Mr. Analytical.  I go do the summer fill-in grade, I'm accepted, I'm in Norman Thomas.  Yeah, thirty women and three guys in every class.  Get out, I can't lose.  Day one, the night before the first day of school it hits me--I don't have any money.  I don't have any clothes.  Now I'm going to be around all these girls and everybody's going to say, "Ew."  And it comes from the dream to the nightmare.  So, the first day of school, I am unglued, like damn it, I got to go.  Why did I pick this school?  What the hell did I?  I over thought it.  So, Rhonda Robertson came out of that school, and I just remember, again, the whole hat and shades thing.  That's what I came from, I got to be cool.  And being cool would be my angle to at least getting girls, because I would never let anybody know about my insecurities, I'd never have to really, really be vulnerable, and I could poker face my way through it.  And, you know, when Rhonda Robertson passed the message, I was like, "Okay, are you sure?" (Laughter) It's like--and then, you know, in talking to her or whatever, she's one of the first people that made me actually feel attractive.  And I was like, I kept, "Are you sure?" Like, you know. And I would wonder who else she liked, "Well, who else do you like?"  And she's like, "It's you, it's something about your way."  And that was also the beginning of a lot of the conversations I had with girls in junior high, I should say, and in early high school, because that was like my junior to senior year, with her.  Where women dealt with men based on the intangibles of energy, how you look is one thing, but how you feel is another thing, and women will respond to that all the time.  And I was like, oh, so you like--it wasn't swagger back then.  You like my swagger, you like my--you like the other stuff, I get it.  And Rhonda Robertson, I never will forget her--and thank her, actually.  She's the one that started the ball rolling and got my confidence up.  And then shortly after that, making a record and going on tour and women throwing themselves at me, and me becoming a complete womanizer, I'm like, "Oh, they're going to figure it out at some point, so I better get all I can while--." You know, it was a very, very nervous energy that created the backlash of womanizing for me.  And besides that, being everybody's best friend, by the time I'm a quote, unquote, a celebrity, the best friend became the most comfortable person to go to, and when relationships break down, I was the guy that filled the slot.  So, it was just, hand over fist--just women, women, women.  So I went from nobody to damn near everybody.  And then having to check my ego at the door at some point--
Story_ID: 298751
Speaker 1: If I could do that, that's bliss for me.  Like, wow, you really got something out of what I said?  And one of the most powerful moments in my whole hip-hop--I mean, I got three big ones.  But one of the most powerful ones was I was doing a little talk show.  [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan's son [Ron Reagan] had a little talk show for a minute, or they were trying to give him a (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: I went and did the pilot, and it was a guy that stood up in the audience and said he was a gangbanger, and he said he listened to my album and, literally, as cliche and corny as it sounds--and I was like, I was almost getting ready to give him a screw face, like, this sounds too hokey.  And then he talked about it after the show to me.  And he was like, "No, no, no, I listen to you, and it was a record that you had, and you were talking about, you know, this record 'Knowledge is King' and you know, just your whole energy.  I was listening to N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes], and I was thinking about the gangbanging and," blah, blah, blah, blah, "and I was young."  He said, "But when I listen to you, and validated by (unclear) say, well he's the rapper I listen to, and he's positive, he's this, he's that."  He said, "It completely turned me around."  "Because", he said, "it made me focus on a), how can I do what you do, not what N.W.A. says, even though I saw all rappers," he said, "but the way you did it.  And then Public Enemy shortly came."  You know, he's like--and I started thinking, like, wow, you can actually move people musically?  He said, "I never even made that connection before."  And he said, "And because of that," he said, "I literally got out of the gang, I actually went to school, because they told me you graduated.  Like I started to listen to what people were saying about you, and I was like, I want to emulate that."  And I was like, oh shit, it works.  Like, that was one of the times--talking about my humbling--I don't need external validation.  Well, actually, that was external validation, because I never knew it worked really, until somebody actually came back and said, "Yeah, it did, I went to school because of you."  I was like, "Oh, shit."  So, this is where the balance of external validation--unfortunately we live our lives through--for most of external validation as opposed to internal.  I'm like oh, just balance it.  It's great to have external validation, just don't let it overtake you.  Don't be looking for people--, "Do you like, me, do you love me?" (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --"Am I good, am I great?"  Don't feed into it.  It's like it's cool in terms of, like--and again, feedback from the universe--feedback from your environment.  People are always going to tell you if--you know, one of the things that was coming off early was, you know, you're arrogant.  I'm like, "Why is everybody getting that?"  And I'm like, okay, my confidence is going past the point of confidence into the place of arrogance.  Well, that has to do with my delivery, my demeanor, because I was flippant about it.  Saying I don't need external validation is one thing--I don't need your fucking validation.
Speaker 2: It's (unclear), right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "What was that?  That's now off-putting.  What are you doing that for?  Hey, what are you smoking?  No. Get out of here, stupid."  You know, I would be flippant with it, like, you know, and I would--and I had all these sarcastic little quips that I would say, "Yeah, you want a cigarette?"  "No, I'm intelligent."  I would do shit like that, which I wasn't even connecting (laughter).
Speaker 2: And also that's you, you know, that's you.
Speaker 1: And I wasn't connecting, because I was--you know what it was?  And I was in a war. My own war of the society has you going this way, and forget about that, and stand up.  And I loved [Muhammad] Ali, and you know, what I heard about Malcolm X and all that stuff, and you know we talked about that last time.  But for me, I just remember having my own battle, you know.  Anybody--I actually fought somebody for offering me some weed, like, "Get out of here."  You know, because I challenged his manhood and he was like, "What do you think, I'm stupid?"
Story_ID: 298752
Speaker 1: I want to go back to Rhonda Robinson [sic. Rhonda Robertson (ph.)], just because that's where we left off, and--
Speaker 2: Rhonda, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and only because it's high school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Norman Thomas [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And at Norman Thomas High School, you met?
Speaker 2: Rhonda Robertson, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And also, that was the time when you met the--did you meet the other like--
Speaker 2: Well, in high school since, you know, for me, hip hope--
Speaker 1: --like was Special K and those guys, did they come--
Speaker 2: That's all--Special K actually went to Norman Thomas.  LA Sunshine, my third partner--and actually Spoonie Gee, who was the original first member of the Treacherous Three: myself, Spoonie and LA.  Special K took Spoonie's place once Spoonie made his own record ['Spoonin' Rap'].  And then he came back and it became Spoonie Gee and then Treacherous Three, which is a whole other ordeal.  But, yeah, Special K was in my high school, and LA Sunshine lived in my neighborhood, so we'd always seen each other, and we grew up together.  And really, really, just, we--again, the same thing I was talking about, men and female in relationships--for us it overtook us.  It just was the thing to do.  We heard music in the park. Break beats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of music were you hearing in the park?
Speaker 2: --break beats. You know, loud, you know, they were doing--the big thing back in the '70s [1970s], they would always have block parties anyway.  And at the block parties, you know, before deejays were cutting, they were just playing records.  They played records you heard on the radio, and people sang along or whatever.  But then I heard, the very first break beat I heard was a record called 'Blow Your Head' by Fred Wesley & The J.B.'s (making sounds).  And simultaneously with that, I saw a guy doing this thing on the ground, the break dancing, and you know, I was stunned.  And I knew I wanted to be part of it, so I started learning how to pop before I started rhyming (laughter).  Because I just wanted to be in.  And back to that whole thing that I was telling you about me not needing any external validation.  I still had to learn it first, to see what was going on.  So, I became almost like this junkie student, a wizard: "Do they have another hip-hop party somewhere?"  And it wasn't even called hip-hop yet. It was break beats.  "Yeah, they playing break beats over there."  And we would go from, I would go from block to block to block to block, just to listen or whatever and to see what was happening.  And then, it's almost like the emcee aspect of it started rising above everything else.
Story_ID: 298753
Speaker 1: I loved the deejays and the break beat, I loved the break dances, or whatever.  But the guy on the mic, he has the command of the audience.  This is speaking to me on some level.  And I know [DJ] Hollywood, you know, as a culture we have a ton of hip-hop mythology and the truth in it, but--and depending on which side you talk to, you know, Hollywood is the first emcee, [DJ] Kool Herc is the godfather of hip-hop.  And to me, both of those statements are undisputed--undisputable.  I think Kool Herc is absolutely the godfather of hip-hop, because he brought the break beats out and he brought the sound systems out, and everybody took their cues from the fact that Kool Herc had this killer system that everybody listened to.  It was like, "Wow, nobody's heard music that loud."  So, we went to a Kool Herc party and they had a thing in the Bronx [New York] where I was wearing a hat, so I couldn't go to it.  It was a sweatbox, and you heard about it, and everybody talked about it that lived in the Bronx.  And because I was in Norman Thomas High School [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York]--at that time you had people from Brooklyn [New York], people from Manhattan [New York, New York], people from the Bronx or whatever, and they were cliquish.  So you knew what the Brooklyn guys looked like and what they wore or whatever, and I would analyze (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did they wear, the Brooklyn guys?
Speaker 1: These shoes called Clarks, you know.  They would have their Kangols turned to the side or whatever, and they had a very, very different rhythm in Brooklyn.  But they didn't have the music yet.  Like it got to Brooklyn last.  And it's almost like, however--and I tell people this, too--Brooklyn's most significant in hip-hop for me by having the pulse of hip-hop on a level that nobody else had.  The Bronx is the father of it, the origin.  They were the hard-core beat boys, they were the purity, they knew exactly what the break beats were, they knew the rhythm and nuances, or whatever.  But Brooklyn had the ability to figure out what was going to work on a bigger level.  For whatever reason, I don't know, if Brooklyn liked it, especially by the time we started making records, it was a hit.  So, it was almost like Brooklyn was the place that defined whether it was a hit or not.  And me being from Harlem [New York, New York], Harlem's flaw and gift simultaneously was we were more concerned with being cool.  We were more concerned with looking a certain way.
Speaker 2: How did you look?
Speaker 1: We needed to dress.  We needed to have on British Walkers, and if we were going to wear Kangols, it needed to match the shirt.  And we wore mock necks, and, you know, mercury (unclear) and all these old clothes, I don't remember the names of the--double knit pants, and the double stitch going down.  So, Manhattan's thing was, "We're the fly guys.  You know, we come in here to get the girls."  That was the Manhattan's vibe.  And the Bronx was definitely, "No, we're here to break.  We're here to B, boy.  We're going to show you what this really is about."  So, when hip-hop translated into Manhattan, into Harlem, we basically turned it into, you know, "We gonna party, but we gonna stand up, because we need to be able to look the girl in the eye. That's our thing, we need to be fly."  Even as a performer, being on stage, the Harlem guys would come out dressed.  The Brooklyn guys were in the audience looking, and I remember, that's during those days when they used to have those sayings, "Money make Manhattan, we make money. Our thing is different," you know, it was a very, very--Puffy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy] is a perfect example of an extension of what Harlem was.  Maze--definitely when you see some of their newer guys or whatever.  So, I'm like the originator in that ilk.  You know, it's the Treacherous Three, we had on blazers.  Like, "What, blazers and hip-hop?  Who's going to wear blazers?"  And we would do it, with an attack, like, "Yeah, what? Yeah, we dress, that's right. Ladies like it, don't you?"  Like it was a swagger to it, like, "We're here to take your girl. I'll do you on the mic, too, but we're here to take your girl."  Like that was the Harlem thing.
Story_ID: 298754
Speaker 1: And I remember the first emcee that I actually heard, because I heard before, I heard about [DJ] Hollywood, but the first person I actually heard was Lovebug Starski.  And he--I knew they were from the Bronx [New York], but he hit everything that--he worked in a place called The Renaissance a lot in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: What year did you hear him, do you remember?
Speaker 1: This is 1977.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Lovebug Starski, he's one of the most un-credited people in hip-hop, because he's right after--I mean, it's Herc [DJ Kool Herce], Hollywood, and Lovebug Starski, who studied under Hollywood, he's right there.  And he's the first one I heard, he's the one that made me want to do it.  I was like, wow.  His swagger--and he would play a combination of break beats and radio records, disco records, or whatever you'd call them at the time.  And in most circles, we would either do one or the other:  Kool Herc was break beats, Hollywood was disco records or whatever.  Starski's both.  Starski would play 'Apache,' and then he'd play Michael Jackson, (singing) "Do you want to freak with me, I'm Starski."  He would make the club record almost as potent as the break beat, because of what he would do.  He would change the words up in it or whatever, and one of his classics is 'Before I Let Go' from Frankie Beverly.  He would take absolute radio records and integrate them into the hip-hop scene in a way that I hadn't seen anybody do before.  So, he's the one that kind of inspired me to do it in that level.  And from that point on, like I said, this is all through high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] because I'm starting to emcee, but I haven't defined what's going on yet inside of me.
Story_ID: 298755
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the first time you actually emceed.
Speaker 2: The first time I actually emceed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where were you?
Speaker 2: --I was at one of my best friend's house, a guy named Mike [ph.], and literally I just wanted to hear what my voice sounded like on a tape.  And we had an eight-track tape, that's how far back it is.  An eight-track tape, he threw 'Apache' on (beats), and I was rhyming just like Lovebug Starski (singing).  You gotta spell your name (singing). And that's what I heard Lovebug doing.  And I was actually doing what he was doing. And I knew I wanted to do more, I just didn't know where it was going to come from or how to do it or whatever.  Most deejays used to change their voice, and do it bad. That was all from [DJ] Hollywood--most emcees I should say. And then I went to, one night I went to go see Lovebug Starski.  Grandmaster Flash was there performing with him.  And Starski was the headliner, because he was the bigger name at the time, and Grandmaster Flash was under him.  And at that time, it was only the deejay's name, the emcees were incidental.  Even though the emcees still did what they did--and Starski was a deejay and an emcee, so it was deejay--emcee, deejay Lovebug Starski.  So, I'm going there, and they would do two-hour sets.  And this is what I call the absolute (singing) moment for me in hip-hop.  Lovebug Starski is on stage, and you know, you do ten to two [o'clock]--no, I'm sorry--two hour sets, so it was ten to twelve [o'clock], twelve to two [o'clock], two to four [o'clock], four to six [o'clock], and that was it.  And the headline moments would be twelve to two, that's primetime, and then you would close out the show, four to six.  So, of course, I walk in at 11:30 and I'm looking and I see the Casanova Crew and all these people and I'm hearing all this stuff in the Bronx [New York], and it's really tense, 'cause Harlem [New York, New York] and the Bronx still had a little friction kind of, so you could tell the Harlem guys by how they would dress, and you could tell the Bronx guys by how they would dress.  But the Bronx guys had an edge on them like, "We're official hip-hop."  You know, "Even though we're at the Autobahn [ph.] in Manhattan [New York, New York], we're official hip-hop."  So, we're looking at it like, okay, these guys have their own energy, which is so crazy because we colonize and fraternize in so many different ways in the black community.  But this was just the birth of hip-hop in it, so, and for all intents and purposes, the Manhattan guys could be called over-dressed, but they were fly as they could be.  And then I remember, you know, some of the Brooklyn guys coming up there literally to try to take people's Cortefiels.  You had the Cortefiel coats back in the day, corduroy with the fur on the collar.  You know, a little silver chain medallion or whatever, and that was the level of bling (laughter) in the late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 298756
Speaker 1: But I remember I got in there, and you know, Grandmaster Flash is on, and he's just playing records, and I'm just like, who is this guy, whatever.  Let's get to [Lovebug] Starski, I'm waiting for Starski.  Starski comes on twelve o'clock midnight, kills for two hours.  I mean, just destroyed the crowd, like he does--pandemonium, frenzy, or whatever.  "I'm the L-O-V-E-B-U-G." Call and response master. Then I hear this voice out of nowhere, it's like, you know, two o'clock and it's Flash's turn to get on.  "Ladies and gentlemen, it's time for Grandmaster Flash. Lovebug, turn your music down."  I'm like, who in the hell has the audacity to just--because--that was the other thing--Flash was on the stage in the Autobahn [ph.], and Starski was on the floor--ropes, you know, and the floor and again, you're up closer to the crowd, you're the star.  So, Flash is on the stage, almost like in back, because they both had their own systems.  And the voice is coming from the stage system, "Turn your music down, Lovebug Starski, turn your music down," which is a Bronx [New York] thing, you know.  The system--if you can outdo their system and be louder than them, which, you know, I knew nothing of.  I knew--I heard about it, but I didn't know--that was their way of battling so to speak.  But, I'm like, who is audacious enough to tell Lovebug--he's the star, he's the headliner--you just wait, you'll get on, what are you doing?  And then Lovebug said something real smug, or whatever, which is another thing I liked about him.  He was like, you know, "We're going to take a two-hour intermission.  I'll be back at four [o'clock]."  Basically, like, let these guys do what they gotta do, but you know, the party starts again at four o'clock, is basically what Starski was saying.  I laughed, and I'm standing at the front row, and I was, "Oh, that was funny.  He dissed him, I can't believe that, ha ha ha."  And then all of the lights go down.  I'm like what is this melodrama?  And I didn't know, you know, this is Grandmaster Flash's coming on.  And all of a sudden, the spotlight hits, the light-skinned guy with a big afro, "Ladies and gentlemen, the most exciting man--." I'm like, is this greatest show on earth kind of--who's doing this? "New York's [New York, New York] number one cut creator, no one no cuts greater, straighter or later than New York's number one cut creator, The Grand, Grand, Grand, Master, Master, Master, Flash, Flash, Flash."  I'd never heard an echo before.  So, I quickly go from, who the hell is this to what the hell is this? (Laughter) And it's [The] Kidd Creole.  "Ladies and gentlemen, I said are, are, are, you, you, you ready, ready, ready?"  They played Bob James' 'Take Me to the Mardi Gras,' one of my favorite break beats of all, but I'd never heard it before.  So, he threw that on, and the next light that comes on is Keith Cowboy [Keith Wiggins], sitting in a chair.  And he's doing call and response in a way I never heard before.  Because most call and response is coming from the deejay voice, "Yes, yes, y'all, to the beat, say ho, come on, say ho."  He was the coolest call and response emcee I'd ever heard.  He was sitting in a chair, laid back like this, almost--he had a microphone.  Kidd Creole said, "Are, are you ready?"  Flash threw on the beat, and Cowboy comes right in.  I never heard an emcee just come in just like that, off the bat.  "Rock, rock and don't stop, keep on, on," using his regular voice, it was no DC voice there.  And then he just started spelling his name, "I'm the C-O-W-B-O-Y, the man is bad, you can't deny.  When you ask the cowboy to play, I'm cowboy, I never ran away. Let's rock, rock and don't stop.  Now throw your hands in the air, air, air, and wave 'em like you just don't care, care, care.  Say yeah."  And I'm like--everybody is mesmerized by him, and I'd never seen anything that cool in my life.  Like, I saw what Lovebug did, but this is like the cooler, if you want to call it, street version, because Lovebug was polished.  Lovebug was absolutely like a showman, to the tenth power.   I mean, he would throw the mike around and grab it like James Brown and cut a record at the same--I mean, Lovebug was incredible.  And Grandmaster Flash's crew--now I've only seen Creole to this point do the intro, Cowboy come in and spell his name--and he had all these new call and responses that I didn't even know.  "What's my name?"  "Champagne."  "Say, what's my name?"  "Champagne."  "Say what, say what."  "Say what, say what."  "I'm scared of who?"  "I'm scared of you."  "Well, the people in the back." "We (unclear) the wack."  And the crowd is singing every word, like, and this is the Bronx people in Harlem [New York, New York], they know what to do.
Story_ID: 298757
Speaker 1: So, now I'm like, I'm feeling left out, like I want to be a part of this (laughter), what the hell?  And I'm still stunned at what the heck is going on on stage.  And then they pass the mike to Melle Mel.  "Melle Mel, Mel, my mellow, mellow.  It's on you so what you gonna do."  Now meanwhile they're doing this, Grandmaster Flash is (beats).  I'm like it's so much coming at me.  This is all brand new, and this is the moment where I'm like, "Oh this is it, this is the next level."  This is--and I made up my mind.  Melle Mel started rhyming, and I think I said this a little earlier, he said, "I'll make Alaska hot, I'll make Africa cold, stop Nat King Cole from playing the role.  I'll move on down his family tree.  I'll fuck his wife, and Natalie [Natalie Cole].  I'll make him toot his horn and tip his hat, can't beat that with a baseball bat.  Melle Mel, rocking them well, from the World Trade to the depths of hell."  And it was like, that's what I'm doing for the rest of my life.  I knew it, it was like that was the moment.  It was like, oh.  And again, through my intro to it--Lovebug Starski, to seeing Grandmaster Flash do it at that level, and then Grandmaster Flash premiere the back spin later on that night.  The first time--he said this was the first time he'd done it.  I don't know if it was actually the first time, but it was definitely the first time I saw it, definitely.  They said it was the first time, and he was playing the record, "Hot shot, hot shot, hot shot, hot shot, hot, hot, hot, hot, hot, hot, hot--." The crowd is screaming, like what are we seeing?  So, in one night, Grandmaster Flash, in Harlem [New York, New York] at least, became a solidified star.  It was all we could talk about for months.  And then it was like, where are they playing at?  Where are they going? We're going to go to the Bronx [New York] now.  Flash is so powerful (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened to Starski?
Speaker 1: He was still, I mean, Starski was still what he was.  You couldn't undo it, it's just that what Flash did, he took the showmanship part of it, added a street edge, made it almost all--'cause Flash was playing all break beats, basically, which is so ironic, because a lot of people didn't know how tight Grandmaster Flash was as a mixer, because we got caught up into the showmanship part of it.  But Flash was as good a mixer as Starski was.  And again, Starski didn't do tricks with the wheels of steel or whatever, but Starski was still the showman.  He was an emcee and a deejay, which still is a niche that very few people understood how to do at that level.  So, Starski didn't really need emcees because he was an emcee and a deejay.  And actually Starski sometimes would take a break, and AJ [Scratch] would cut for him.  And then Starski would just go out there and rhyme by himself.  So Starski was a one-man show, you couldn't undo that.  It's just that Flash had a crew now, and there were three emcees at the time: [The] Kidd Creole, Melle Mel, and Keith Cowboy [Keith Wiggins].  And for what hip-hop was becoming, you know, the group thing, it was different energies.  Oh, you needed the party man, you needed the hype man, which Kidd Creole was actually the first hype man, to be honest.  And Melle Mel, the rhymer, the hardcore rhymer, the guy that's going to give you metaphor, and simile, and all this witty, witty clever--like, wow, what the hell.  They overwhelmed us, and like I said, we didn't go from the Manhattan [New York, New York]--we didn't go from Harlem to the Bronx to see--we would hear about.  But, you know, you're taking your life in your hands going up in the Bronx.
Speaker 2: Because?
Speaker 1: Because the foreignness of neighborhood, the poverty side of it, or whatever.  You know, we had thugs since thugs were thugs.  It wasn't glorified the same way, but, you know, you walk in the wrong project, you can come out without your coat.  So, we knew that, and we were aware of that, but for Flash is so potent, we're like, we're going to the Bronx (laughter).  That's just what it is.  And I'm going with one person, two people--if I don't have a posse, I'm going by myself, because I have to see this.  And that was the power of hip-hop, and definitely for me, the intro to it from Grandmaster Flash.
Story_ID: 298758
Speaker 1: So, I want to talk about Treacherous Three, and how the group was formed, like the early days.  But before that, I want to--where did--who coined the phrase hip-hop, and where did that come from?
Speaker 2: For me, again, the phrase was coined after Lovebug Starski. 'Cause that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But where did it come from? What does it mean? Yeah.
Speaker 2: He used to say--Lovebug Starski, to getting from one rhyme to the next rhyme, used to say, (singing) "Hip-hop, the hippit, the hippit, the hip, hip, hop and you don't stop the rock."  And because adults, which is so funny, it's always defined by the people that are quote unquote not of it, because we were still just calling it break beat, a break beat party.  We didn't--it wasn't called hip-hop yet, it wasn't called rap yet, of course.  But, people in a very non-glorifying way, or contemptuous way, would--, "That's that hippy hop stuff," because they couldn't remember he said, hip-hop, and he said that a lot, to get from rhyme to rhyme (unclear) different party.  (Singing) And he was doing almost like a military--, "Hip hop, hippit a hop, one, two, three, four--one two, three, four."  It was almost like--almost in that cadence, and I guess that's what resonated to the adults.  "Oh, turn that hip-hop stuff down, turn that hippity hop down."  And they were calling it hip-hop because they didn't like what that music was.  And we kind of embraced it, almost like the word, like the N word, you know, we embraced it and turned it around.  So, to my knowledge, it was Lovebug Starski doing that, saying, you know, hip-hop, or whatever, just like [The] Kidd Creole came up with the, "Yes, yes, y'all, thing, and that was just a segue just to get from rhyme to rhyme."  Now, if you were in it, you understood that, but if you weren't, you just remember what was most memorable.
Story_ID: 298759
Speaker 1: So, tell me about the Treacherous Three and how it all came about for you.  Like, you saw Grandmaster Flash.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You decided, I'm going to do this for life.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What steps did you take?  How did it all--how did you become "Kool Moe Dee" [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at this time, after seeing that Grandmaster Flash thing, like I said, and I definitely didn't stop talking about it for at least six months, at least--going around--and, then again, my analytical thing came on.  And at this point, I'm like a little Mr. T going around to all of the parties.  Not only Flash's but just any party I could see.  So I went--I saw [DJ] Breakout and the Funky Four [Funky 4 + 1] before they were actually the Funky Four.  I saw the "L" Brothers, and I didn't know what the "L" Brothers were, you know, because crews were coming up, so that was the other thing.  The Bronx [New York] had crews.  They had these big glamorous names, all the way down to the Mercedes Ladies, an all-girl group that nobody even talks about anymore.  So, I would just go to all these parties and they'd be outside in the summertime, by myself in many cases.  And this is where the craziness of my passion and ego was.  Not even thinking about the danger at all.  I'm by myself dressed in all-white or all-red or all whatever--Kangol down to the (unclear), and I'm standing up front at the ropes just looking at the emcees, and shaking my head, like that's not enough, that's not enough.  And because I'd already heard Furious--Grandmaster Flash--they weren't called the Furious Five [Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five] because there were only three of them at the time--I knew what level it had to be on.  So, I was making sure that either I was going to be near or at that level if I was going to actually come out and do it.  So, I'm writing rhymes, and I'm doing what I do, but I'm not really letting anybody really know yet.  And I'm just walking around.  And they're like, "Who is this guy?"  And I was, you know, in my mind, I thought somebody would invite me to rhyme if I did that (laughter).  I don't know what kind of sense that made, but it was almost like I'm challenging the emcees.  But I created this air of intimidation and mystery simultaneously.  "Who's the guy dressed in all one color, just shaking his head there in front of the ropes?  He's at all these parties and he's looking at people," doing that like, almost doing this, you know.  Like, what the--you know, and that's the--again, you're talking Harlem [New York, New York] and the Bronx.  What--are you crazy?  So finally, I get around my neighborhood, and I don't have a crew yet, but I know, again, because of the crews that I'm seeing in the Bronx, that's how you do it, you need a crew.  The solo emcee still wasn't that big yet.  The only person that was solo at the time was Kurtis Blow, and Kurtis Blow was kind of in the vein of [DJ] Hollywood and Lovebug Starski.  Even though he didn't deejay, he was an emcee that--again, Kurtis Blow could drive a party crazy with his call and response thing.  And he wasn't really like a lyricist per se, but he was so proficient in the party rocking that it was incredible.  And right after him became, from what I saw, again, Busy Bee [Busy Bee Starski].  Even though Busy Bee was already down "L" Brothers before him, just talking about when Busy Bee became solo and became a name.  He was a party rocker, and that was the other thing.  The party rocker emcee and the rhyming emcee, and you were either one or the other.  Most people didn't do both.  I mean, even Melle Mel could rock a party, but he was a rhymer.  [Keith] Cowboy [Keith Wiggins] could rock a rhyme, but he was a party rocker.  It was--you know, in their crew, so the balance of that is what made the difference.
Story_ID: 298760
Speaker 1: For me, I just kept going around, like I said, doing all of that.  And then finally, one day in my high school, in Norman Thomas [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York], I created--I needed to create something that was going to be my own niche.  And I created this style called fast rhymes.  And nobody in my high school knew I rhymed, and I was doing the same thing in my lunchroom, just standing there with my arms folded just watching all the emcees get on, 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because people--what do you mean, watching people get on at the high school?
Speaker 1: At my high school, we had the unique space in Norman Thomas where we would actually play music in the lunchroom.  The lunch break was music, and there was--this was like--this is unheard of in high school, in any other high school.  So, people would leave their schools to come to our high school because we had music.  So, our lunchroom would be packed at lunchtime, you know.  And then, you know, of course, they had to come up with security stuff to make sure people couldn't get in, because it was becoming like this so-called party school.  And the magic of it, there was a guy named Mr. Johnson [ph.] that used to do lunchroom, the magic of it was it almost created a work environment that was much more conducive, because, again, which I--one of my theories, too, is when children are having fun, they're more inclined to work, they're more receptive.  And by doing that, I remember lunch (unclear), you know, PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]--some people would cut class, but for the most part, you felt good about going to school, because it was going to be an event, every day.  And that actually worked.  The attendance went up, everything was, you know, on high because of that.  But--and I would stand in the lunchroom and watch these guys.  You know, the Bronx [New York] guys would get on, and some of the Brooklyn [New York] guys would get on.  And at this time, Brooklyn doesn't--Brooklyn has Grandmaster DJ Flowers [Grandmaster Flowers].  You know, they have a couple of people, but they're not really, really, you know, known for their hip-hop yet.  So the Brooklyn guys still were setting the tone in terms of who was good or not, because they would either, you know, woo, woo--they wouldn't boo you, but they wouldn't explode for you unless you were really, really good.  I just remember I sat there and then one day a friend of mine, Dano B, my actual first deejay, was playing in the lunchroom, and I told him I was going to get on.  And he's like, "Really?" You know, "For real?"  Like, "Oh, okay," you know.  And I was like, "Get this record called 'Headhunters.'  I heard Grandmaster Flash use it."  And this kind of helped me and cursed me simultaneously throughout my hip-hop career, because, for me, I didn't want to get on records, I didn't want to rhyme on records that would make people dance.  I wanted you to focus on what I was saying.  So, I didn't want to rhyme on "Good Times," I didn't want to rhyme on "Freedom," I didn't want to rhyme on Cheryl Lynn's "To Be Real" ["Got to Be Real"]  those are party records. I want you to hear what I'm saying.  Give me a beat that you can't dance to, (beats), there's no dancing going on.  So he threw that record on, and I did the fast rhyme thing (rhyming), and by the time I got half way through, the crowd is screaming.  So, it was like this overnight sensation, but I was planning this all this time.  Not that moment, but I was planning doing that--and I just remember the Brooklyn crowd went crazy, and I actually became more popular in Brooklyn than I was in Harlem [New York, New York] first.  And by being popular in Brooklyn, my name started resonating through the city as, "Who is this guy?"
Story_ID: 298761
Speaker 1: And what was that deejay's name, the kid?
Speaker 2: Dano B.
Speaker 1: Dano B.  And the year (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My very, very first deejay, 1978.  Fall, '78 [1978], spring, '79 [1979], actually, to be more technical.  I'm a stickler for detail, and dates and stuff like that.  So--
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: --it was my junior year [at Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] and, then, like I said, so, the actual rhyme--
Speaker 1: But just go back to the point that you wanted, you didn't want people to dance.  You wanted them to hear the message.  Now, what at the time, were the messages you wanted to get across?
Speaker 2: Well, to--let's take it even further, it wasn't even, it wasn't even about not letting them dance to hear the message.  It was not letting them dance just to hear me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was absolutely more narcissist, it was more egocentric than that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't even have the message to give.  I just wanted you know I was good (laughter).  As a matter of fact, not only am I good, I'm probably one of the best people you're ever going to hear.  I was in that space.  Like I was, again, I think the character of me--and some of its flaw and some of it works out to be an attribute--is I was at war.   I was at war with a lot of cliches that society had out.  I didn't know, you know, I wasn't polished, and I think this--I speak for a lot of what the hip-hop generation was about, because that's what I called it.  We just weren't going to take it anymore.  We didn't know what we were going to do.  We didn't know what we weren't taking, we just knew we weren't taking it and we know, you knew, we ain't having it.  You know, it was just this bravado, like whatever's been going on, you know--we're looking at poverty and the one thing I can say about the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] is with all of the burned out buildings and all that stuff--which is, again, we'll fast forward again and digress for a second.   When Melle Mel came with the record, 'The Message,' it struck a chord because we had seen it, we had lived it, or whatever.  Nobody actually put it in a poetic form yet--but abandoned buildings, bricks and concrete you know, all of that stuff.  It's like yeah, you know, doing that day to day, it'll create a hard edge to you.  And that's what, quote, unquote being hard really meant.  We can weather this storm and we can still shine.  Of course, it has a different connotation of violence now.  Violence is always a part of it on some level, but really, think about the character that came out of it.  And I think, you know, I always go high and low end.  In the high end of it--in the high end of it, yeah, it's about perseverance, it's about being able to weather that storm.  I'm still going to school in spite of being hungry.  I'm still going to graduate in spite of quote, unquote not having good books, or whatever it is that the circumstances and the odds are against us.  We're going to persevere, we're still--some of the greatest basketball players are still going to come out of here, some of the greatest artists and so on and so forth.  So, that was what being hard was.  It's like if you grew up in New York [New York], you know, we took the Frank Sinatra thing to the tenth power.  If I can make it here, I can make it anywhere.  What?  If I can make it in the South Bronx, if I can make it in Harlem [New York, New York]--the world's an oyster, are you crazy?  Like, and that, on the high end, is the great thing about it.
Story_ID: 298762
Speaker 1: The low end, unfortunately, is what I call the hustler mentality.  I'm just doing what I gotta do to survive.  Yeah, on one level, but you're also messing the community up simultaneously.  So, all of this stuff is in hip-hop, because you do have the early levels of the hustler that looks at this as something that's a pastime, something that you may be passionate about, but it ain't making no money, so I can't be spending too much time doing that.  Which is why for us, the biggest dichotomy in hip-hop right now is, hustlers aren't really entertainers.  They're hustlers.   And making money is why they're doing the entertainment side of whatever, so when people say, "Oh, the guys can't rock no more," it's like, well they're not thinking about being great.  They're thinking about the money they can make from hip-hop, because it's a business.  Ah, and at that time it wasn't as defined or refined a business as it is now, so they couldn't look at it that way.  So, the hustlers did the hustling and the emcees did the emceeing.  And most emcees, if not all emcees at the time, they weren't hustlers.  They were literally trying to find another way out, which is where the hardcore emcee thing came from.  Do you know how hard it is to be in a party where you're not making all of the money?  Actually, probably not making no money, really.  You might get a hundred dollars, and that was our hustle.  Well, my hustle's going to be rocking the mic and doing this little party, and you know, it's literally how many people come in.  The doorman, you know, is stashing, because we were little entrepreneurs in that sense so you had somebody that had enough savvy or money.  And again, because you can't make it clean all the way around, sometimes a hustler would rent the place and then hire the emcee, but he was keeping all the money.  And because he was a hustler, he wasn't going to go off and really give him too much (unclear) about it, because now it's your crew versus his crew and the emcee crews are emcee crews, there wasn't a street crew.  The guys at the door (laughter), "Yeah, well y'all only made four hundred [dollars] tonight." "Four hundred, are you crazy?  It's like six thousand people in here."  "Well, you made four hundred tonight.  Basically, that's what we got for you."  Like, well okay.  You got a choice to make.  You're gonna fight, you know, that was the way to be under the low level of it in hip-hop was.  But then again, like I said, it took on a life that it took--of its own, and for me, going back--now digressing back to 1978, '79 [1979], when I'm finally emerging, so to speak, I wasn't going to come out until I thought I was really, really at an elite level.  Because I'm still rhyming, you know, in my neighborhood and on the block, and my partner, LA Sunshine, we're coming up with little routines or whatever.  But we still didn't have a crew-crew yet.
Story_ID: 298763
Speaker 1: Then I met Spoonie Gee at the PAL [Police Athletic League], because I was going to box, that was my other thing.  I was going to box, and I had all this stuff going on.  The 1976 Olympics [1976 Summer Olympics, Montreal, Canada] turned me completely on.  Sugar Ray Leonard, that whole class, and you know, in my neighborhood--younger--I'm known for being able to fight, and I mean just fist fight, not like organized boxing.   And I remember the first time getting in the ring, and I never knew all that went into boxing.  I figured I could fight, and I'd go and box and there'd be no problem.  I'd never been hit before.  So, finally, you know, I get in the gym, and there's a guy that actually knows what a jab is, and I'm like, "Oh, wait."  And I remember the boxing coach telling me that whatever it is that fighters have, I had, which is another one of those self-esteem boosts, because all I knew is that I had speed.  I was really, really fast or whatever.  And I had all the--you know, my defense was okay, but I wasn't technical yet.  So, I didn't know, you know, throw the punch and snap.  I didn't know any of that stuff.  So, I get in, I get in with this guy.  It's like yeah, you're a tough guy. Okay.  So, I get in there and I get hit.  And in the first round this guy is (making sounds), and I can't believe I'm getting hit.  And I'm like--and then my analytical thing kicks in, and I got to figure out what it is.  And then by the second round, he still hit me a couple of times, but I figured it out.  And then I made a miss, and then I saw him get frustrated.  So, by the third round, it's all me.  And the coach was like, "True veterans sometimes don't even know how to do that."  He said, "So whatever it is that you have, is innate."  I thought I was going to be a boxer by this time. 'Cause hip-hop--again, there's no real money there yet.  It's just something that I love to do, so it's not solidified yet.  So, I'm thinking I'm going to be a boxer or a football player, because I'm also playing football for the church, the Common Saints [ph.].  So, it's a very very packed plate that's going on.  This is the first time that my grades ever started to slip, in my junior year of high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].  I'm working after school at Arthur Treacher's Fish and Chips.  I'm going to PAL to do this boxing thing.
Speaker 2: What does PAL stand for?
Speaker 1: Police Athletic League.  Back in the day, it was like the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and the PAL, they had all these programs that Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] cut by the '80s [1980s].  The whole political side of the hip-hop stuff is even more intriguing than some of the stuff we actually talk about.  The programs that were there for us, the youth programs, that quote, unquote gave us a chance--and that's the other thing about being hard core in hip-hop, too.  It also meant being able to take those opportunities and maximize them.  Like, that was hard.  Because it's really, really hard to go into a gym under-nourished, starving, you don't have any money.  How am I going to be a boxer?  What weight category am I going to be in?  Am I going to be like some grown man fighting kids because I only weigh ninety pounds (laughter), like, what?  I'm not eating (laughter), what's going on here (laughter).  But yeah, the boxing coach he gave me, you know, some insight and said the whole thing about, you know, being able to make an adjustment, being able to see what you're doing wrong, what the other's guy's doing to you.  It's like you teach professional fighters that.  So, like if you stick with it, if you're really serious about this, you know, come back, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I met Spoonie Gee, 'cause Spoonie used to go to the PAL all the time.
Story_ID: 298764
Speaker 1: Oh, he emcees, or whatever.  And Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] was actually shy.  And right at that time, there was this kind of like soul-mate kind of connection with Spoonie.  I befriended him.  His mother passed when he was thirteen, and he hadn't gotten over it by this time.  He's sixteen now.  So, he's talking about it, and it's like he's almost in tears every day.  I'm like, "What is--?"  And he had a--Spoonie Gee is one of the few emcees--Spoonie Gee, Doug E. Fresh, Heavy D--to me, those are emcees that basically have what I call the likeability factor.  They're non-threatening, they're proficient at what they do, and everybody loves their energy.  Spoonie, he's one of the first to battle where--he's not talking about battling, he's not talking about being better than you.  He's talking about loving women and having a good time with them.  And that was his emcee style.  So, he's the first quote, unquote love rapper, and women loved it.  I mean, "He's such a teddy bear, he's so cute, he's this, he's that."  And he's got this thing under him where he's basically in pain because he hasn't adjusted to his mother's death.  So, we become good friends or whatever.  We go up in the neighborhood and I introduce him and LA Sunshine or whatever, and my other deejay, who's another guy that went to school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York]--that I grew up with, DJ Easy Lee, who actually is the person who let me rhyme first.  Because you know, that's the other thing.  If the deejay had a system, they had to invite you to rhyme on the mic.  And because I was Lee's friend, DJ Easy Lee, who's my official deejay--Dano B was the first deejay for me--but DJ Easy Lee is the official deejay that I actually had and got notoriety and popularity with.  And Lee brought the equipment down to this little club, and I got on, and it was like, "Wow, he can really rhyme."  And you know, we had a little balance thing there.  And Spoonie also knew Lee before he knew me.  So, it was almost like, "Oh, you know Spoonie, too?"  And then I was like, okay, brainstorm.  We need to be a crew, we should do this thing or whatever, and I came up with the name Treacherous Three.  And that was strictly because Furious Five [Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five], Funky Four [Funky 4 + 1]--"Oh, well it has to be like a double consonant thing at the top, okay.  It's three of us, so, what's going to go with three?" Terrible-- ah, that's not good.  Terrific--ah, that's corny.  Treacherous--ah yeah, that sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Treacherous.
Speaker 1: --that sounds menacing (laughter). We need something menacing.  Treacherous, we're the Treacherous Three.  So that's, you know, I came up with the name.  It was Spoonie Gee, LA Sunshine and myself.
Story_ID: 298765
Speaker 1: --But you came up with the name [Treacherous Three] specifically to--I mean, but you still were only playing at high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] and block parties (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're not even playing anywhere yet.  We're basically in the neighborhood. You know what I mean.
Speaker 1: I see, you're in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is no--you know, but this is, again, I love--[HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones says, "Always think big."  I always had that.  I always envisioned us doing this, anyway.  So, and like I said, I'm the one taking it more serious than everybody.  You know, people are playing basketball or whatever, and I got the little pad, "Oh, I got this new routine."  And LA Sunshine loves basketball, so he'd be on the court playing basketball, and I'd be like, you know, trying to get him to come over.  "You know I got this rhyme, or whatever."  And he's like, "Okay, after the game."  Like, "I'm shooting over here, what are you--?" (Laughter) I was almost like a nuisance, man.  I was dead, dead serious.  Hip-hop was my, I was just loving it.  And, then finally Lee [DJ Easy Lee] brings his equipment down and Spoonie Gee's on the mic and he turns his back and he can't even face the crowd.  And I'm like, "Spoonie, they like you."  And he's like looking over his shoulder, almost like a movie moment.  I'm backstage, coaching him.  Like "Go on, just go on," there's only twenty people out there.  We didn't have a name yet, so you know, it was just a little neighborhood thing or whatever.  So, I told Spoonie to turn around, and Spoonie wouldn't turn around, so I got on stage next to him, and I just--"Yes, yes."  I just started rhyming, and it was like, okay.  The room is like--looking like okay, this guy has something.   And that was that external validation that I said I didn't need, but once again, (laughter) it's showing up (laughter).  So, and then LA Sunshine, who loved [DJ] Hollywood like I love Lovebug [Starski]--LA Sunshine was basically about the storytelling, which is a whole other art form that's been lost in hip-hop on some level.  Slick Rick is the best ever.  Biggie [Biggie Smalls; Notorious B.I.G.] is another one of the greats in the storytelling department.  LA Sunshine is one of the first storytellers where people would request his rhyme.  "Well, do the fat lady rhyme."  "Oh, do the one--." You know, he had a whole rhyme about a fat lady and at the end of it, you know--if you missed the first bus, just catch the next one, with the punch line to it.  So, basically it was an inspiring story to ladies about not worrying about missing, you know, your opportunity.  Guys too, actually, saying, if you miss the first bus, catch the next one, you know, that kind of thing.  So, LA had his niche.  And that was the Treacherous Three, we had different styles.  Spoonie was the love rap guy, LA was the storyteller, and I was the quote unquote hard rhymer.
Story_ID: 298766
Speaker 1: And finally, '79 [1979], remember we're talking spring of '79 [1979], I do the first fast rhyme in the lunchroom.  The school, people in my school don't know, whatever.  You asked for the rhyme, too, it was (rhyming). That was the--and of course there was more in cadence of the beat, or whatever, in the crowd. And I had like six of those, and it went back to back to back to back, and the crowd was just going bananas.  Now, unbeknownst to me, Special K--I'll give you a little story about Special K.  Special K was a guy that was in my school, Norman Thomas [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] again, high school.  It was almost like a movie with him, because he cut class a lot.  He was absolutely one of the most charismatic people in the school, like 'West Side Story.'  Six or seven guys walking behind him, doing this (snapping fingers) and he's rhyming.  That's who Special K is.  So, if you're in class, you just hear the (making sounds) and you see him walking by.  He's not in class, but he's walking by, he's rhyming.  On the escalator, we had escalators in our high school--he's going down the escalator, these guys are behind him, and it's a different group of guys every time.  But he's just going around the school rhyming.  Like in all these corners or whatever, you know (rhyming).  That's his conversation.  He was almost like this soundtrack going throughout the school, and that's who he was.  And he was, which is so funny, he basically created his own little thing in the school.  Everybody knew he could rhyme, and everybody knew he was the one that had, you know, he'd just get these guys and they'd walk behind him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The 'West Side Story' gang (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They would snap their fingers or clap their hands, they would literally be following him.  And I was like, who the hell would a), think to do that, and how do you have the balls to have somebody just follow you around, especially when you're supposed to be in class?  Like, that's the other thing.  You're supposed to be in class.  So, he became completely--his notoriety was doing it that way.  And, so, I do the fast rhymes, and I'm not knowing that in his competitive mind, this is his school.  He's the emcee in the school or whatever.  And he's the star, so to speak, or whatever.  So, even when the music goes on in the lunchroom, he would get on once in a while.  But to him, in his world, that's an event.  Special K is getting on today, you know, but I don't know any of this is going on in his world.  But in his world, that's how it's going down.  So, I get on and do the fast rhyme and completely obliterate everything that everybody knew about hip-hop up to that point.  Nobody's ever heard fast rhymes, nobody knew I was rhyming.  Once again, my arrogance slash confidence in doing it also worked because part of hip-hop's swagger--especially early, and it's still here now on some level--but especially early, the more confident you seemed, the more people bought it.  So--and I had this robotic thing where I wouldn't move.  Everybody else was (singing), and I was (making sounds).  I was almost, you know, like Max Headroom or something.  And they just bought into it, completely.  So, they were talking about me the whole day.
Story_ID: 298767
Speaker 1: Special K--the next day, we're in the cafeteria [at Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York], I'm not even going to the cafeteria yet, I'm walking to it--he said, "Come here."  And I was like, "What the hell do you want?"  I go in the classroom with him (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Empty?
Speaker 1: Empty classroom--right next to the--he closes the door, and he says (rhyming), and then he walks out.  And I'm like, I didn't even know what to make of it.  At first, I was like, okay, you basically took my style.  But he was also putting me on notice that he could do my style (laughter).  And on a third level, if you try that shit today, I'm going to get on with you, and I'm going to do what you just did because you will not take my school (laughter).  And we weren't friends or anything yet, and I was just like, was that a challenge, are we supposed to battle now?  You know, it was like I didn't even know what to make of it.  Because you know, when he did that, he just walked out of the classroom.  But that's Special K, if you--well, what I got to know of him, he was vulnerable and he didn't know how to deal with reality.  But he was also like, "I'm not going to just let you take my spotlight."  So--and it was also an introduction to like friendship on some level.  Now what's hilarious is that he doesn't know what's going on.  This is now September.  This is the next year, actually.  I should say we're moving from the middle of '79 [1979] to the end of '79 [1979].  'Rapper's Delight' has just come out.  Spoonie Gee has made the second record in hip-hop at this time.  So, when Spoonie goes and does this record, Spoonie's now a solo artist, because he's made a record.  And I'm looking for a replacement for Spoonie.  So, by K doing that--
Speaker 2: But, what a minute.  So, Spoonie went off and made a record?
Speaker 1: 'Spoonin' Rap.'
Speaker 2: 'Spoonin' Rap.'  Before the Treacherous Three ever made--
Speaker 1: Before we ever--yeah, absolutely.  Spoonie made the first record--well, the second record ever, but it's the first record that he did.
Speaker 2: And what was the first record?
Speaker 1: The first record was 'Rapper's Delight.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Spoonie's 'Spoonin' Rap' was right after that--a couple of months, not even a month--a couple of--yeah, about a month after that, to be honest, yes, about October.
Speaker 2: So you're looking for a replacement?
Speaker 1: Right.  So, K does that, and I'm sitting there--like this bing moment, like wait a minute.  He is good, I know he's good.  But I'm caught between should I battle him and crush him?  Then, again, what if he is better?  So, I'm in this little quandary like, what should I do about this?  And then I--later on in the lunchroom, I get on.  Dano [Dano B] throws on the 'Headhunters' thing, I do the fast rhyme.  He smiles--he smiles this time, and then he goes right after me.  And it looks like we're a group, anyway.  And to me it was like one of those kismet moments again.  I do my fast one, and he does his fast one.  I do another fast one, and then he does his fast one.  I do another fast one, and he'd do another.  The crowd goes bananas.  They think we had it planned.  It wasn't planned.  He just knew that if I did it again, he was going to be ready.
Story_ID: 298768
Speaker 1: And then afterwards, he's [Special K] smiling like, that's all he needed.  He was comfortable again, he wasn't angry, and I said, "You know, I got this group uptown, Treacherous Three," blah, blah, blah, blah. "And Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] just left--I'm looking for a replacement."  And he was like, "You know, all right, well."  He acted reluctant, and then, which I found out later, maybe ten years later, he had just auditioned for the Funky Four [Funky 4 + 1], and they turned him down.  So, he was a raw nerve.  So, all of that's going on while I'm doing the fast rhyme stuff, and he does that, and he says he was so happy that I asked him to be down because he wanted to be in a crew, but nobody in the Bronx [New York] would let him in any crew.  So, this is the other thing that's phenomenal.  We've got a Bronx rapper in a Manhattan [New York, New York] crew.  But he's in a Manhattan crew because nobody in the Bronx either thought he was good enough, or whatever it was.  So, he's like this great emcee that feels rejected and then I ask him.  But, I'm asking him like an authority figure.  Now, we don't even have our shit together, but I'm asking like, "Yeah, you want to join our group?" Like we got it going on in Harlem [New York, New York].  We don't yet (laughter), people know who we are, but we're not like a mega group or anything or whatever.  He said he was so elated, but he poker-faced it.  He was like, "Oh, okay, I'll come up town, you know, I'll see what's going on."  I introduced him to LA [LA Sunshine], and him, and LA was like, LA was like, "Okay, whatever you say," you know, because LA was very lax about the situation.  And then we started putting routines together and out of that came the fast rhyme record that we did and a routine called 'Body Rock,' and a bunch of other stuff.  Then we got the rehearsal stuff and we started rehearsing, and all of a sudden we are making a bigger name.  Simultaneously, Spoonie Gee goes out and he doesn't like the solo thing, because he came from a group, and he was already shy.  So, all that stuff is showing back up, and Spoonie said, "Can you just come out with me and party, you know, just do some of the shows?"  I'm like, "Okay, I'll go do some of the shows with you."  But then, when I go to the shows, Spoonie already has the record, so it's his show.  And on some level I was upstaging him in a sense, but I knew it was happening, but I couldn't pull back.  Because when you go to the Bronx they're still like, "You're from Harlem."  So, I'm making sure--Red Alert [Kool DJ Red Alert] is there, DJ Jazzy Jeff, Bambaataa [Afrika Bambaataa]--these icons in the Bronx are in this party.  And again, I'm not rhyming on '[Got] To Be Real.'  Get me '[Do the] Funky Penguin,' get me 'Mardi Gras' ['Breaking Bells (Take Me to the Mardi Gras)'] get me 'Headhunters.'  Get me all of these beats that are break beats that the emcees in the Bronx respect.
Story_ID: 298769
Speaker 1: Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] does his thing with the love rap thing, or whatever--the girls love it or whatever.  I'm doing the hard, laser rhymes--"I'm the alpha and omega of rap, and I'm out to really make mega bucks, and you ducks imitate me.  Bah, bah, bah, bah, bah, bah, bah, bah, Kool Moe Dee [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese]."  And I'm just looking at Red Alert [Kool DJ Red Alert], and the cats in the Bronx [New York] are like--I'm getting a sense of approval from them.  So, by the end of it, my name is starting to come bigger and bigger and bigger again.  And, Spoonie runs the course, does his thing.  New Year's comes, we do a New Year's party.  I meet Kurtis Blow, and Spoonie comes back and says, "Well, I want to be back in the group [Treacherous Three]."  I'm like, "But we got K [Special K] now."  And then, right in front of K, Spoonie's like, "Well, he's not really crew," (laughter).  And K is like on shaky ground, but he poker faces it again.  He tells me all of this years later.  So, I can do the revisionist history or re-visit it with the information now, because I didn't know that at the time.  K is sitting there on pins and needles, because he's like, "I'm not crew.  Damn, I finally found a crew, and I'm going to be put out."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.   So I come up with a solution.  Like, "Okay, well since you already have a name, and your record is already out, let's just make it Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three.  This way, we can still keep K and you can still be in the group or whatever.  We'll just change the routines from three to four," because I'm writing most of the routines anyway because I'm the junkie of the group, so to speak, the fanatic.  And then Spoonie says, "Well what are we going to do about the money?"  And I'm looking at Spoonie, like, "We're going to split it right?"  And he's like, "Well, if I got the name--."  I'm like, "Oh, my goodness, you know what.  You keep half, and I'll split the half you were giving me."  And from that point, I created a loyalty with Special K and LA Sunshine, because they were like, at that point they could have been expendable.  I could have done it any other way.  And I came up with a solution that appeased Spoonie's ego on one hand, and kept them in place, even though we were taking lesser money. But that's why ultimately the next year, when Spoonie left again to make a record with Sugar Hill [Records], the Sugarhill Gang and Sequence, or whatever, we were, "All right, that's it.  He left twice, he can't do it again.  We're just going to stay Treacherous Three."  And it was us from that point on.  So, that's the beginning, the humble beginnings of the Treacherous Three.
Story_ID: 298770
Speaker 1: And then you said things changed quickly, leaps and bounds, every six months in hip-hop in the ci-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Quantum, quantum, quantum, leaps.
Speaker 1: Quantum leaps, yeah.
Speaker 2: Because we go from--
Speaker 1: So you, let's just take--you graduate from high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Before--no, we [Treacherous Three] didn't graduate yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the last six months of 1980.  'Rapper's Delight' comes out.  I do the fast rhymes in the lunchroom.  Special K sees it, comes in, I replace him for Spoonie [Spoonie Gee].  By New Year's, it's actually February of '80 [1980], Spoonie wants to be back in.   We've got all these new routines.  I put this thing together and make it Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three, and then we do our first record ['New Rap Language'], our first record.
Speaker 1: But, can I--and this is for my own curiosity, but like at that time, when he said, well what about the money, we're going to split the money--what kind of money were you talking about?
Speaker 2: Ah, top dollar at that time--$500 to $1000 was top dollar for a show.  We'd do a show for $600 or whatever.  But once again, remember, we're coming from zero, so we're not seeing any money.  And in fact I had to look at it both ways, too.  Honestly, because Spoonie made a record--
Speaker 1: He was a star.
Speaker 2: --he was more known than everybody.  So, making it Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three made sense on some level.  Now it's true, everything wasn't as benevolent.  My competitive side was also very, very aware that I was becoming a dominant emcee.  And the name and the notoriety--it's almost like Sugar Ray [Sugar Ray Leonard] and Hagler [Marvin Hagler], you know.  You always have a Hagler or a--you always have a boxer who everybody in boxing knows, but the public doesn't know yet, but everybody in boxing is like, "If he ever gets a shot, it's going to be trouble."  And I was that guy at that time, whatever.  So, I was like, Spoonie's going to be that platform.  So, okay, whatever, you can have the money now, it's just a matter of time, in the competitive sense.  And so, yeah, so we split the little bit of money that we got.  There was a lot of tension, a lot of arguments, because after a minute, it just started being like oil and water, to be honest.  Because everybody has their own sensitivities and sensibilities or whatever--
Speaker 1: With the entire Treacherous Three or just with Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three?
Speaker 2: Kind of like with Spoonie, because I was very, very tight with Spoonie, and Spoonie never really really liked K.  They didn't dislike each other, but he never really liked him.  So, the jokes that we had from growing up together, K doesn't have that.  So, K felt like an outsider on some level.  So, but K's also very, very--his bravado is very big, so K would say things back, and you know, "You want to fight?"  You know it would get to that kind of thing or whatever, you know, testosterone to the tenth power.  And then at one point you know, K was just like, "Well, you know I'm better than you anyway."  You know, that kind of thing.  Because K was very clear telling people, "Well, you know I'm better than--you can't beat me rhyming."  And then, you know, Spoonie would come back, "Ah, nobody knows you, nobody likes you."  You know, it would be that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 298771
Speaker 1: So, finally, Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] again went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Left to--
Speaker 1: --to do his own record. Oh, I'm sorry.  We made our first record with Spoonie, Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three, called the 'New Rap Language.'  And I wrote the whole thing.  The whole premise of the record was the fast rhymes that I created.
Speaker 2: And that was what year, 1980?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980].  April of 1980.  And we again, to compensate for Spoonie's thing, the B-side was 'Love Rap,' Spoonie's second record.  So, we did an A-side and a B-side, which was going to be our Treacherous Three thing.  We were going to put out two records at a time instead of one, you know.  And Spoonie's like, "My uncle, Bobby Robinson"--and Bobby Robinson, you know, is a legend from old school records and all that stuff or whatever--"We can actually make a record."  That was the other thing, I forgot, let me be more honest, too.  Spoonie wasn't only a name, Spoonie was also the gateway to us making records, so we couldn't take away the fact that not only did he have a name, he was also the reason that we were going to be on wax.  So really, ironically, which I never even thought about, almost until this moment, Spoonie kind of deserved half of the money, to be honest (laughter).  Now that I think about it, it's like yeah, he does have a name, in 'Kumbaya' world, we should split it.  But without him, we wouldn't have had a chance to make a record, at least that way.  It was his uncle, he was bringing us in.  I was just only focused on the fact that, you know what, Spoonie needs is my support, because he's still shy and he's not comfortable on stage or whatever.  And ironically, like I said, too, he still hasn't gotten over his mother.  He still has not gotten over his mother's death.  I mean, he talked about it at least once a week.  But he'd talk about it to me, and I think--that's why I said the dichotomous energy is, you got all of this stuff going on on the business side, but then just on a friend to friend basis or whatever, "Oh, man, I miss my mother, man."  And I would just let him go on and, you know, let him vent it out.  And he'd almost be in tears.  And this is like 19, 20, 21--his mother died at 13.  He just never got over it, he never shook it.  I mean, he'd even go into a trance almost.  And he started writing rhymes about his mother, I mean, literally.  And he's got rhymes on wax.  He's got a rhyme on wax about his mother, which also endeared him to women even more.  You know what I mean, before 'Dear Mama,' [ph.] (laughter) Spoonie said, you know, "Nothing in the world will ever bring my mother back and you know that, and I miss her, and I swear to God I wish--," and you know, he had a whole heartfelt rhyme about how much he misses his mother.  Women--over the top (laughter).  It's like whatever love they have for him, just multiply it by ten.  And he was really, you know, again, he was a real, real nice guy in that sense.  So we do this 'Rap Language' record, and 'Love Rap' B-side, and we do a couple of shows.  But by July we get our first introduction to the record industry in not getting paid.
Story_ID: 298783
Speaker 1: So we did the rap 'New Rap Language'--
Speaker 2: And you get a bag of money.
Speaker 1: --and we get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--but can you just briefly tell me the experience of going on wax for the first time?  What was the studio like? What--
Speaker 1: Three stages.  Three stages that are extremely profound in the journey from Treacherous Three into the Kool Moe Dee's [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese] solo thing.  The first time you're being told you're going to make a record is euphoric, because before hip-hop, there's no reason for me to ever even think about being on wax.  It's not even in my thought.  I'm gonna be a boxer or a football player, that's what I'm doing.  I'm running around, I'm, you know, I'm trying out, I'm getting in shape, or trying to or whatever, like I said.  And hip-hop comes, it overtakes me, I love it, I'm proficient at it, or whatever.  Then all of sudden I become this big underground buzz street name, and there's no thought of being on record.  That's for Michael Jackson, that's for Stevie [Wonder].  You know, you buy records, and I'm not on them, I buy them.  Why would I be on a record?  So, when "Rapper's Delight" comes out, it's like I could be on record.  Like, how can we make a record?  You know, you're thinking about that or whatever.  And Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] bringing that opportunity to us--, "Well, my father, my grandfather, my uncle, rather, Bobby Robinson owns a record shop [Bobby's Records and Tape Center, New York, New York], and he makes records."  "What?  You can get us to--what?"  Like, again, we don't know anything about the deal, we don't know anything about legal, we don't know anything about publishing.  We don't know anything about anything.  We can actually make a record?  First stage of euphoria.  The second stage, come down to the studio, Unique Studios [Unique Recording Studios, New York, New York], blah, blah, blah--quadrasonic--is on 34th--48th Street [sic. 47th Street] and 7th Avenue, Unique.  We go down to the studio, and it's funny because I didn't feel out of place.  I felt like, this isn't brain surgery, I kind of know what to do.  The funniest thing for us is, we didn't know we could do takes.  So, we were like, "You gotta get it right."  You know, we're thinking, we're thinking, whatever I saw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's live (laughter).
Speaker 1: --whatever version of a movie I saw where Elvis Presley's in the studio and the band is playing the one thing, and he's playing--, "Oh stop, the tape, would you? You messed up, though."  Get it right, because you're gonna, you know, they're going to have to re-tape, and re-tape, and I don't know about punching, I don't know you could punch.  I don't know any of that stuff or whatever.  So, there's flaws in that record that me and LA--LA Sunshine and I, actually we listened to it the other day, and we're laughing like, wow, we could have just re-took that, we could have just done that over.  It's a flub right there, you know, but you gotta just keep going, just keep going.  We were literally looking at each other in the studio like, "Rock to the rhythm--." (Singing) We're doing that to each other because we don't know we can cut.  We don't know we can stop.  We don't know that K [Special K] has his own track that he can punch in, you know.  We're doing it all together.
Story_ID: 298784
Speaker 1: So we [Treacherous Three] practice and practice and practice.  And we finally get to the studio [Unique Recording Studios, New York, New York], and I see the mix board and I see the booth, or whatever--and get on the mic, you know, we do the mic checks or whatever.   And, we're really like nervous, though, but I don't feel out of place.  I'm feeling comfortable, like this is the beginning of something.  This is the beginning of something big.  So, we finally do the record ['New Rap Language'].  Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] goes in and does his solo song ['Love Rap'], or whatever, and then you get to hear it back.  Another one of those moments like, "Wow, we're on wax."  Now, I can't wait to actually get the physical record.  So, it keeps going.  You know it builds up, builds, you know.  I got the record, oh shit, I actually have--my name's on the record.  So, I can look at that for a week.  Special K, being who he is, walked around with that record under his arm, because we're still in Norman Thomas [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York], by the way (laughter). So Special (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a twelve-inch?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a twelve-inch. And Special K is walking around playing this record on anybody who owns a record player.  He has a tape of it on a box.  But, that's who he was.  So if you think he had guys walking around him like that, when he had the record, he's walking around with his record playing now, and the actual wax under his arm, and showing anybody that will look.  "Look, that's me.  Yeah, here it is right here, I'll play it for you."  And people are standing around by the locker rooms and the cafe--you know, next to the cafeteria on different floors, and I'm like, why do I keep hearing this record?  It's K walking around with the record, and making people listen (laughter).  And what's even funnier, most people didn't like the record, so that's even more like the funny footnote.  He's forcing people, and it's an eight-minute record, so you're taking eight minutes out of people's time (laughter), and they don't like the record after two minutes.  I could see it in their faces, they don't really like this record (laughter).  So--but K's got these people like a hostage captive audience, like, "Check it out."  And they're like, "Okay."  Four minutes in, they're being polite now, we go to school together, and then people have to say, "Yeah, I heard your record. Didn't say I love your record, I like it."  "Hey, Moe [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese], I heard your record."  And I'm like, oh, God it's not a hit.  I can feel people don't like it.  I'm in touch with this, and K is just walking around blasting and calling people.  He's damn near calling the principal over.  "Listen, I'm on record."  Blah, blah, blah.  So, yeah, it was a bit of a quandary in that I have a record, but people don't like the record.  However, ironically, again, the way Spoonie--the golden child thing--everybody loved the B-side, which turned into the A-side, which was Spoonie's record.  The beat--they didn't even like his record that much, but they loved the beat, and the beat became a hip-hop classic, called 'Love Rap.'
Story_ID: 298785
Speaker 1: And then shortly after that, like I said, by July--that was April--by July we [Treacherous Three] get paid a bag of money (laughter), literally, a bag of money--like a wrinkled bag, like a lunch bag of money, sixteen hundred plus dollars, whatever.  Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] takes his eight [hundred dollars] plus, we split the rest you know, two hundred plus dollars apiece, because we gave our deejay some actually.  And it was like, I remember LA [LA Sunshine] just looked at me, almost like the Indian [Iron Eyes Cody] who used to cry with the garbage commercial [Keep America Beautiful public service announcements], a little tear in his eye.  I used to walk across the street like, I can't even say--there's no words for two hundred dollars after all of this.  I'm sitting there looking at the money, but nothing would get me down, I'm like, I'm still doing what I love.  K [Special K] left, he was pissed off or whatever, and nobody spoke for a week.  I remember that, we just, there was nothing to say, we had no words.  And then the next week, we find out Spoonie Gee signed to Sugar Hill Records.  He left again (laughter).  It's like, what's going on?  And I think he was always a solo artist, really.  He wanted to be in a group for the stage, because he wasn't comfortable on stage, but as far as an artist, he needed to say what he needed to say.  He didn't like being in a group, he didn't like doing the increments, you know.  So it's almost, again, like being in The Temptations.  You're going to do your part (singing). He goes, then you go.  He didn't really like--he wanted to keep going, it would be him.  And he knew that we didn't have personalities to be background guys, so it wasn't going to be Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three, and us just backing him up.  It's like, "No, well it's too much other stuff going on."  And you know, again, according to me and K, we're way too good for that. "Are you crazy?  Forget about it.  We're basically leaders," that kind of thing.  And quite frankly, LA was the best on stage.  He was the--a true showman.
Story_ID: 298786
Speaker 1: Back to the niche thing again.  So we come back, we [Treacherous Three] regroup, Spoonie [Spoonie Gee] left. And then we're like, "Oh wait, Spoonie's the connection to Bobby [Bobby Robinson], so what are we going to do?"  And you know, now it's captain analyze to the rescue again.  Well, we already made a record ['New Rap Language'], and a record is still business, even though Bobby didn't really pay us like we wanted to be paid, we shouldn't not make records.  'Cause LA's [LA Sunshine] like, "I ain't doing no more records, are you crazy?  For two hundred dollars and? No, no, no." I'm like, "I'm going around the corner," and I went to the record shop [Bobby's Records and Tape Center, New York, New York] and told Bobby I wanted to make a record.  I told him that on Tuesday and on Thursday we were in the studio, and I already had routines and all that stuff written.  And I convinced LA, like, "Come on, let's go down." And he said, "Well, all right, whatever man, I'll just follow your lead," kind of thing.  And K [Special K] was like, "Great, another record, because I'm going to be walking around with this one," (laughter), "showing it to people." But you know it just never occurred to anybody that we could go make the record.  I'm like, well, we already know Bobby.  We don't need Spoonie to make the connections.  Like, you think he wouldn't do it because Spoonie's not in the group?  So, Bobby was elated, and we made one of our first hits called the 'Body Rock,' which is a routine we created.  Spoonie was in the group at the time, and then, you know, once we did the record, it was just the three of us.  And from that point on--and then we had that experience, the secondary experience, of hearing our record on the radio for the first time.  Mr. Magic comes into the equation, because they still wouldn't play hip-hop in daytime radio other than, okay--'Rapper's Delight' got played and Kurtis Blow's 'The Breaks' got played, and a little bit of super rhymes, Jimmy Spicer.  This is all beginning in 1980.  By the end of 1980, because we made our record in September, Mr. Magic now has a rap station, two hours every night on HBI [WHBI-FM Radio; WXNY-FM Radio] in the morning--two A.M. to four A.M.  So--and people would stay up to hear two hours of--because we now have enough records, maybe ten or fifteen, but it's still enough to fill a two-hour slot.  And Mr. Magic was the guy that was playing records.  So, now the entrepreneurship starts.  Young guys can just go in the studio and go take their record to Mr. Magic, and he'd play it and you'd hear it on the radio, and that was--for us, that was the payoff.  Like, this is rap radio, we actually have a rap station that plays rap records, are you crazy?  So, I remember the first time--once again, a lot of my connections were with LA because we grew up together.  I'm with LA, he's arguing with his girlfriend at the time, we're in the house, it's about 2:30 in the morning and he's--they're going at it, and we're laying in the living room--I'm laying on the couch in the living room.  And he's in there, (making sounds), and she's, (making sounds). And we--(beats) it's like it was--(making sounds)--like the (laughter) '[The] Five Heartbeats' moment.  It stopped--conversation, time.  We're on the radio. It was funny--this is October.  We're hearing it for the first time, and we're like, we're too cool to go (cheering), but all of that's happening inside.  Like, see, we're on the radio, we're on the radio.  We get up and we just go outside.  I don't even know why.  Like, is anybody else listening?  I want to make an announcement.  I'm on the radio.  And we just sat outside and basked in the cold (laughter), because our record was on the radio.  It didn't make any sense, nobody had a box outside, it's not summertime anymore.  But we were just looking for somebody else to see, did they know.  And, you know, one friend came by, and it was like, "They're playing us on the radio."  Like, we just told whoever we could tell.  And then we laughed about it.  We laugh about that to this day because it's like, what did we run outside for? (Laughter) It's like, our record's on the radio.  We just go outside, we're just standing out there (laughter), like, for nothing.  But, yeah, so, you know, it was the first time hearing our record on the radio, and it felt, again, like a sense of arrival, a sense of something happening.
Story_ID: 298787
Speaker 1: And still, no money's in the equation yet.  But now, LA [LA Sunshine] becomes the booking agent for us, because he has the phone and a number--he also had the gift of gab.  He's the guy, you know.  I'm the college grad and all of that good stuff and the intellect--yada, yada, yada, but I need to take LA with me to go talk this guy down to get my coat on sale at Delancey Street [New York, New York], because I can't do that.  I'm like, it costs fifty dollars, why would the guy not charge fifty dollars?  So, I say, well, "How about forty [dollars]?"  "Get out of here."  LA goes in and gets it for thirty [dollars].  "Give me your money, come on, come on," (laughter).  "Come on (unclear)," you know, he would just start fast-talking or whatever.  "Come on man, I got thirty dollars, I got thirty dollars."  "Get out of here, take the coat."  I'm like, the guy told me to get out of here with my forty dollars.  LA comes back, he gives him the coat for thirty dollars.  I'm like, how (laughter) is this possible?  So, LA's always had that--that energy, and he was basically, for all intents and purposes, the booking agent for the Treacherous Three.  And I used to hear him talk to people, and I'd be like, "No, no, no, take it."  "Yo, man, it's seven hundred, or we ain't doing it.  Call me back."  They call back.  "No, no, no, that's transportation.  No, come on, you know what, then we need nine hundred then."  I'm like, I just didn't know where he got that from (laughter), but he genuinely had it.  And, you know, we--the next thing we know, we're getting shows for a thousand dollars, in Poughkeepsie [New York], which is a road trip for us, you know.  We're going to Poughkeepsie.  It's only in New York, but we haven't been anywhere, so that's a road trip.  And we were elated riding up to Poughkeepsie, and I'll never forget, like that was one of the first shows we did on our own.  No Spoonie [Spoonie Gee], no nothing, and we got a record or whatever.  And we had on all black in records. I told you, we were dressed.  It's still the--Harlem [New York, New York] thing was still there.  And we had on, I never forgot, red Pumas, black corduroys, black mock necks, or whatever, and I had a red Kangol on.  And I remember they opened the gym floor, and I told us, we want to make a grand entrance, we want to run through the crowd and jump up on the stage, so they made a little thing.  And they said, "Ladies and gentlemen, the Treacherous Three."  And the doors opened, and [DJ] Easy Lee, our deejay, plays (making sounds), and we run through, and everybody's screaming.  And we got the effect like we used to see the Jackson Five.  And that was what I call the end of anything that was amateur, because from that point on, we really took practice seriously, and we took doing the routines and all that stuff seriously, and whatever.  And that moment was like to me, the defining moment of, again, Melle Mel defined--I want to do this for life.  That moment was, I'm going to be doing this for life.  Like, okay, like this is a reality.  And even--it fed the ego, but it fed something deeper, and people screaming and us getting up on stage and watching them react.  And now we have two records, and even though the records aren't necessarily hit records, everybody knows the records or whatever.  Because what happened in hip-hop, we had underground hits at the time, there's no real radio.  But everybody knew about these records.  I was like, wow, all right, so this is it.  We're here, we did it.
Story_ID: 298788
Speaker 1: Poughkeepsie, New York, November 1980, was the polishing--the polishing began.  This was when we're here--as a group [Treacherous Three], we're going to be doing this, and little did we know, back to that six-month quantum leap thing, we have our first legitimate hit, and it's on the radio, and in daytime--'Feel the Heartbeat,' that came in March of 1981.  So just from that six-month period from September to March--completely different.  And by the time we got to 'Heartbeat,' I mean, that's more surreal, because not only am I popular, and I'm now considered one of the dominant emcees.  There's a triad, which I talk about in my book ['There's a God on the Mic: The True 50 Greatest MCs,' Kool Moe Dee], the three kings of hip-hop. Every era has three lyrical kings, and I was one of the first lyrical kings.  It was myself, Melle Mel, and Grandmaster Caz.  And it was undisputed, it was like commonplace.  But, the reputation's there, and then the 'Heartbeat' record is there, so it's like validation to the tenth power.  Not only that, simultaneously, because I always talk about things happening simultaneously, in 1980, Furious Five, Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five had become the absolute elite hip-hop group.  They had this record called 'Freedom' out in June, July of 1980.  They are absolutely the super group.  They're setting the tone, they're setting the pace or whatever, and we're like just a cut below Furious.  Like, we're good in the skill department, which everybody knows, we rhyme, routines, or whatever, but they were way more polished.  Their stage show was just phenomenal, quite frankly.  Because all of the stuff that they were doing from the time that I saw them in '77 [1977], "Ladies and gentlemen, are, are you ready?"  They just upped that to the tenth power.  And they got dance steps, and routines and outfits, and it's like they are absolutely the super group.  And we're right under them.  So, I used to say, they're like Earth, Wind & Fire, and we were like The O'Jays.  Because if you knew, The O'Jays were a solid group, no matter what you did.  I mean, there were people--Earth, Wind & Fire would be considered a super band, and probably, one of the--and again, my favorite band of all-time.  But when you look at it, and remember with The O'Jays, they had, The O'Jays had a soulful sound, a soul thing where they were solid.  You know, they might--and they, again, had enough hits to hold their own or whatever.  And ironically, I just did the Tom Joyner cruise [Tom Joyner Foundation Fantastic Voyage], and The O'Jays and Earth Wind & Fire were the R&B acts, or whatever.  So, I was like, I was in heaven, because it was a perfect--then I used to always make the analogies that Treacherous Three was like The O'Jays, and the Furious Five was like, you know, Earth, Wind & Fire (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Earth, Wind & Fire.
Speaker 1: All of that's happening.  So, by the time we do 'Heartbeat' in '81 [1981], we finally eclipsed Furious Five for that year.  It only lasted for a year, because they did 'The Message' the next year, and took it right back.  But (laughter) for us, it was like, in '81 [1981] we're the champions.  Again, it's me and Melle Mel, who's also, you know, the leader of the Furious Five, so to speak.
Story_ID: 298789
Speaker 1: Well, what year did you graduate high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Technically, I didn't graduate.  I actually took the GED [General Educational Development], but I finished high school in '80 [1980].  That was my, my graduation year was in '80.
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980].
Speaker 2: And I took the GED in 1981, which is another--I have to digress and go on to the family thing, because all this stuff is happening simultaneously (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, and I was going to ask.  You're becoming a, you know, star, and what's happening at home?
Speaker 2: Well by the--by this time, my father [William DeWese] and mother [Josette DeWese] had split, in a violent split, actually.  My father and mother got into a violent thing.  My father stabbed my mother.  It was so crazy, because for me and LL [LL Cool J] to have been rivals--and then hear that he saw his, you know, parent [Ondrea Griffith] get shot by another parent [James Louis Smith, Jr.; James Nunya] kind of thing.  I was like, wow, we had very similar backgrounds.  His was a gun, mine was a knife.  And I didn't actually see it.  I was coming home from football practice and saw them pulling my mother out.  But still, I wasn't speaking to my father, you know.  I was just--I was furious with the scenario of what happened.  And, still loved him--and then the ironic moment for that for me also was my last year, my senior year, 1980, I was coming back.  I was supposed to do six months to graduate--summer school or six months.  I chose six months because I didn't want to do summer school.  And my guidance counselor--which was so crazy at that time, they used to have guidance counselors, counselors that would tell you what to do with your life.  So, of course, you can't do hip-hop, you know better, right?  So, pick a career, because (laughter) that's just for fun, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  But then she was telling me I was going to have to do a whole year to graduate.  I'm like, "No it's only six months."  And you know me, I'm analytical, I figured it out.  I know I have to do English 5, that's the one that I didn't pass.  And English 5 is given in the fall.  Because the way they used to do in our school, you had English 1 to 6, and 1, 3, and 5 would be in the fall semester; 2, 4, and 6 would be in the spring semester.  The problem was, if you failed any one of them, you couldn't get it until the semester it came, which means, you don't get to take 5 the very next semester.  You can't take 5 until the semester following because it's the odd semester.  So, I had to do six months to re-do English 5, because I got into a whole debate with my teacher and condescended to him, and he was like, "You're not passing, no matter what."  Which, when I think about it, was kind of illegal, which I didn't really know, you know, at that point, but he was like, "You're obnoxious," and, "That's it, I had enough of you."  So, I just basically disrupted the class every day for the rest of the semester, got my failing grade, and said I'll take it over again.
Story_ID: 298790
Speaker 1: I had to speak to my father [William DeWese] because I needed somebody to come in and talk to the counselor [at Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].  So he comes down--
Speaker 2: Why did you need someone to talk to the counselor?
Speaker 1: Because you had to bring a parent in.  She was like, "Well, bring your parent in," you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. And your mom [Josette DeWese] couldn't come because she'd been stabbed?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  My--she'd recuperated by this time--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --my mother was working or something, and couldn't take off, or whatever.  And we have, what I call, it's the welfare family history, where when she's working, it's work.  And you can't play with that, because you don't want to lose a job.  And I remember they implemented this thing at one point where in order to get a welfare check, you had to work.  Like, there was something going on with the government.  Again, it is what it is (laughter).  So, long story short, one of the craziest moments--and every time I tell friends of mine this story, they're like, "Wow, no wonder you're strange."  My father comes in, and this is in the time of me not speaking to him, basically (laughter).  He comes in--so I have to find him, make the call or whatever, somehow or other.  I don't even remember how I said it to him.  But was like, "I need somebody to come down and talk to the counselor."  The one thing I can always say about my father is--anything for his children, right there.  Him and my mother, that was where the friction was, which probably plays into some of my whole thing about marriage, another issue.  But, we get to the school and the counselor gets ready to start her spiel, about, you know.  My father's like, "Okay, so what's the circumstance?"  I said, "She's saying I got to do a year.  I'm telling her six months."  "Well, sir."  "I'm asking him."  And he has this whole, you know, I guess part of that stuff that I have, that off-putting--, "Enough, I'm talking to him."  And then he goes to her, "So what are you saying?"  "I'm saying he has to do a year."  He says, "Why?"  She explains it.  I said, "That's not right."  I said, "You can look at the syllabus and see."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And she's like, "Oh, well, I'm recommending, because," whatever, whatever.  It's like, "No, by the book, I don't have to do six months--I only have to do six months."  And my father gets--he sees us going back and forth, he says, "All right, let's end this.  What do you want to do?"  Like, what do you mean, what do I want to do?  "I want to do the six months, and that's it."  He said, "Well, she said you can't do six months, so what do you want to do?"  I said, "I'm not doing a year."  "So, what do you want to do?"  And I'm like, is this a trick question?  "I'm not doing a year.  She said I can't do it in six months.  Then, I'm not going to school, I'm not going."  And I'm wincing like, is a smack coming (laughter)?  Like, I'm just telling you I'm dropping out, basically.  He said, "Well, that's it, he doesn't want to go, so."  She's like, "Sir."  And she was like, I can't believe a parent is co-signing a child basically saying he's not going to school.  And he's like, "I let him make his own decisions.  He says he doesn't want to go, that's it."  "But sir."  "The conversation's over."  And we get up and we walk out.  And I'm like, did I just drop out?  But is this cool?  Like, I'm this weird mix of, you know, I feel comfortable, and I'm happy on one hand that you know, that he supported me that way, but on the other hand--and then he does his, the mental thing.  We get outside, I'll never forget, he puts his hat on and he said, "You were going to be the first one to graduate in the family."  Blah, blah, blah. "And, you know, but you're a man, I'll let you make your decision as a man, and it gets rougher from here.  So, all right, good luck."  He put his hat on, gave me the fist and he just turned around and walked away.  And I remember getting on the train with this eerie feeling, like he just did the father mental thing that he used to always do to me.  He's always done that, let me make the decision and figure it out.  And then, ask--always ask yourself better questions, you know, the whole thing.  And I'm like, I just quit.  Oh, I just quit, and no, I know I can't--quitting is quitting, I can't quit.  So how do I undo this, because I'm not going back in there, I'm definitely not doing a year.
Story_ID: 298791
Speaker 1: "All right," I go uptown, I go right to my old elementary--I mean, old junior high school, find out about the GED [General Educational Development].  I get the application or whatever, because now to undo what I did in high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York], I'm going to college, because I'm not going to quit.  And this is how college comes about, literally, like it was just that organic.  Because it was not that I didn't plan on going to college, but I didn't have a plan to or not to go, like I didn't know what I would have done.  However, by not doing high school, I went and took the GED, got the application and whatever.  I never forgot it.  I took the GED test February 25, 1981, right before 'Heartbeat' ['Feel the Heartbeat'] comes out.  So, all of this stuff is in the same time period.  And that was September of 1980, so I'd just made the first record with the Treacherous Three, the one we did without Spoonie [Spoonie Gee], "Body rocking at the party," ['Body Rock'] that was September.  So, basically I had that whole time period off.  The GED came February 25.  I got my score back that I passed, you know.  It was like I was in the top 15 percent of the city [New York, New York], or in the history of scoring, or whatever.  "Oh, wow, you're really intelligent.  You should have," da, da, da, da.  And I realized the GED was about tenacity, it was a six-hour test.  And that was the whole point. It was like most people would break down, like okay, one hour for English, one hour for math, one hour for science, one hour for history, one hour for some other--I forgot what the other two things were.  But it was six-hour test.  For each thing, I was like, wow.  Oh, vocabulary was one, and what was the sixth one at the time?  I can't remember.  It might have been philosophy, I wasn't sure.  But anyway, and I did it, and it was like you really, really aced this.  You know, if you did the points, I think the max was 750 or something like that, and I got like 728, or something crazy.  And they were like, you know, "You could have actually done this," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  I'm like, either way, I got the GED diploma, and then I went right from there, because I got that, and went right up to the college, Old Westbury [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York], where I went to college at with my GED.  Got the application, filled out the thing.  My best friend Mike [ph.], the one that I said I first rhymed with--when I first rhymed at his house on the eight-track tape, he was at Westbury.  So, I went to Westbury, looked at the school, said, "I like this, okay, great, where's the admissions office?"  And I went in, and it was like I was on a mission.  Went and got that, filled out the thing whatever, got the Pell Grant, the BEOG [Basic Educational Opportunity Grant Program] grant and the EOP [Educational Opportunity Program] grant--the equal opportunity thing--all that stuff of that they--inspiring youth from the ghetto areas to going to college (unclear).  Again, I'm still rapping, but I'm still signing up for school at the same time.  Now, I'm actually signing up for Old Westbury College, with a number one record on the radio, which was the other thing.  Like, and I think back to what I loved about--when I look at my journey, like I said, take the good with the bad.  In the bad, I'm still focusing, and good stuff is still happening, but I'm not letting the good overtake me, just like I wouldn't let the bad overtake me.  I'm not going to let the hit record for right now sidetrack me for the future.  Same thing, like I wouldn't let not going or finishing high school sidetrack me in a negative way, so keeping the balance going.   So, I'm you know, like I said, I got a number one record (laughter) and I'm basically going to college, which didn't seem like it made sense, because Special K was like, "Are you crazy, we're about to be rich."  And I'm like, I didn't finish high school, that's my own journey, I got to finish that thing.
Story_ID: 298792
Speaker 1: I go to college [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York], and I'm back with my best friend [Mike (ph.)], we're roommates.  And you know, like I said, number one record. So now I'm a star on the college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Campus.
Speaker 1: --campus (laughter).  But we don't have video then, so it's more like name notoriety kind of thing at that time, whatever.  And rode that 'Heartbeat' ['Feel the Heartbeat'] wave for about a year, because it, I mean, it really had a long lasting impact, or whatever.  And then right in that period of time, my first semester on campus, New Year's Eve, or a couple of days before New Year's and then New Year's Day, I had the big battle with Busy Bee [Busy Bee Starski].  And that creates the notoriety of me as, you know, the battle emcee, and the first emcee to win at this level, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And, you know, I finished that, and then went off to college again (laughter).  It was just like, so this duality of what was happening was very, very intense at this time.  And that was what I could honestly say was the beginning of the separation from me and the Treacherous Three.  Because not only am I known as one of the quote, unquote lyrical kings, but I'm also being viewed as the mouthpiece and the voice of the Treacherous Three.  There's a natural separation because of the Busy Bee battle.  And within three years, I'm solo.
Story_ID: 298793
Speaker 1: You go solo.  What year is this that you break up, the official break-up of the Treacherous Three?
Speaker 2: The official solo career started--it's two officials--but really, I have to say 1986, because that was '81 [1981], and now I'm in college [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York].  And ironically, now, the Treacherous Three's heat and notoriety is waning.  The new era of hip-hop is coming in.  It's Run-D.M.C., it's Whodini, it's The Fat Boys, and Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, Treacherous Three, Funky Four [Funky 4 + 1], [The] Fearless Four, [The] Cold Crush Brothers.  We're not as popular anymore, because what's happening on wax, truthfully, which is so funny, Run-D.M.C. and I had been rivals on a street level, not like on an industry level, not like, "Oh I hate you."  It was more like they had made statements of them coming in and killing our era of hip-hop.  And on some level that's true, but what's more significant is the way records are being made.  The sonics are better.  Their sonics, their record production was better, and what we hated was for our generation, it was like, they can't rhyme.  They're like nursery school rhyming, "It's a dog, a cat, a mouse, a rat, a fly, he won't die in a little net."  I'm like, we would never say anything like that.  But they're saying it and they're the most popular group.  So, it's this backlash of hate from everybody that came before Run-D.M.C.  Yet, it's all this love from everybody else that came after them more at that era, and they were revered.  And we were like, how is this possible?  I can't believe that it's--you know, we've already had the message.  Melle Mel's put the message out.   We've gotten deeper, we've gotten philosophical, but they tapped into the simplistic elements of hip-hop.  It was always beats and rhymes, there was always loud noise, and there was always about the energy.  The messages were cool, but you also--remember, you're talking to 16, 17, 18 year old--the messages were appreciated by the adults.  So what happened was, our generation finally broke through for the adults.  "I don't really like hip-hop, I don't like--." But then, when they heard the message--and they started hearing messages coming out of it, the adults, especially in the black community, started appreciating that form of hip-hop.  However, it wasn't appealing to the kids.  And as you know, if it's viewed as teen music, Run-D.M.C. had better appeal to the children.  So, we were like waiting to get at them.  It was like if we could battle Run-D.M.C. we can--well, it would be great.
Story_ID: 298802
Speaker 1: So, I was like if we could ever battle Run-D.M.C., you know, we would basically show people where their flaws are.  You know, that was the whole thing.  Like I said, I was already known for battling because of the Busy Bee [Busy Bee Starski] thing.  And still, the older ilk, it just felt, it felt like we had no control, not only us, but just the audience, because we'd get a lot of complaints or whatever.
Speaker 2: About (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of people didn't like Run-D.M.C. when they first came out, they just didn't get it, especially people that came from a certain generation that loved hip-hop in the form that it was, of course.  Anytime art form changes forms--it changed forms then.  And Run-D.M.C. was the pioneer group of the form it changed to, which is so funny.  I had a three-year run--back to the whole thing of the quantum leap thing--because by '86 [1986], when I am doing my solo thing, Rakim, Big Daddy Kane, KRS-One and Kool G Rap are out, and it's back to the lyrical stuff again.  So, now Run-D.M.C. is being viewed as passe, and that was just in three years.  They went literally from--just like that.  And it wasn't that--people still loved them, because now it's coming to a point where we're still loving the people, we're still--but we're changing with the art, and we're going with whatever is the art of the time.  And from the entertainer's ego, you just don't like being on the end that's not cutting edge anymore, because you go from being ahead of the curve, cutting edge, in, on-time, hot, popular, passe.  And no one wants to--when the passe stage comes, you just don't know how to adjust, so it's anger, "I dare you."  "That's garbage."  So, you're pointing fingers at everything.  And the industry is this way, and the radio is this way, whatever.  It's just changing, it's just doing what it does.   It's never going to stay.  You know, I'm sure Jackie Wilson in their time and the music that they put out is still great--it didn't mean that people didn't love it or whatever, but by the time it got to Stevie Wonder and The O'Jays, and--it's different now, so the '60s [1960s] is very different from the '70s [1970s].  And then I'm sure--which I call the pinnacle of the music industry's period to me, for black music especially, the '70s [1970s]--when it came to the '80s [1980s] and hip-hop is here, they're like, "This is not music," including us [Treacherous Three], like, what, what?  There's no bridge, there's no--what's going on?  There's no instrumentation.  So, imagine from the '80s [1980s] (laughter) to the '90s [1990s], it's like, samples?  What the hell? You know, so--each group had something to gripe about the next group coming in, you know, because the non-music of the '80s [1980s] is talking about the sampling non-music of the '90s [1990s] (laughter), so--and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 298803
Speaker 1: I'm in college [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York] all this time, and I'm hearing it.  You know, I'm loving college, I'm loving college life.  And I remember people like, you know, "Well, what are you doing?  Run-D.M.C. is taking over."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I very cockily said, "My plan is, in my last year when I'm graduating, I'll reintroduce myself and then show you.  Now come on, you know, a king is a king forever, you know, no matter what happens." Blah, blah, you know that was my thing.  'Cause I would never just take shots.  People would try to take shots or whatever, and like I said, because of that flippant, arrogant attitude that I had, my comebacks were always pretty on point, but it was always a smugness to it, like, you can't break me, are you crazy?  I'm in college because I want to be, not because I have to be.  And I'm like, I'm basically doing this to prove something, because I quit high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York].  I'm not going to need this degree.  Like, I'm great, I'm not going to need the degree.  And all the backup plans and all that stuff, it's like, this isn't a--I wasn't the poster child for the, you need to go and have a backup plan, and blah, blah, blah, and college is a great thing, or whatever.  And I said, but in the balance of that, college is a great thing because of the exposure to other cultures living in an environment.  It's your first real chance to deal with adulthood, you know.  You're making your own schedule, which I--you know, was phenomenal to me.  You know, you take your classes and there's a schedule and you get your program, and you're all through, and when you get to college, it's like, no, you can go to class when you want to?  Are you serious?  I'm not taking a class before 12:40 ever again.  That was--12:40 was my first class, so I could stay out later.  I'm like, this is perfect.  So, college was the place where I learned a certain level of responsibility, because it is on you.  There is no, you know--nobody to report to.  You do your work, or you don't.  You pass or you fail.  There is no, you know, there was a dean of course, in the school or whatever.  You couldn't just run amuck, but it's basically on you, and I loved that.  I was like, oh I can do it myself.  Perfect.
Story_ID: 298804
Speaker 1: The industry is changing.  Run-D.M.C., LL Cool J, [The] Fat Boys, Whodini--these guys are now the prominent artists of the time.  And by 1985, we do--Treacherous Three does our last record, a record called 'Gotta Rock,' and I remember having to damn near twist LA [LA Sunshine] and Special K's arm to go back into the studio, because we've now had a couple more incidents or instances of not getting paid, you know.  We thought we didn't get paid for Bobby [Bobby Robinson], but when we got to Sugar Hill [Records], we never got a check.  We just kept going over to borrow, "Oh, let me get an advance."  You know, we understood what an advance was, an advance against your future royalties.  Well, an advance only meant you could just go get money to keep paying your bills, or whatever.  And we're really getting significant advances.  We'd get a thousand dollars, you know, apiece, like that was big or whatever, and then after a minute, that started going down, and we'd only get an advance of five hundred dollars.  It was just basically getting us through the month, or through the week or whatever.  And it wasn't any real money happening, and I think, you know, at that time, Sugar Hill, the label had lost it's luster.  Like I said, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons is coming now, and to his credit, Russell Simmons is one of the first, if not the first, people in my estimation that took hip-hop serious, from an executive standpoint.  Everybody else kind of got in as a fad, because--oh, I digress.  I didn't even talk about the fact that from '80 [1980] to '85 [1985]--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Digressing again, like I said, from '80 [1980] to '85 [1985], we were told that this was a fad, hip-hop is a fad, it's not going to be here, there was nothing to hang your hat on.  There was no real money makers, nobody's going to be set for life from this.  And anybody that's ever had a hit, basically, in that time period, had a hit for that year.  The Furious Five--Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, are the only group of that time that had a hit in 1980, 'Freedom,' and then another hit in 1982, and then Melle Mel had another hit on his own, 'White Lines' in '83 [1983].  But other than that, people had a hit one year.  That was it.  You didn't really have too much or whatever.  And we were right--again, right under that with, we had a big hit with 'Heartbeat' ['Feel the Heartbeat'], and we had a couple of early hits in '80, so it was '80 [1980] and '81 [1981] for us.  But then in '82 [1982] and '83 [1983] and '84 [1984], it was very tenuous.  You know, we still had notoriety, but we didn't have hit records, and without records, which you start to find out, music industry rules supersede hip-hop rules.  Hip-hop, they may love you forever, it doesn't make a difference.  But in the music industry, you don't have a hit, you're quote, unquote irrelevant, according to what they tell you.  So, now we're going through this little quandary of what do we do, should we still do it, do we try to get a hit, how are we going to get a hit without being notor- blah, blah, blah, blah.  And it creates this weird, schizophrenic experience where you're getting all this love and reverence from the street, but you're being told in the industry, "You're not worth anything.  What are we going to give you money for?  You can't sell records."
Story_ID: 298805
Speaker 1: In '85 [1985], I had to convince LA [LA Sunshine] and K [Special K], "Let's not give up, let's do it, let's keep doing it."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  Because to me, like I said, I'm doing this forever, which is, I'm in the studio now 'cause I'm doing this (laughter) until I can't do it.  And ultimately they go in the studio, we [Treacherous Three] do this one record called 'Gotta Rock,' and still, we have this great relationship with Mr. Magic, who's gone from having--back to the simultaneous arc of hip-hop--who's gone from having a hip-hop radio station that was only on at two [A.M.] to four A.M., in the morning, on WHBI [WHBI-FM Radio; WXNY-FM Radio], to being the head deejay, even over Frankie Crocker, at WBLS [WBLS-FM Radio].  And because we were there from the beginning, we have this great relationship with Mr. Magic.  And now, even though Frankie Crocker still is the ace deejay, the prime time slot is eight to ten [o'clock] or eight to twelve [o'clock], that's what it was for Magic, eight to twelve at night.  And everybody would just wait for Mr. Magic to come on.  And Frankie Crocker would go off, (singing) "There I go, there I go, there I go."  He'd play that and he'd sign off and then Mr. Magic would come on.  Frankie Crocker would be off at six [o'clock] or going off at eight [o'clock], one of the two.  And Mr. Magic would come on, and that was hip-hop time.  So, hip-hop now has Mr. Magic on WBLS.  And we got [Kool DJ] Red Alert, another one, icon from all the way back--"L" Brothers, Afrika Bambaataa, [Universal] Zulu Nation, the whole nine--he's on KISS.  We had ins with KISS and WBLS because we're of the generation that grew up with them, so all we have to do was make a record and take it to them, and we're on the radio.  So, it supersedes all of the stuff with the payola and all that stuff, which is the other thing that hip-hop did, too.  A very interesting part, aspect, of hip-hop that isn't really talked about, which is unfortunate for this era that we're so integrated now that we don't have that anymore--but when the hip-hop deejays, Red Alert, Mr. Magic, [DJ] Chuck Chillout, you know, there was a couple of them, [DJ] Marley Marl--actually there was a bunch--were on the radio in the early '80s [1980s], mid to early, early to mid-'80s [1980s], when they're on prime time radio, payola is not an issue for hip-hop, because they're playing what they love.  And it's kind of like an unsupervised four hours, you know, other than you can't curse and all that stuff, the regular FCC [Federal Communications Commission] stuff, but for the most part, you could actually get a radio--a record on the radio without worrying about being at a big label, which is what made a whole lot of--KRS-One, without question, one of the icons of hip-hop is from that, because Red Alert played it on W--I mean KISS-FM, or whatever.  And, you know, there's a bunch of groups that come out of that stuff where we were on the radio, and we were guaranteed a slot and some airtime because we had Mr. Magic in our pocket for us.  He was down with us.
Story_ID: 298806
Speaker 1: We make this record, 'Gotta Rock,' and we're still, again, Treacherous Three, we're doing two records at a time, 'Body Rock' and 'At the Party,' 'Heartbeat' ['Feel the Heartbeat'] and 'Boogie in the Body' ['Put the Boogie In Your Body'].  You know, we're doing two records at a time, 'Action' and 'Yes We Can Can.'  So, finally we do 'Gotta Rock,' and the second record was supposed to be 'Turn It Up.'  We go in, we do the 'Gotta Rock' thing.  LA Sunshine takes the record right to WBLS [WBLS-FM Radio], to Mr. Magic.  Mr. Magic puts it on that night.  "Brand new, I know you been waiting for this for a while, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, the Treacherous Three."   He plays it, the phones light up.  Everybody's like, "Where have they been?" "What's going on?"  Or whatever, it's like (making sounds).  However, the record is still not really a hit, and Doug E. Fresh, who is one of my best friends.  And I told you, I have four basic best friends in hip-hop.  It's Doug E. Fresh, Will Smith, Chuck D, and KRS-One.  Those are like my four family members in hip-hop.  Doug E. Fresh drops the record 'The Show' with him and Slick Rick, which, of course goes on and takes over the whole summer, whatever.  So I always say, "Doug, you killed my summer--you killed our comeback," (laughter).  "You basically dropped the hit of," you know, that's one of the biggest hits in hip-hop history.  It came out three weeks after we dropped our record.  So we drop our record, 'Gotta Rock,' and I can't--I've done such a big sales job of getting LA and K [Special K] even to do the record--once that record comes, because LA's thing was, "I'm not going to let this label take any more money from me," because for him, it's taking his soul.  "I can't, I can't just keep doing this and not getting paid."  Because he's coming from, "I've never seen money.  All the time we've done records, you know, from 1980 'til now, I haven't seen any money.  I can't do it, I just can't do it.  It's--I'm going to wind up killing somebody."  You know, that was LA's thing.  "It's going to wind up making me violent. I can't do it."  So when he took the record to Mr. Magic, and we got that great response, that was it for him.  He was like, "That's it. I'm not going back to the studio."  'Cause we were supposed to come back to the studio the next day and do the second record.  So, K comes in.  He doesn't want--it takes three days to get K in the studio.  LA's just not coming.  And they're both like, I talk, I talk, I talk, because I can do a pretty good sales pitch.  "All right, all right, we're coming."  I just wait, two in the morning, and nobody comes.  The next day, two in the morning, nobody comes.  The next day, the third day, K finally comes in, just puts this little rhyme together, and says something, or whatever.   And I'm furious now, because they're not coming to the studio.  And I'm like, y'all don't get it.  Quitting isn't the answer, you know, back to my whole thing with the high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] thing.  I'm like, "When you quit, you lose.  You cannot quit, and if you're going to quit, have an alternative, so that's not actually quitting."  Couldn't talk, they just wouldn't do it.  So finally, I go in, I'm doing this record by myself.  I put the headphones on, take K's voice off, and then I just do 'Turn It Up' by myself.  And then the irony of that is, when the record comes out, 'Turn It Up' winds up getting more response than 'Gotta Rock.'  And that's what I said when Doug comes out.  So for three weeks I had a lock with 'Turn It Up,' because I did the same thing LA did.  I take 'Turn It Up,' take it right to Mr. Magic, Mr. Magic is like, "Oh, my God."  And then he calls and he tells me, "More people are requesting 'Turn It Up.'"  And from this, at least from what they tell me, Rakim, Kool G Rap, KRS-One, Big Daddy Kane--they were fans of our group, so to speak, or whatever.  But they were also fans of me and in terms of the styling and the rhyming or whatever.  It wasn't like I--I said I create it, in the sense, but I guess when you're there, it's happening, so it's a creation.  But I created the new wave of the solo lyrical artist of what was getting ready to come, you know, how to rhyme.
Story_ID: 298807
Speaker 1: T La Rock, Special K's brother, who was right before that--Special K wrote this record called 'It's Yours.'  It started this thing where you wanted to hear an emcee really, really be lyrical, and then just go to a hook, and the hook wasn't really melodic.  So, (singing) "It's yours, it's yours."  That was the hook.  (Singing) "Commentating, illustrating, description giving, adjective expert, analyzing, surmising, musical myth-seeking people of the universe, this is yours."  That was how we got to the hook.  And the hook didn't really matter, it was just like--one-word hook or a two-word hook, but it was about the rhyme.  So that was 'Turn It Up,' (singing) "Turn it up, I'm potent just like a powerful force driven by ancient spirits, feel it, hear it, a metaphor for a living, bass, amplified, when fully applied, all adversaries become terrified, I take minds and decode 'em, then erode 'em, feed them information, program 'em, explode 'em, blow 'em out of proportion," and on and on.  So it creates this wave of lyricism.  Now, ironically, because Run-D.M.C. was saying that they killed that--our style of rap or whatever, me coming back and doing that, brought the lyrical stuff back.  And in one year, because 'Turn It Up,' is '85 [1985]--the same year like I said, Doug [Doug E. Fresh] drops 'The Show,' and 'The Show' goes on and explodes and destroys everything and it lasts--that's one of the longest lasting hits, ever.  I think 'Planet Rock' from Afrika Bambaataa in 1882--in 1982, and Doug E. Fresh's 'The Show' in 1985, I've never seen hit records last that long.  'Planet Rock' lasted almost a year, which is unheard of, because you got all these remixes, you know.  You know, a bunch of people (making sounds)--you just heard that in every--I mean people were using it to sing on, people were just rapping (making sounds).  There's a [The] Temptations knock-off group that came out and did something off 'Planet Rock,' called 'Planet Control' [ph.], and this lasted for a year.  Doug E. Fresh and 'The Show,' which, you know, Salt-N-Pepa came out (unclear) with 'The Showstoppers' [sic. 'The Showstopper'] the answer to Doug E. Fresh and 'The Show' record.  And it just went on and on.  That record lasted so long, I mean, it was phenomenal.  People loved Doug E. Fresh and Slick Rick, I mean, loved them.  Slick Rick became an instant icon, you know, and on the other side of that was 'La Di Da Di,' so they really took over the airwaves.
Story_ID: 298808
Speaker 1: But underneath that, slowly but surely after that, Big Daddy Kane comes out with Biz Markie and Rakim comes out--this is all in the next year, 1986.  And it's so crazy, because you have a pop side and an underbelly side, and that's always been constant in hip-hop.  Run-D.M.C. comes out with 'Raising Hell,' one of the most phenomenal--phenomenally successful records in hip-hop history in '86 [1986], so they hit their pinnacle.  But right as they're hitting their pinnacle, the audience is gravitating to Rakim, and gravitating to Big Daddy Kane, and Kool G Rap, and KRS-One, and the lyricists of the time are becoming the people's champ.  Now, it's not that people didn't like Run-D.M.C., but what's happening is, at their pinnacle, they're also being viewed as passe.  So, just like we were going through three years before in 1983 when Run-D.M.C. came out, yes we're the pinnacle groups, but people are, "Oh, we need something new."  Run-D.M.C. was that new.  While Run-D.M.C. is at the pinnacle, people are looking for more lyrical content, so to speak.  And those four guys that I just mentioned became that.  And by 1987, I'm making my solo comeback.  I graduated from college [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York] at the end of '86 [1986], do the ceremony in '87 [1987].  In '86 [1986], I put out a record called "Go See the Doctor," which was the hardest record for me to make because I'm known as this lyrical king and this lyricist, and all this stuff, or whatever.  And I make the most simplified, candid, simplistic message about safe sex.  And I'm singing it, (singing) "I was walking down the street, knocking my feet, clapping my hands, and stomping my feet."  It was real simple, but I knew it was going to connect.  And by this time, I'm starting to figure out in hip-hop, one of the things besides authenticity that always works and needs to happen is connectivity.  You need to connect.  It doesn't have to be deep, it just has to connect.  So, I was connecting with the cadence, with the resonance, and the fact that oh, he can step out of himself and not take himself so seriously, oh, okay.  The connectivity opened up, and--but at that time I'm looking at KRS-One and I'm looking at Kool G Rap, and Rakim, and Big Daddy Kane, and I'm like, "But I'm that."  But I'm not being known for that now, because this new generation is like, "We remember you from the group [Treacherous Three], and we heard you were lyrical, but all that stuff is not on tape."  We're now in an era where we're looking at records, and what's going to make or break you is the records.  So, now I got to make hit records.  So then I come up with a formula to make hit records, but they're not that lyrical.  So, it's driving me crazy that I'm not getting the lyrical accolades that I'm used to getting, but I got hit records now.  And I'm like, okay, so which one matters more?  Because now I come out with 'How Ya Like Me Now.'  And then of course, everything gets blown out of the water two years later.  Finally, I graduate.  You know, I laugh at my friend [Mike (ph.)] and tell him, "I told you so," the whole cocky, "Yeah, didn't I tell you?  Just like I said, I graduate and look at what's happening now."  "Wild Wild West" comes out, completely obliterates everything.  I mean, you know, it just winds up being the biggest hit I ever had.  And I have this ambivalence of loving the platform, loving the success, and I actually saw a check for the first time.   I'm like, I got $125,000 royalty check, and a $90,000 publishing check.  And this is before the records even finished selling, like--and I called LA [LA Sunshine], I was like, "You do get paid from this, man," (laughter).  It was like, what? Get out of here.  We were laughing at that, because we'd never seen a check. So, I saw my first check from a record in hip-hop in 1987. And I mean, again, it was--I was looking at the twelve thou- I thought it was 12,500 [dollars].  I was like, no, but that's three zeros.  That's $125,000.  I just put it on the desk and looked at it for a while, because I just never got a check before.  So, and then you quickly adjust to, that's not anything, that's no money, you know, once you start knowing what money is, but for that to be the first one was huge.
Story_ID: 298809
Speaker 1: When did you get into the war of words with LL Cool J, like you guys were going back and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same time.
Speaker 1: --eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: This is all the same--same period.  Now, what's happening, as Run-D.M.C. is becoming quote, unquote passe and the lyrical--the lyricists are now being defined--again, you know, KRS [KRS-One], Kool J Rap, Rakim and Big Daddy Kane, and actually Rakim is considered the elite of all of that.  Like Rakim is, at this time, Rakim is becoming what's known, been known and kind of still arguably known as the best emcee ever.  That's happening right then.  Like people are like, "We've never heard anything like this, period."  Just that's--and I remember listening to Rakim and pulling over, 'cause again, I was feeling myself and you know, I'm still one of the greats, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And then I hear, you know, check out 'My Melody.'  I'm sorry, the first side is 'Eric B. For President' [sic. 'Eric B. Is President'], (singing) "I came through the door, I said it before."  I'm like, wow, he's melodic, he's, there's something about him.  I like him, I mean, I like what he does.  And finally, I turn it over to the B-side, check out 'My Melody,' and I remember the rhyme that made me pull over.  He said, (singing) "Rhymes are poetically kept and alphabetically stepped, put in an order to proceed with the momentum except, say one, I'm out of order, long or rhyme shorter, we'll pause, but don't stop the tape recorder."  And I remember pulling over saying, okay, somebody new is here.  It's undeniable.  They're going to be saying he's either as good if not better than you.  Like, that's what my mind was like.  I'm really going to be challenged, because it's not challenging right now for me.  It was basically, again, me, Melle Mel, Grandmaster Caz and that was it.  I mean, there was nobody even close to being compared to us, but when Rak- when I heard Rakim, I knew.  I was like, he's already leapfrogged into that, and this is his first record.  And I'm like, oh, man.  So, I need to hear more, I need to hear what else he's got because maybe this is a one shot deal, da da da da da.  And I like him, but I'm just not ready to just give up the throne like that.  And--he can't just be the king, it's impossible, ba, ba, ba, ba.  And then, six months later--this is all '86 [1986] by the way--not even six months later--that was September of eighty--July of '86 [1986], yeah, it was six months.  By Septem- by December, I hear a record called 'You Know You Got Soul' [sic. 'I Know You Got Soul'], and I'm like, okay, he's great, I can see it.  I--you--it's one of those things--Magic Johnson has to take note that Jordan [Michael Jordan] is in the league.  It doesn't make a difference.  It doesn't undo what Magic did, doesn't make Magic any less great, but Jordan is here.  So that's what I was like, you know what, I'm Magic Johnson, he's Jordan.  It is what it is.  And I guess in the timing of it, Johnson is all in the '80s [1980s] and Jordan comes in in '86 [1986], or '84 [1984], actually.  But by '86 [1986], people know Jordan's a one-man wrecking machine.  He doesn't have championships yet, but you see greatness, you see it coming.  That's what Rakim was.  Ironically, in the same time period, I do the early '80s [1980s] and I do what I do.  I make my little comeback and I have the biggest hits of all time or whatever, but Rakim is still being viewed as the great, and I kind of tie that in.
Story_ID: 298810
Speaker 1: Now ironically, simultaneously, LL Cool J is being used, on some level, of my opinion, as the poster boy for--it's Run-D.M.C.'s answer to we're not lyrical, we're not, you know, because the rap on Run-D.M.C. was great records, but you're not real emcees.  I mean, y'all, come on, y'all can't rhyme, you know that's nursery rhyming.  Nobody ever gave them real props or whatever, nobody on an industry sense.  People loved them and loved them for what they did, but nobody was like, "They're lyrical--oh, did you hear that rhyme?"  It was like, yeah, but it didn't matter for them, because that's not really what they were going after.  We didn't know that at the time, all we knew was hey, you're not real rhymers to us.  But, LL Cool J was in their camp, and you couldn't say LL wasn't a real rhymer, because LL was one of the best rhymers also, and to this day still is one of the best rhymers.  I would call him--if I was Magic [Magic Johnson], he would be Bird [Larry Bird], you know, without question.  And that was a collision course that was definitely going to happen, because he's young, he's got a lot of the swagger that I had, he's cocky, and he had that cutting voice.   And, you know, he also had the other element--girls loved him, so he was becoming a sex symbol, hard core lyricist whatever, down with the winning team, Rush Productions [Rush Communications].  'Cause Rush had a management team at the time, even though Run-D.M.C. wasn't on their label, on Def Jam [Recordings], he was still managing Run-D.M.C.  And when Rush put out the (unclear) Jam and the Def Jam, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons again, without question, took hip-hop to a level that a lot of the predecessors didn't.  He put an actual hip-hop tour out, with just hip-hop acts.  Nobody even thought of doing that.  When we [Treacherous Three] first went out on tour, we finally went out with The Bar-Kays, and Al Hudson, and One Way and, you know, the 'Double Dutch Bus' guy [Frankie Smith]--I forgot his name, you know, it was (singing) "Double Dutch." We went on tour with R&B acts.  Furious Five [Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five] is going out with Rick James, you know.  That was the summit and the pinnacle of touring for us.  And Russell was like, "Let's do a hip-hop tour."  It's going to be Kurtis Blow, Run-D.M.C., [The] Fat Boys, Whodini.  And then, you know, later it was LL, and he just mixed all his people in there.  And--but LL was clearly the gem of the bunch in terms of, there's nothing you can say about him at the time--there's stuff to critique Run-D.M.C. or The Fat Boys for--even Whodini on some level got a little bit of critiquing.  But Whodini was also like what I said with Spoonie Gee--what I said earlier about Spoonie Gee, Doug E. Fresh and Heavy D--Whodini is also one of the most likeable groups ever.  So nobody really attacked Whodini the way they did Run-D.M.C.  Yet, on tour, from knowing the guys, Whodini always felt like they were, you know, second to Run-D.M.C., because Run-D.M.C. got all the accolades, and all of the press and all of the whatever.  And Whodini was, to me, a more polished group, to be honest.  They actually--on stage their show was just professional.  I mean, they were like a R- they were like a polished R&B group.  Whodini was, to me, still one of the best live performances ever.  And, you know, they put records together well also. But anything that you could say about them, you couldn't say about LL.  LL was lyrical.  He was hard-core, so to speak, and he absolutely had a female following.  And he could deliver live.  So, he was their poster boy for, now what do you have to say?  Here's somebody from the quote, unquote new school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you like me now (laughter)?
Speaker 1: --here's somebody from the new school that actually can do it.  And for me, you know, it's like [Muhammad] Ali and George Foreman.  Like, just because he's knocking people out (laughter) doesn't mean--he hasn't had a real fight, though.  I'm like, you know, he hasn't gone against the grain.  It's like, that looks good in a vacuum, I'm sure--you know, my analytical thing, and you know, I would always say things or whatever.
Story_ID: 298811
Speaker 1: The irony is, LL Cool J, according to T La Rock, basically saw T La Rock's rhyme book.  T La Rock is Special K's brother, back to our little tie-in.  And T La Rock was going to [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons for management, and he said he left his rhyme book down there, and LL saw his rhyme book, and LL basically took his rhymes, and that's where his notoriety comes from.  So, even what we couldn't say, what people didn't know--I'm saying, no, but he's still got his stuff from our school, our people.  That's Special K, that's my partner's brother.   Special K wrote for T La Rock in the very beginning.  So, the day I meet LL Cool J, the--which is so crazy, because while Run-D.M.C. are bigging him up for being their poster child, for their hero, so to speak, "Yeah, LL's our man, he'll do anybody, he can't beat all of y'all."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah--when I meet LL, the first thing he says to me is like, "Oh my God I can't believe I'm meeting you.  People say I rhyme like you, but it's because I don't want to rhyme like Run-D.M.C.  I'm a real lyricist," you know.  He's separating himself while they're bigging him up, and they don't even know that this is going on.  And, you know, I'm sure they have their own relationship and stuff that I'll never know about, but that's what he says to me when I first meet him.  And I'm kind of like, you know, in a smug, "Yeah, little kid, that's cool.  Thanks a lot or whatever."  Because he's bigger than me, too, but he was younger and he just had all this passion and this real energy.  And what I appreciate about LL in retrospect was his honesty.  So, it's ironic that T La Rock was right on the other side of me when I'm meeting him, and T La Rock was like, "Just get him to the stage, I'm going to crush him."  Because T La Rock is talking about him stealing his rhymes.  And what I'm feeling from LL is like I feel this honesty coming off of him, because he was just like a little kid that was happy, and he was like, "Yeah, and they say I rhyme like you man, but I don't rhyme like they rhyme, because I'm a real lyricist, and, you know, I see the stuff that you did, man and the battle with Busy Bee [Busy Bee Starski] was incredible."  And he's just talking, and I'm like, he's excited to meet me, genuinely.  And it's so funny, because as we're older now, I see in interviews when he said, "Yeah, I remember meeting a lot of the old school guys, and they weren't nice to me."  And I--I would have to be in that category because I wasn't embracing, I wasn't like, "Hey, welcome.  Welcome to the throne, you know, hey."  You know, it's like, no, the kingdom is not necessarily open, you know, for newcomer's kind of thing.
Story_ID: 298812
Speaker 1: So, we're walking to the stage, and I remember him [LL Cool J] on one side and T La Rock on the other side.  And I introduce these guys, they get on stage and we all rhyme, and then LL stays on for like twenty minutes, you know.  And T La Rock took that as a diss.  I looked at it as he was just passionate and overwhelmed.  And the battle starts, because two weeks later, I'm still in school now, this is college.  Remember this is all '85, [1985], '86 [1986].  This is '85 [1985], actually for LL.  I go back up to campus.  LL comes up to my school.  He knows I go to Old Westbury [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York], or whatever.  And whether he admits it or not, LL was a die-hard Kool Moe Dee [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese] fan.  However, because of his passion and his naivete, or whatever--we didn't know each other, but, you know, I guess he's figuring, well I made it, I'm an emcee now so there's some camaraderie or whatever.  I really didn't have the camaraderie in me yet, because I didn't know--again, it's like listening to Rakim and I don't know what to make of this.  Let me see what's going on.  I didn't know what to really make of LL yet.  I knew he was really, really, really cocky, but I didn't know what his personality was.  So, he comes up to my school, it was a friend of mine named Collin [ph.] who lived in LL's neighborhood.  They knock on my door.  It's like, "Yo, Moe, it's LL."  He's standing outside my door, my dorm.  I'm like, "Get out of here, who is it, for real?"  He goes, "It's LL Cool J."  And then first I was thinking it was my friend Collin just playing a joke.  Then I heard his voice and I realized, oh, this might be real.   But I didn't want to be bothered, truthfully.  I had a girl in the room, you know--back to my sexual obsession in college days--and I'm listening, and I'm saying, "Collin, that's a horrible LL impersonation."   So now I'm going to make it like this is Collin doing a bad LL imitation.  Then LL started saying things about, "Remember when I met you at The Roxy [Roxy NYC, New York, New York]?"  He's saying things that I--that nobody would know.  I was like, oh shit.  So, I start turning the music up and, "I'm not listening to you, Collin, I know it's you, it's not LL, for real."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and I leave the door locked.  Collin (laughter), being older than LL, and LL being young and eager, gets LL to start rhyming outside my door for at least a half hour.
Story_ID: 298813
Speaker 1: I turn the music up loud, and I get to this space where I'm not acknowledging LL [LL Cool J] in the hallway. And he's got a couple of my friends on campus [of the State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York] there, whatever, and they love him, by the way.  You know, he's becoming a star.   And they convince LL to stand outside and (making sounds) they're beating on the wall, and he's rhyming for a good fifteen minutes, just rhyming, you know, 'cause he--LL was passionate about it.   One thing you couldn't--the one thing you could never undo about LL was his passion for emceeing, and you could see that on him, day one.  So, he'd rhyme (unclear) at a drop of a hat I guess.   And they got him to rhyme, and he was rhyming, and they were like, "Oh, oh," you know, playing the beat, and I never opened the door.  And then when he's leaving, it hits him like he's quote, unquote, been dissed, and they're kind of rubbing it in a little bit, "I can't believe you didn't open the door," or whatever.  And he says, "That's all right, he ain't making no money anyway," which is to me the beginning of--they come back to me, "You hear what he said?"  "Yeah, he said you ain't making no money anyway."  I said, "Yeah, he just wants to be me, don't worry about it."  They go back to him, and now the pipeline of insults are going back and forth.  And finally--and remember, when the--with him saying I'm not making any money--because that's '85 [1985]--this is the 'Turn It Up' and the 'Gotta Rock' stuff.  I haven't done 'Go See the Doctor,' which is coming in '86 [1986].  I do 'Go See the Doctor' in '86 [1986], but at the same time he has 'Rock The Bells' out.  'Rock The Bells' is a supremely more--more hip-hop hip-hop hit, so to speak.  'Go See the Doctor' is quote, unquote re-introducing me to a new generation, but not as a lyricist.  This is introducing me as a hit--you know, hit record, hit artist type thing or whatever.  And then by '87 [1987], which is the reason I made "How Ya Like Me Now," was for all of my friends in school, for Run-D.M.C., LL or whatever.  I'm like, for all of those that said in the first verse--that's how I end the first verse--those of them who said that I could only rock crowds, only rock rhymes, but never rock records--how you like me now? You know, that kind of thing.  So, it's like, now--now I got a record and I know "How Ya Like Me Now" is a record.  And this is before it's a hit.  I'm saying this in the record, like how do you like me now?  This is a hit record.  So, kind of like what I was saying about them, what they were saying about me is, like, okay, you're saying I can rhyme, but I can't make hits, and I'm saying, you can make hits, but you can't rhyme.  I'm like, well now I got the balance, so which--how you like me now?  And in the record I say LL's album was bigger and deffer, and I say, "I'm bigger and better, forget about deffer. Every time I rock the mic, I left a stain in your brain, it will remain, stuck in the back of your brain until you see me again.  Respect, or come correct.  The rhymes I select are never short of perfect.  Vernacular's pure, I can ensure life and death with my breath. My voice is the cure. I feel life."  You know, I'm doing this stuff, and it's like subtlety saying to them, basically, this is the elite status that you want.  You might have hit records, but you can't do this.
Story_ID: 298814
Speaker 1: So, finally, you know, and then it gets back to LL [LL Cool J].  He's like, "Yeah, well you can't deny it's a hit."  And now, because in '87 [1987], he's at the pinnacle of his thing, and it's something that's kind of crazy.  Only Jay Z and the later ilk of hip-hop artists have been able to supersede this, because the '90s [1990s] were something totally different than what the '80s [1980s] had.  But usually in the '80s [1980s], when you hit the pinnacle, you were right at the point of being passe, and that was the danger zone.  LL conquered it inadvertently in the long run, by doing records in the '90s [1990s], but there was a period of time in '87 [1987]--I come with 'How Ya Like Me Now,' at the end of summer, he comes with 'Bigger and Deffer' at the beginning of the summer.  By the end of the summer, he's starting to be passe, and he's saying--but he's still an icon, I mean, he's become like almost this instant icon, or whatever.  He's bigger than Run-D.M.C. now, and he is officially the face of hip-hop's success, so to speak, but he can't rhyme, so it's not like Run-D.M.C., it's a little different.  So, now people--their taste buds are wet.  It's this big super fight getting ready to happen, the old school king with the new anointed king, or whatever.  Now, simultaneously, which is so crazy, even though we're getting ready to do this on the super star level, the undercurrent is still Rakim, Big Daddy Kane, KRS-One and Kool G Rap.  They're still, as far as the streets are concerned, the true lyrical heroes.  But then, it's like, you know what, but you can't undo Moe [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese] and LL for what they do.  The lyrics are still what they are, it's just not of a certain ilk, but you can't undo it.  So that is the super fight, because we're hotter and bigger.  Our names are bigger than these people.  So, finally, I'll never forget, we go to the Soul Train Awards [Soul Train Music Awards], and LL--you know, somebody walks up, and we're in the same category, and it's the first time, you know, hip-hop's starting to be nominated or whatever.  And even to the Grammys [Grammy Awards], we're the first in the Grammy, first class of Grammy nominations:  Will Smith, J.J. Fad, Salt-N-Pepa, LL Cool J, and myself, that's the first category.  So, we're--we're on point with each other.  It's almost like it's this connection, no matter what you do.  And, at the Soul Train Awards, I remember the look on his face.  He looked very, very tense about if I won the award, it would have done something.  But, he had "I Need Love," the love song thing, and I had "Wild Wild West."  Well, "Wild Wild West" had just come out, and although "I Need Love"--he won the award.  I remember him screaming and going crazy, and--it looked like it was a weight off his chest or whatever.  And one of the things I used to always say that I could see in his personality was he definitely looked for outside validation more than I did.  I think he's changed that since, but at that time, that's what I saw.
Story_ID: 298815
Speaker 1: But "Wild Wild West" becomes this phenomenal hit, and it puts me on a level that's superseding--they--nobody could predict this, that's what it was.  Nobody could predict that I would be the consummate superstar at this point.  And now I'm in pop radio stations where they weren't being played.  And LL [LL Cool J] has that record, 'I'm That Type Of Guy.'  I mean, before 'That Type of Guy'--I'm sorry, 'Going Back to Cali,' and on the back side of that, he had a diss record to me called 'Jack the Ripper.'  So, while 'Wild Wild West' is out, LL's doing the diss rap, because what he said six months before that was, "I'll respond to him in 'How Ya Like Me Now' when he makes some money, when it does some noise or whatever."  So, "How Ya Like Me Now" becomes like a top twenty hit.  But then "Wild Wild West" comes, it's like a top five hit.  It's number four, actually.  And it's undeniable, I'm hotter than all of y'all now.  I'm actually the hottest rapper in the country.  Like, you wrote me off, and after "How Ya Like Me Now" on the album is "Wild Wild West" that makes me the highest rapper.  So now LL does make an answer, he makes this record called 'Jack the Ripper,' and I got the hottest record in the country out, and I want to do this diss record, but I can't undo the heat.  So this was what I said, boxing.  Like boxing or like fighting, battling is also about timing.  I let that ride for almost six months, so that "Wild Wild West" could maximize.  And when "Wild Wild West" finally hit the wall, it lasted from February to August.  As soon as I felt it slide, it went--we're out of the top ten, let's go do the record.  And I went and did my diss record, 'Let's Go.'  And for all of his fans, it was the first time--kind of like what happened with Jay Z and Nas, it was the first time that LL's aura had been questioned, because for the younger generation, they don't really know who I am, especially around the country.  In New York [New York], yeah, but around the world, it's like, LL's the king, are you crazy?  We don't even know Kool G Rap.  Yeah, we've heard about those guys, but LL's the king.  He's the one with the pop success, he's the one with the fan base, he's the one that sells double platinum, he's the one we know.  Why is this old guy messing with him?  Like, for them--and then they hear the 'Let's Go' thing and the point is, like you know, I told them what LL stands for, and used his name.  It's like:  "LL stands for lower level, lackluster, last least, limp lover, lousy lame, late lethargic, lucky, leak little logic, lucky leech, liver lipped, laborious louse on a loser's lips, live in limbo, lyrical lapse, low life with the loud rap."  And it's like, "Oh."  And, I just remember his following being stunned, like, what just happened?  "You're gonna come back, right?"  And then the pressure turned to him, like, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do?  And, of course, in hip-hop lore, you know, you win the battle--and so you can win the battle and still lose the war.  Right after that, for me, it's like it became anti-climactic.  It's like, I did what I had to do, it was done.  He started getting booed the next year.  We did a rec- then my consciousness changed, this is the other thing that happened.  Public Enemy is now in the equation.
Story_ID: 298816
Speaker 1: Public Enemy comes, and is speaking to everything that I love about hip-hop.  We can actually use our voice to make a difference.  I don't want to do battling stuff anymore, I want to do records that have messages or whatever.  And I've already beat LL [LL Cool J], so let's move on.  And for the hip-hop fan, what they never understood at the time, I mean they understood the battle, but I guess there's an older versus younger thing happening.  I'm older.  The stuff that used to work for me at sixteen doesn't work anymore.  LL's eighteen, I'm twenty-four.  I want something else now.  I--yeah, I beat you already, so whatever.  And there was a vibe in hip-hop that just wanted the, I call it the blood of that, like just keep it going, keep it going.  And we kept going a little bit, and he did another record, 'To da Break of Dawn,' he talked about me, [MC] Hammer and Ice-T, and then I did another record, 'Death Blow,' but then it started feeling like, simultaneously, both of us weren't as popular anymore.  People just like, "All right, enough, enough of it."  So, it was this quandary of what's happening, and I knew, I used to tell people all the time. I said, "If you just look at the timing of it," because it's easy to look at things in a vacuum.  Ten years later, the battle is over.  LL still made reference to it, because it really stung him, and I knew it, it hurt, or whatever.  So, he's doing this record ['Hey Lover'] with Boyz II Men, and he got this record with Foxy Brown and Keith Murray, 'Who Shot Ya' [sic. 'I Shot Ya']--"I crushed Moe Dee [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese], Hammer and Ice T."  I'm like, leave it alone, you lost.  You lost, man, live with it.  And at that time, also, I am now in a battle with my record label. So--
Speaker 2: Which was Sugar Hill [Records]?
Speaker 1: At this time, it's Jive Records.
Speaker 2: Jive, you'd gone--what year did you leave Sugar Hill and go to Jive?
Speaker 1: I left Sugar Hill, well I left Sugar Hill in '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: You went to Jive in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: I went to Jive in '86 [1986]. And then--
Speaker 2: So you were having trouble with Jive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jive, by '90 [1990], I'm having trouble with Jive Records.  I want to do things that, you know, again, the record company, which I learned the hard way, your voice and your platform, all of that's great as long as you're making money and selling records.  You know, Marvin Gaye didn't--I'm sorry, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy--Berry Gordy didn't even want to put out Marvin Gaye's 'What's Going On,' he didn't know what was socially relevant, you know.  It was where's the funk, where's the funky record, just give me the hit record.  And then, of course, 'What's Going On' goes on to be one of the most phenomenal albums of all time.  Same thing with myself--without the 'What's Going On' album.  I want to do the socially relevant records, but we need heat, we need hot songs.  We don't hear hot songs.  So, they're like trying to guide me.  You know, gangster rap is now coming into the equation.  They want it a certain way.  "The kids want this," but I'm like, I'm not talking to the kids that way.  I'm talking a different way, I have a different audience.  And when labels and the industry--or industries are rigidly locked into the regiment of what they see and what they believe, it's almost no talking to 'em.  So, the pioneer or the breakthrough artist has to break through either in the formula they're comfortable with, or go so far left in an unconventional sense, that something has to happen organically that they can't stop, for it to happen.  Because they just weren't going to hear that I want to use different producers, you know.  I want to do an album--I want to get Stevie Wonder and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones to produce.  "What? Why?" I'm like, because I'm seeing it at that level, that's the way I see it.  Plus, I've met Quincy Jones, and I did this album 'Back on the Block,' which I get my first Grammy [Award] for.
Story_ID: 298817
Speaker 1: The experience with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones is one of the most phenomenal music experiences--musical experiences I've ever had.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: Because I'm meeting--first of all, I'm meeting him.  The wisdom in Quincy Jones is almost unparalleled, for the people that I've met in the industry.  The stories he can tell, from the eras of bebop, jazz, to the early R&B--all the way to the Michael Jackson, and all of the stuff he's done in TV with 'Sanford and Son,' and whatever--I just shut up and listen, I'm not talking.  Basically when I'm around Quincy, I'll ask a question and just go, because his wisdom is just some of the highest levels of wisdom I ever heard of.  I mean even--he even said with me in the battle with LL [LL Cool J], he said, "Be careful of being too proficient in the diss, because it'll come back on you."  He's like, "There's a little spiritual musical rhythm thing," or whatever.  "It's almost like if you do it too well, people won't like you for it," (laughter).  I was like, and he was absolutely right, because I remember walking into arenas, and women saying, "Why are you doing that to him?"  He said, "When you do it too good, you look like a bully."  And really, what happened with the LL thing--to wrap up the LL thing and transition into the Quincy Jones era of where I was at, the way the battle went with LL and myself--because LL's not truly a battle rapper--it--like one of the biggest myths of hip-hop is LL's this great battle rapper, he's just not a battle rapper.  And he's truthfully never won any battles.  However, his popularity and his ability to sustain in the industry creates the aura of, "Wow. He's a great--." And I was like, no, he's lost every battle, it's just that he's a great artist.  He's a genuinely great artist.  What I love about him is he will take chances that people won't take.  'I Need Love' was a chance-taking record, you know.  Even when they miss, you know--he makes bad records, but he'll--you know, the record ['Father'] about his father [James Louis Smith, Jr.; James Nunya]--everybody needs a father, or whatever.  It wasn't a good record at all, but he tried.  And he always does that, and to me, that's true artistry.  And I think as a true artist, he stands the test of time in that sense, or whatever.  He's genuinely passionate about it, and you know, "Oh, he's making love songs for women now," and blah, blah, blah.  Like, that's a smart move.  As an older man, he kind of should be talking about older things, so.  And he always--he already was a sex symbol, so making records directed to women--that's like, well, that's a guaranteed fan base, are you crazy?  Why would he be trying to compete with 50 Cent and do what you do (laughter)?  So, it's an absolutely smart and logical move.  However, it creates the mythology that he's weathered these storms and won these battles because he's lasted so long, and the other people aren't here anymore, so he must have--I'm like, no, the other people aren't here based on industry rules, it has nothing to do with the battle.  And again, me in a talk show, or me in an environment like that, crystallizes that.
Story_ID: 298818
Speaker 1: And it's so funny, I'm doing my own documentary on the book that I wrote, 'There's a God on the Mic: The True 50 Greatest MCs' [Kool Moe Dee], and there are some guys that, you know, were interviewing me.  We were doing the interview simultaneously, one of the little tricks I wanted to do on my interview.  They got cameras on me while I got cameras on them.  And they're interviewing me for allhiphop.com and I'm interviewing them for my documentary.  And the guy says, you know, we talk about the LL [LL Cool J] battle and I say, "Well, I'd like to ask people who said that he won," I said, "ask yourself why."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You asked people--you asked people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I asked them.  If you went to the people that said he won, it's like, "Well, tell me how, why do you think he won?"  And it's like it's interesting that they don't really have an answer.  And then I said, "In any battle, you usually have some--give me something that he said was memorable, that made you say, 'Yeah, that was the moment that I saw--.'" And I'm like, "The only thing you're basically doing is looking at his success after the fact, and you're having what I call a revisionist history."  I said, "But that would be the equivalent of saying George Foreman beat [Muhammad] Ali because George Foreman is more successful in the '90s [1990s], you know, through the grill."  And boxing, again--and Ali's, you know, well--but Ali won that fight.  And then the guy on camera was like, "Wow, I'm remembering.  You did win that battle."  And then his friend was like, "I can't believe you're doing this on camera.  What would you say if LL was here?"  He said, "I would have to say to him that you lost the battle. I never thought of it that way."  And I think that's what it is, too.  When I say--digressing a little bit--when I was talking about what I do in my lectures and speaking to kids or whatever, it's like, always be more analytical, don't ever just go along with the status quo for the sake of it.  There are certain things about assimilating that may work for all of us on some level.  It's like 'The Matrix,' we're in the matrix no matter which way you want to look at it, whether you want to be an agent, or you want to be Neo, or you just--whatever.  You still just have to analyze it and see it for what it is.  And I said, there's certain things about this system that work great, but there's certain things that just don't work, and you just have to, you know, pick your battles wisely, so to speak.  I said, but don't just take things for face value.  I said, so in doing that--and the same thing in hip-hop, is the same thing I do with analyzing you know--who won battles, and who did this or whatever?  So, yeah, but things are happening simultaneously.  If there's nothing else that's come out of this interview is the simultaneous thing of, while I'm in school [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York], I'm still making records.  There's a heat that's waning, I come in on high and I go out on high, but in that there was a turmoil, but in the turmoil I'm actually getting my education.  And in getting my education I'm actually undoing the fact that I dropped out of high school [Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York], by my father's [William DeWese] consent, who I wasn't speaking to for stabbing my mother [Josette DeWese].  But the support of him actually gave--ambivalence and simultaneous movement is always happening.  And we try to simplify things that are way more complex than you know, that meet the eye.
Story_ID: 298819
Speaker 1: Back to the [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones thing--
Speaker 2: What year was 'Back on the Block'?
Speaker 1: 'Back on the Block' is 1990--'91 [sic. 1989], actually.  And meeting Quincy and just hearing all those stories, and how some of the jazz greats lasted and didn't last, or whatever.  There's always an element of luck, so to speak, in success stories.   Because it's like sliding doors, or the crossroads of paths, and just one little thing different, you know.  The fact that he didn't want to do 'The Wizard of Oz'--'The Wiz,' rather, not 'The Wizard of Oz,' 'The Wiz.'  He hated the project, but through that project he met Michael Jackson.  And through meeting Michael Jackson, Michael's like, "You want to do an album?" or whatever.  And Quincy's like, "Okay."  The Jacksons are bubblegum kind of, or I guess a little pop group, or whatever.  But he said he met Michael and he felt something underneath him, he felt something else.  So, he got that underneath thing, and they create 'Off The Wall,' and 'Thriller,' you know what I mean, the most phenomenal album probably in the history of album making.  And it's those kind of things that happen in life that you can't orchestrate it.  You know, you're on a project you don't want to do, you hate 'The Wiz.'  He was like, "I just thought it was, you know, Tin Man-y, (unclear)," blah, blah, blah.  But his--the bigger picture was about Michael.  It was something for the future. Same thing I say about relationships.  If you don't know what those paths are crossing for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The cornerstone, or the stepping stone.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So, in not knowing what those paths are for, or about, you find out that some stuff you're going to know, and way more of it you're not going to know.  And just, like I said, sitting around and listening to Quincy, that's why the things that I have--the things that I have in me from a character standpoint and a creative standpoint and an artistic standpoint, all I'm going to do is just follow my bliss.  Because you don't know--I'm telling you right now, by the time this is done, the record that I'm working on may be a flop, but it may be like the biggest hit I ever did, because I don't know what else is coming.  And all of a sudden, it's like, it has a different resonance to it, you know.  What once was irrelevant, quote, unquote, becomes the groundbreaking stepping stone for--which I plan on doing--it's like, you know, I'm going to be that artist that you don't think--'cause it's always been (unclear).  You didn't expect me to do it the very first time.  You know, I was just a little poor kid from Harlem [New York, New York] that, you know, why would I be on wax?  Oh wow, I'm on wax.  Then I go from being a quote, unquote icon to being passe.  So, you wrote me off and then after that, I'm the biggest rapper in the industry three years later, after being quote unquote written off, after having my degree [from State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York].  You know what I mean, because you get your college degree to have a job, because the career thing is over.  No, it's not, I'm actually hotter now with the degree (laughter).  So, it's like then after all of that learning curve, you get all this money and then all of a sudden the passe thing happens again, but in the passe point, you meet Quincy Jones, and then you get your first Grammy [Award].  Like, what kind of cycle is that?  It does--it seems like it's going this way, and then boom.  And then it seems like it's going that way, and then boom.  Like, you can't really predict it on a certain level.  So, for me it's just, again, tapping into what I feel and what I love, and letting the chips fall where they may.
Story_ID: 298820
Speaker 1: So what happened from 1990, meeting [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and getting the Grammy [Award] for 'Back on the Block' to--
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Basically, I always tell people, if you can do a regression or digression, whichever way you want to call it, and go into your childhood and you find out that stuff that's in you probably never leaves--the war that I've been at with the society has been in me, and it culminated in the early '90s [1990s] with the music industry.  I hated the payola stuff, I hated the cliquish stuff.  I started seeing too much of the ugly side of business.   Like wow, the record label act like they love you, and the minute you didn't sell the same amount of records, or you sold less, they pull the plug.  You were basically disposable.  So, once I felt disposable, I took it too personal.  There was always good business--and again, when I hear people say good business, I'm like, that sounds like a password for being able to do anything on a personal level.  People will take advantage of people personally--it's good business.  So, you know, you own a company that, you know, puts eight thousand people employed, but if the company doesn't make money, a good business deal is to cut your losses.   So you cut four hundred people, or four thousand out of the eight thousand people, even though you just messed up four thousand people's lives, but it made the company return a profit, that was a good business move.  That stuff always bothers me on a soul level.  So, I've basically taken a lot more time, and said, okay, what do I want to do creatively?  The music stuff, which is so funny.  You can make me passe, but I'm looking at--it is passe.   I'm like, wow, we don't--we're not saying anything.  It seems like people are only doing it for money now.
Story_ID: 298821
Speaker 1: But also in that time span, you've had--like gangster rap is huge.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What do you think about what rap has become?
Speaker 2: The frustrating thing for me in--in that time, back in keeping with the line of being at war with the society and the way things are going, I'm not happy with the direction.  When I see gangster rap, everything in me as a battle emcee is, you attack it.  But if you attack this, not only are you putting your own life at risk, you're putting other people's lives at risk now, because there's a mentality that comes with that.  It has nothing to do with art.  And, on a business practical level, they can make the argument that you exposing this, or making us look bad, could potentially take money and food out of our mouths.  And if that's the case, as a gangster rapper--because remember in the early days, like I said, the hustler and the gangster didn't rap.  Now the hustler and the gangster is kind of looking towards rap.  And they're trying to find a way to legitimize their money and all that stuff, or whatever.  It seems like a natural progression, but you could basically be in a war-like situation based on a difference of opinion, because I never really, really vibed with gangster rap.  I never thought it was anything of any value.  I think it had--(unclear) any value, it had minimum value.  But the value I think it did have was was it was a great window for America to see an underbelly of especially American culture, but definitely with particular black American culture.  But, I've always been one that always wanted to deal with solutions, and the only problem--the biggest problem I have with gangster rap is it's like, okay, y'all can say it's like CNN for the hood--and blah, blah, blah--but nobody's offering solutions, and nobody's doing anything analytical.  And you can use that as a scapegoat, on one hand, but you're also exploiting it just for the sake of money, in a lot of ways.  So, I'm like, I have a problem with somebody that says, "Well I'm just recording what I see."  But you're getting money from it, and not doing anything and not even offering any solutions.
Story_ID: 298822
Speaker 1: And my personality, I definitely would have said--there would be no way I wouldn't have said that.  And because I also have the machismo thing, too, that means I'm not going to back down, which means now we have a Biggie [Biggie Smalls; Notorious B.I.G.], Tupac [Tupac Shakur] situation from an intellectual level.  Because I wouldn't have been talking about killing people, but I absolutely would have been challenging people, and I would have no problem doing it on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] or anything big like that or whatever, asking questions that I know you can't answer, and showing the hypocrisy in the dichotomy of what you--, "Well, I'm keeping it real," and blah, blah, blah.  I'm like, well how real is it?  I know you just made two million [dollars] from the last--you know, the last album sold double platinum, and I know your publishing was this and that, or whatever.  What have you done to give back to the community that you say you basically love, knowing that you bought a house and moved out to Beverly Hills [California]?  You don't live in that community anymore.  What are you still promoting that lifestyle and that thought process for, when your lifestyle is absolutely living in Beverly Hills?  You're doing that to exploit that vibration and make that neighborhood feel like you're still a part of it, but you've done everything you could to get out of that neighborhood.  And there's a vicious cycle in that that we don't talk about.  And again, it's not that it's not your right to move out, and I'm not saying you should stay there, because Tupac made a very good point when he said, "Where am I going to live?  They don't want me in Beverly Hills, and there's no quote, unquote middle class black area that I'm going to feel safe in, because," what did he--as he broke it down, "If I stay in the hood, they're going to rob me.  I'm too popular, I'm too big, and I have too many material things."  Because once you get money, you're going to buy cars and so and so.  "So I can't stay in the hood.  If I go into the white neighborhood, I'm the outcast, I don't have any friends, there's no camaraderie, there's no sense of community for me.  So, I'm caught in this quandary of where to live."  And that's very valid also, but still and all, even by posing that, my thing is, where are the solutions?  Why are we not putting our heads together, pooling our resources and coming up with solutions, you know, whether it's educational solutions, whether it's financial solutions.  Why aren't we not getting into real estate and trying to undo the homeless situation?  Why are we not creating affordable housing?  And there's other ways to approach this, you know.  We can get government grants.  You don't even have to use your own money.  You can use your name as the power, with that heat and that popularity, to actually do something, you know.  Like I love seeing what Usher is doing, you know, the hundred homes--and what's this guy's name on the Atlanta Falcons, the running back [Warrick Dunn], you know, giving homes to the single mothers and all that stuff.  I'm like, we could have been doing that.  I mean, come on, if we pooled our resources--if you get ten popular big names, or whatever, with money, go into a real estate agent, I mean, that's great publicity, if you know it's messed up.  You know, if we're going to exploit the system, then exploit the positive side of it.  Let's exploit these government grants and loans and whatever, and use them for--again, some politicians will do the photo op thing, but you can be more real about it.  You could still--okay, I understand that comes with the territory, but still we could still make more progress, you know, with our heat and our passion.
Story_ID: 298823
Speaker 1: So, what are your hopes for like music, rap music?
Speaker 2: I have an ambivalent thought process with where it's going and what I want to see happen, because I understand we're having what I call two wars, social and economic.  Socially, it's almost impossible--but I don't believe in impossible.  We have to do something with, not just education in the cliche sense, 'cause I genuinely think our educational system--I don't want to be a conspiracy theorist, but it does more damage than good, collectively, just in the fact that we're being told what to think as opposed to how to think.  And, we're not really taught to challenge our philosophies.  Once we've bought into, whether it's conservative, Christian, right wing, blah, blah, blah, Republican, whatever--again, choose what works for you.  Because I believe--I do love the freedom in that.  What I hate is the fact that we have to be penalized for thinking differently, and I would love hip-hop as the revolutionary art form it started out being, to really take that baton and run with the ability to--to me, revolution doesn't have to be, in the cliche sense, bloody.  It doesn't have to be attacking.  I can disagree with Bush [President George Walker Bush] without wanting him dead, without wanting to do violence to him.  I want to have the conversation and really, really probe and push these thought processes, so that at least in the thinking of it, whether--if you still want to be conservative, right wing or whatever, if that works for you, that's fine.  But don't set it up where--I remember when the Dixie Chicks, you know--the whole stomping because they didn't support the war [Iraq War], and record stations were pulling them off the radio, and I'm like, that's where it's too far.  Why can't they express their opinion?  Why can't they show that, you know, we don't support the war or whatever?  And even on the other side, for the liberal versus the conservative argument, which is way more than liberal and conservative, because I'm somewhere in-between, quite frankly.  I think that sometimes it's simplified.  You know, you can't make--even though war is bad, quote, unquote, yeah there's a school of thought that says it is a necessary evil, because there's a violence coming back based on their belief system.  If they genuinely believe that the Christian is a devil and he's a devil worshiper, and they were doing good by knocking the buildings down, you really have to deal with that.  And it's not going to be the 'Kumbaya' way to deal with it, because zealotry works on both sides.  So, the conversation and the intellect has to be elevated.  And as artists, we have the unique position of being able to be pseudo-political, pseudo-intellectual.  It's almost like we're not really taken that seriously, but when done correctly, we can be complete inspirations to generations of people.  And I just would love to see hip-hop take on the inspirational format again, or that aspect where we're actually touching people and moving the thought process along.  And you know, again, you say, oh we need to get political.  Well, once you get political--I like to be politically aware as opposed to being political.
Story_ID: 298824
Speaker 1: You were saying that you--about politics--being political versus being--
Speaker 2: Politically astute, or politically aware. I think sometimes, again, everything has a high end and a low end.  There's a high end of politics, or being politically astute and politically aware, that is absolutely beneficial.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: There's a high end and a low end. And like I said, the high end is beneficial in the sense of, you know, being aware of how things work, how to get things done, knowing who's who, what the policies are, what's changing.  You know, a lot of times we, especially in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know the props, the propositions are more important than the bigger platform, because the propositions are going to directly affect what happens to you in your neighborhood, in this district, blah, blah, blah, you know.  And sometimes, in the low end, unfortunately, politics is so damaging because it's about saying the right thing, doing the right thing, not offending the right person, greasing the right palm.  That part of it is an ugly part of it that really is bothersome to me, because you know, again, to not like Bush [President George Walker Bush] or to not like his policies because you understand them is one thing.  To not like them and go along with them--because you know, we've fallen into this thing where I remember seeing blacks just being Democratic for the sake of being Democratic.  And, "Oh, we don't want the Republican, we don't (unclear)," but you're not politically aware.  So you're--and I've seen it.  I wouldn't call people out, but I've seen people talk about stuff, and it's like, you're not even aware of the issues, though.  And not being aware of the issues, unfortunately, it's almost like, you know, patriotism can be taken to jingoism, you know.  You can just be fanatical, because of the contempt for something else, or whatever.  So, being politically aware and politically astute--and then, like I said, choosing your battles, makes way more sense.  Chris Rock once said, quite wisely, "Anybody that makes their mind up, or picks a side before hearing the issues, is basically a fool."  How can you pick a side?  How can you be Democrat or Republican without hearing what the Democrat or the Republican has to say?  And, again, the fact that we're totally at free will, free thought, blah, blah, blah--but you're given the two choices.  I'm like, well, there's an array of other things besides Republican and Democrat.  There's a big thing between--an array of other things, besides, you know, liberal or conservative, and so on and so forth.  So, one of the things that I saw in hip-hop, too--you know, Puffy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy] did the thing with the Vote or Die [Citizen Change], and Russell's [HistoryMaker Russell Simmons] Hip-Hop Summit Network [Hip-Hop Summit Action Network], or whatever.  I think all of those things are great things in the sense that at least the conversation is starting, and you have a chance to get teenagers, adolescents, politically, at least thinking in political terms, earlier.  I think that's great.  However, if you don't offer true alternative thinking, it's almost going to be colonizing again to another level, and back to saying and doing the right thing, because somebody could be conservative, but not necessarily Christian, and maybe Republican--like a Republican conservative that's not Christian doesn't even sound right--because we've been told, it's Republican, Christian, conservative.  But a Republican that's liberal (laughter), who's you know, like, "What, he's not Christian? What? I--."  And the outcasting, you know.  This, you can't get a building fund, no matter how great this project is.  Oh, and I'm going to start a youth situation for this neighborhood, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  Get rid of the gun violence, da, da, da, da, da, open this YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], but if you don't know the right person, if you're not of the right party, if you don't support this campaign, you don't get to get funding?  Like that kind of stuff is always bothersome to me.  But if you know it, if you're aware of it, then you can put people on blast.  And like hip-hop would--you know, what I see hip-hop as doing--the role in hip-hop is we were confrontational.
Story_ID: 298825
Speaker 1: We didn't have a problem, you know, saying, "Who gives a F about a Grammy [Award]."  You know, and then the Grammys [Grammy Awards] came along and it's like, "Okay, well cool."  It's almost like fighting to be integrated is--is a totally different vibration than fighting the system for the things you don't like.  Because sometimes like I say, when I look at the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] back in the day, there were some people who were politically aware, that were really, really leading the bell with that, and the intellects--and the assimilation of information.  But then there were a lot of people that were basically just fighting for a piece of the pie.  And once they got assimilated, it was like okay we'll give you a little job, and okay, well, hey, the revolution is over, I got a job.  Because all I wanted was a job basically.  It's like, oh, so it wasn't about the principle?  You didn't care about?  That kind of thing has always bothered me.  And I think hip-hop can play a very, very deep role in impacting the mindset, again, not telling you what to think, but telling you how to think.  And that--meaning telling you how--meaning the ability to know how to think, think outside the box.  Think on your own page or whatever, be aware of your environment, and be able to take all that stuff in and maximize it for the most positive outcome you possibly can.
Speaker 2: So, hip-hop, the music, has also become a culture?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Has that ever happened in music before?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --so pervasive, though?  I mean, the clothes and just, you know, body language, you know, there's every, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.  Well I think hip-hop--hip-hop is definitely not the first music to quote, unquote become a culture or impact the culture the way it did.  The difference in what the hip-hop generation has that the preceding generations didn't have was, while the hip-hop generation is doing what it does, so was the television industry, the home entertainment industry--all these industries are growing so greatly that when hip-hop comes, which we didn't--of course, we couldn't foresee this, so in the late '70s [1970s], there wasn't even a VCR yet, or at least everyone didn't have one, they weren't accessible.  But by the mid-'80s [1980s], everybody's got a VCR.  You know, were you going to get Beta [Betamax] or VHS?  (Laughter) You know, it was like, then the Beta falls apart, falls a while by the wayside, and it's the VHS, and then it goes from that into the DVD, and you got cell phones, and you know, then the Internet--forget about it.  So what happened is, the global impact winds up being more profound for the hip-hop generation because the exposure level is so much bigger.  You know, in the '50s [1950s], before there was television--bebop, you know, you had to find it, you had to know about it.  It was, you had to be an edgy person to know what was going on, you know, to go in some of these back watered houses in the South to find, "What, who's playing?  Is there a jazz band back there?"  You know, you--if you can get through the cars and the weeds, and get to that house.  First, you got to know where that house is at.  Then you got to get an invite, and then you got to be cool (laughter).  So, it was a whole edge and a different kind of swagger to even know what was going on.  So, and of course, you know, as we say, things are going from the underground to the mainstream, you know, I listen to stories from Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] about the bebop era, and playing at the Copacabana [New York, New York] or the Cotton Club [New York, New York], and you know, Duke Ellington, going all the way back.  You know, because he said that those are his heroes, the Duke Ellingtons of the world.  And you know, playing in places that they had to walk through the kitchen to get in, they couldn't come through the front door kind of thing, or whatever.  I think as time progresses, the impact winds up being bigger, because, you know, it was a handful of black children that could see Duke live.  You could hear, you could know.  The radio, you know, the radio was the big thing before television, everything was radio.  And you created the vision in your mind.  Now everything's on television, so you get the picture told to you.  This is what's cool, and it's because this person on that radio station is wearing this.  Now, back in the days, you didn't know what Cab Calloway had on unless you could go to the show and afford it.
Story_ID: 298826
Speaker 1: Do you consider hip-hop to be black music?
Speaker 2: Right now, hip-hop is more than black music.  The origins, of course, is black music and it's always going to have a fundamentally quote, unquote black feel, which is something I learned in the '80s [1980s] with black music versus CHR [Contemporary Hit Radio] versus pop, and the different charts and different vibrations.  But hip-hop is always going to have that feel.  However, it's so multicultural now.  And not just with the success of Eminem, but just if you travel, you start to see that, it's again, not only is it black music, it's also a youth music--but it's also growing, because those people are growing with it.  And I always say, well, you know, Melle Mel's forty-four, so is hip-hop not forty-four?  [DJ] Kool Herc is fifty.  Is it not fifty?  (Laughter) It's like, of course it is.  And because we have a myopic culture that focuses on the quick dollar--we're in the fast food generation, the fast food era.  Which is, digressing for a quick second--I remember hearing, you know, the baby boom and then Generation X.  And then, Generation X seemed to keep extending, and the baby boomer seemed to keep (unclear). It's like, no, baby boomer just doesn't just mean forty.  A baby boomer was forty in 1984--then that's the baby boom.  You can't just make forty the baby boomer for this--and no, that was people coming from the war [World War II, WWII] that had children that were born in the '40s [1940s] that were in their forties in the '80s [1980s], that was the baby boomer (laughter).  So, the Generation X that were born in the '70s [1970s] that are now--if you take 1970 and go to 2005, that's thirty-five.  That's you know, Generation X.  So, the hip-hop generation is a part of Generation X, but then you have Pepsi [PepsiCo, Inc.] calling it Generation Next, and it's a whole bunch of other coined phrases, or whatever.  And I think what happened is, we're in another generation's time that hasn't really been defined yet.  And you know, just to make it Generation X versus the baby boomers--well baby boomers are now sixty.  It was twenty more years since '80 [1980], when they were, you know, Ronald Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] baby boomer people, so to speak--that's the president.  So, yeah, I just think that it's more of a cultural--a world phenomenon now than it ever has been.  And in that sense, it's probably affected the planet or impacted the planet more than most music has had a chance to, for a longer run, and for more visual--like I said, the visual aspect of hip-hop has done something that the preceding music--art forms didn't have a chance to.
Story_ID: 298827
Speaker 1: Does having a white rapper like Eminem open doors for hip-hop that possibly were not open before?
Speaker 2: Eminem absolutely has opened doors on a level.  I mean, a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, and I'm specifically talking about the fact that he's white.  Does that have something to do--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm just--absolutely.  I think Eminem's success has a great impact, and a lot of people might not see it this way, but 50 Cent's success has a lot to do with Eminem, to be honest.  Because what the average lay person might not know about radio stations--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: The average person, or the lay person, so to speak, might not know that there are certain record store--chain stores, that won't hold hip-hop, until this day.  Or, they won't hold hip-hop that has a parental advisory stamp on it, you know--little mom and pop shops, you know, do what they do, pick and choose.  But store chains, like Kmart--
Speaker 1: Wal-Mart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.].
Speaker 2: --Wal-Mart, the mart stores, so to speak, or whatever.  There's only a certain kind of hip-hop that's going to be in those stores, or whatever.  Unless you sell a certain amount, and once that happens, you know, the phenomena will overtake it, because money is going to speak louder than anything else.  But, what Eminem did, was he got to radio stations that notoriously wouldn't play hip-hop, and by him breaking through in that sense, it's almost like if you take the four -isms that I call racism, sexism, ageism, classism--those -isms exist with or without us, music or not.  And those -isms play into the psyche of the diaspora of what goes on.  So, in the racism sense, there is a segment of white America that looks for themselves to be a hero.  And Eminem being as proficient as he is in doing what he does as a rapper, opened doors that weren't open before.  And in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For all rappers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for--yeah, for most rappers I would say.  And by him being, say a white artist that could get a station that the average black rapper couldn't get, it created a pathway where 50 Cent now knows how to go to that space.  Because it's Eminem's label [Shady Records], and Eminem has 50 Cent on it.  So, there's always a ripple effect of what happens when, you know--from jazz all the way through.  Once white America accepts it, then who they accept also has, quote, unquote a chance to have bigger success.
Story_ID: 298828
Speaker 1: --It was the beginning of what the problem was with Will Smith.  I've always had a problem when people said he was a sell-out, or whatever the hell they wanted to say about him, because Will Smith was, again, one of the most raw, authentic, true rappers ever, and he still is, that ever came in hip-hop.  But because white America accepted him on a level that they hadn't accepted most rappers, they looked at it as something must be wrong, it must be something else, he must be doing--and Will never catered to anybody, he did what he did, and that's it, it's simple.  Will was the first guy that smiled.  "Yo, what's up (unclear)," you know, we had an energy and Will smiled.  Okay, smiling works.  That's just, you know, (laughter) almost metaphysical on some level.  He looked like he enjoyed what he did, he looked like it was fun.  So, you know, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons made the joke, and he said, "Well, Will Smith, have you met him?" He's like, "Yeah, and his rhyme--nobody would put in a rhyme, 'I got punched in my eye,'" and he said, "Well what were you doing?"  He said, "I was holding my eye."  That's very real.  That's always going to have an appeal.  And I think what happens in the dichotomy, in the racist sense, we look for ourselves to validate things.  So, I looked at 'Good Times' because it was a black sitcom, basically.  That's why I tuned it. It's a rarity to see blacks on TV.  It's on--'The Jeffersons.'  So, I sought that out.  I would assume, even though white America has way more examples for itself or whatever, you're still going to look to what relates to you.  So, when they saw 'Seinfeld,' and 'Cheers' and 'Friends,' they said, "Well, where are the black people on it?"  Well, it was like, hello--memo.  There's a lot of white people that don't really hang with black people.  And if they're looking at, you know, their six friends, that's their friends.  It is what it is, so it's going to have that platform.  However, in that dichotomy, the thing that hip-hop has done--because you have a black--predominantly black music form that a lot of white America likes--so it's natural that when somebody white comes along that's proficient, they're going to support that, of course.  Like, wow, it's almost like in a reverse sense, Eminem is the anomaly.  So, it's like, just like we look for the black TV show on television, there's a white guy in rap?  I need to see what that's about on it's own.  And then, in that sense, again, I think there's a part of racism that's blatant, overt, and attacking, and then there's a part that's subtle and innocent, it's just natural.  Why wouldn't you want to see more of yourself?  It just is what it is.  So, why wouldn't they want to spend--I saw old white businessmen buying Eminem, especially around the time when he got nominated for the Grammy [Award], I mean for the Oscar [Academy Award] even, for his song ['Lose Yourself'].  So, I didn't look at it in the sense of the malicious side of racism, I call it the undercurrent, the reality thing of it, you know.  There're some people, yeah that's still rooted in the deep ugliness of it.  But on another level, it's a natural progression.  Actually, hip-hop has to have that in it in order to sustain.  It's not going to just sustain just being black, so to speak.  Because nothing really has a real impact unless it has a global impact at some level.  Otherwise, it dies out quicker.
Story_ID: 298829
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the global impact of hip-hop like in places like Japan--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or Korea?  Have you been to other countries where is--hip-hop is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've actually gone to countries when hip-hop was very, very early in its impact, when it was (laughter) phenomenally an undercurrent, even globally.  Now it's like--not under, it's pop culture now.  But it was an undercurrent, it was almost like the alternative.  And I think what I mean when I say the connectivity that hip-hop has always had, is there's a rebellion in youth that's natural, whether you take it all the way back to Elvis [Elvis Presley] and, "Oh my God, he shook his pelvis, I can't believe--," you know, what was cutting edge for that point or whatever.  Because it's almost like the next generation's job--to push the envelope.  It's just what it is.  As a teenager you don't want what your parents wanted, you want your thing.  You're making your path, or whatever.  Yeah, you're going to get some bumps, you're not going to know what you--you know, you got to learn along the way, but in the learning, it's trial and error, and you're doing it.  So, I was able to see, you know, from Run-D.M.C. and watching Japanese kids with Adidas on--and, you know, I did a show in Brazil in 1988, even, New Year's in 1988, and they were just getting on with the break dancing thing, but it was big to them, and passe to us.  But you know, I get off the airplane and they got a bunch of break-dancers on the floor, to welcome me into Brazil.  Because you know, for them, that's their culture and that's how they see it or whatever.  And a lot of American culture still sets the tone for the world, quite frankly.  Because, you know, I'm sure we glorify ourselves, but we definitely glorify ourselves to the world.  So, when the world gets a piece of it, they take what they see is relevant.  So, you can't dictate the heroes to them.  So, to them, it's like "Well, we know that guy's not hot, but we like Public Enemy."  Because Public Enemy was one of the first groups that had this phenomenal global following, before anybody else did.  And it was because of what they said.  And because what they were saying was political and radical, so to speak--you know, the fact that Chuck D would be like "Who gives an F about a Grammy [Award]," or, you know, "Well, F him and John Wayne," talking about John Wayne, and, "Elvis was a hero to most, but he never meant, to me, he was a straight up racist, simple and plain.  Motherfuck him and John Wayne."  Like oh, wow, what did they say?  So dealing with it, from that energy, the global side of it, is not caught in our politics.  Also, there's a backlash of America going on, so anybody that seems rebellious in America, is embraced on a certain level, in certain pockets of the world.  So, hip-hop, again, being the music of a rebellion.  And then, of course, you know, you have writers poetically rewriting our stories and making it much--there was a little thing in the Bronx [New York] where they made it sound like it was, you know, Harry Potter and, you know, The Sorcerer's Stone ['Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone,' J.K. Rowling].  Grandmaster Flash actually spun the turntables, and the needle--oh. You make it sound grand, it's like (making sounds) and you see it (laughter), it's like, so, for them they didn't grow up with it, so it has a more romantic impact with them.  So, yeah, it affects the--I saw that early, when it was still an undercurrent thing, and it was the cool thing for kids to do, was their sign of rebellion, wear a Public Enemy tee-shirt, and a bandana--or hat to the back, or some Adidas, like you saw Run-D.M.C. doing, basically 'cause you know that wasn't the dominant thing in their culture.  So, their teenagers did the same thing.
Story_ID: 298830
Speaker 1: I would like for you to speak to me as to why the history of hip-hop is important, and all that you've shared with us about the history of hip-hop.
Speaker 2: For me, the history of hip-hop is important just like most aspects of history.  I think that there's always jewels and things to learn from in almost any experience.  Anything that becomes a phenomenon has a beginning, a middle and end like anything else.  But it also has a reasoning and something you can't--and an intangible that you can't--you can't explain why jazz did what it did, it was something intangible, something in the spirit that resonates, whatever.  And I always said that I thought that hip-hop was created from the poverty-stricken underbelly of the Bronx [New York], New York [New York] community, for not only for the betterment on a spiritual level for the future of us economically or whatever--because I think organically, the way the universe seems to work, doctors are born because people need doctors.  Certain foods and herbs or whatever are here to heal certain diseases, and so on--it's like everything on the planet is here because organically whatever the master planner, or the higher power, whatever you believe in, is doing, there's a rhythm to it that you just don't have.  You know, it's like, and I tell people, we're connected whether we understand that or not.  And I think hip-hop was outcast, like [Muhammad] Ali was outcast.  And Ali became a hero, like hip-hop's on some level's a hero.  And I think it's changing and impacting so many people's lives in so many different ways. You ask most hip-hop artists what would you be doing if you weren't doing hip-hop?  Now, of course, some people take the cynical, "I'd probably be in jail, or dead or selling," blah, blah, blah, blah.  Somebody else would have been the accountant, or a broker.  You know, there would have been something else you would have done, but this had a place that meant something, and like I said, because of the upside and the potential of what it can actually do besides the millions of dollars it made, it created a balance for us on some level, an outlet.  A lot more people, especially coming from the ghetto situations, have something viable that can't be taught yet.  But I can actually intangibly do--I can actually do this--take something intangible and make something tangible out of it.  Wow, I can actually have a career as a rapper.  Wouldn't have been a thought process in 1970, but from 1980 on, it's something that people had to consider.  And definitely by the '90s [1990s] when you look at Jay Z and 50 Cent and Eminem, and the guys that are really really making money, it's like, it's really something that you could look to.  Because it's not only the rapper, the rapper needs lawyers.  He needs, you know, accountants.  He needs business people around him, which means there's more employment opportunities.  So, the history of hip-hop is important because if you look at the journey of it, it's from where it comes.  It can be inspiring to somebody to say, again, poetically as our cameraman said, to come from nothing to create this, hip-hop as it's own entity, came from nothing, and it's this billion dollar industry.  That's like kind of poetically the American dream through an art form.  Many people lived through it, many people accepted it, experienced it, or whatever.  But it in itself has basically lived the American dream.
