Story_ID: 178533
Speaker 1: Okay. My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ronald Edwin Daly.  R-O-N-A-L-D; Edwin, E-D-W-I-N; Daly, D-A-L-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois, on February 23, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the C.E.O. and chairman of Oce North America, which is a fully-owned subsidiary of Oce N.V., a Dutch company.
Story_ID: 178534
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer; simple questions.  The first one is:  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  It's a toss up.  I have to say fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: All right.  And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "If you always do what you always did, you will always get what you always got."
Speaker 1: Oh, that sounds true. (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: It's true.
Story_ID: 178535
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.  And we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ella, E-L-L-A; McCreary, M-C-C-R-E-A-R-Y; Brown, B-R-O-W-N.  McCreary is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is June 22.  She was born in 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she born here in--
Speaker 2: She was born in Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Mobile, Alabama.  Okay.  All right.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can only go back to her parents.  I never met her father, because he died before I was born.  My grandmother lived with us.  She died in 1961 or 1960, probably.  So I knew my grandmother, my mother was one of thirteen children.  She was one of three sets of twins, which I think is pretty rare.  Her twin passed away at birth.  She--I guess the family was probably, you know, evenly split, I think she had probably five sisters and seven brothers, and God knows how many cousins I had, 'cause each one of those went off and produced quite a few kids, except for my mother.  My mother only had two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother and myself.
Speaker 1: Are most of her relatives still in Mobile?
Speaker 2: I can't say most of her siblings--first of all, they dispersed from Mobile, you know.  A lot of them were part of the northern migration in the '40s [1940s], came to Chicago [Illinois].  They went to places like Flint, Michigan; some went to Georgia, some were in Atlanta [Georgia]; some in Columbus [Ohio]; some in Florida.  I doubt that any of them live in Mobile anymore.  There may be some nieces and nephews and cousins down there.  But outside of my mother and her younger sister and an older brother, I don't think any of the siblings were left.
Story_ID: 178536
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down through the family about what life was like in your family in the nineteenth century or, you know, during slavery or the Civil War or any of those kinds of stories?
Speaker 2: I never heard any of those stories.  I know my grandmother was part African and part Indian.  I know my grandfather was part white.  I know one story that's passed was his family sort of disowned him because he married this very dark-skinned woman.  That was a no-no for light-skinned African Americans to marry dark-skinned African Americans then.  So I know there were some problems, and I think his family probably disowned him because of that.  So that's a story that's been passed down.  They didn't necessarily grown up right in Mobile [Alabama], because they were farmers.  So I heard stories about, you know, cows and, you know.  My mother [Ella McCreary Brown] used to always talk about her older sisters having to work, so she'd take care of the babies.  And so those were the kinds of things I used to hear about.  But stories about slavery, no one ever talked to me about that.  No.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about race relations in Mobile at all in those--before they moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I knew it was tough to be black in Mobile, and tough to be black anywhere in the South, you know.  And face, it, I went through my teen years in the '60s [1960s], so the great Civil Rights Movement was going on.  So, I mean, it was really obvious to me that, you know, to be black meant you could be murdered at will almost. I remember one of the most frightening things in my life was walking down to the local candy store when I was about eight years old to buy some candy and saw a piece of paper blowing in the wind on the ground and picked it up, and it was a centerfold of Jet magazine, and it was a picture of Emmett Till, his face.  Because Jet magazine ran a two-page spread of his face, you know, after they had beaten him and everything, and that scared me to death.  But that told me all I needed to know about the South, you know.  And I also remembered my family, you know, some of my family members lining up with other folks outside of Roberts Temple [Roberts Temple Church of God, Chicago, Illinois] on the South Side on 35th Street to go view his body.  I wouldn't--gonna go.  I wasn't gonna go.  I had seen that picture on the ground.  There was nothing I wanted to do with that, so I stood outside and waited by the car.  But, you know, I grew up knowing what the South was capable of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember [Michael] Schwerner, [Andrew] Goodman and [James] Chaney.  And I remember the bombing of the church in Atlanta [Georgia].  You know, all that; you know, Birmingham [Alabama] hoses, you know.  So yeah.  Whether or not the consciousness of slavery was in my mind from the stories I got from my family or what I just learned growing up as a kid, you know.  I knew these things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, as far as you know, your mother's family was centered around Mobile.  They never lived anywhere else.  Right?
Speaker 2: And my father's, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: They were all right in that area.  You know, I've heard of towns called Burnt Corn, Alabama; Bernice, Alabama, you know, where the family had a farm or, you know, some of the kids lived, you know.  I used to ask crazy questions when I was a kid, like, "Why would you name a town Burnt Corn?"  It's probably, maybe, somebody had a still there and named the town, said (unclear).  But, you know, yeah, I used to hear stuff like that.
Story_ID: 178537
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your father's side of the family.  What's your father's full name and--
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Edwin Walter Daly, D-A-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was September 23, 1919; also, Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know very much about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Actually, I probably know a little bit more about his than I do about my mother's [Ella McCreary Brown].  My father was one of three children.  His father died at thirty-six from tuberculosis.  So my father grew up without a dad in some tough times.  His mother remarried, didn't like his stepfather, I knew that.  There were a lot of hand-me-downs from family members.  And I sense that he and his sister that was next to him in age, were considered sort of like outcasts of the family 'cause they never really had anything.  The second sister, the younger sister, was actually parceled out to a relative in California.  She actually grew up separately from the rest of them.  My father's father had two brothers that I know--three brothers--four, that I know of for sure.  And all of them came to Chicago [Illinois].  One actually passed for white, so we never saw much of him.  The oldest brother, John, I used to get together with him every now and then.  I remember he was big and into home movies and stuff, and he was the first person I ever knew--I've ever known that had a camera, you know, with a projector and all that stuff to shoot movies.  And so we used to go over his house and see movies, but not very often.  And then the two uncles that I used to see a lot, my father's uncles, Alfred [ph.] and Early [ph.].  I never knew until Early died that his name was really Canute.
Speaker 1: Canute?
Speaker 2: C-A-N-U-T-E.  I used to go over--my father used to love going over to visit with them.  They were all into horse races and bookies and stuff, and drinking Old Granddad, laughing, loud talking and card playing, and all that kind of stuff.  So I knew them pretty well.  But I didn't see a lot of them.  My father is somebody who'd worked two jobs for the first seventeen years of my life, so he mostly worked and slept.  And so when I saw him it wasn't a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did anybody in your family tell stories about that side of the family back into the nineteenth century or did they--
Speaker 2: I--you know, I--again, you know, I didn't have contact with grandparents, you know, 'cause he died, you know, or they lived somewhere else.  And my father's folks were all real light-skinned blacks, and they didn't want to talk about being black or slavery an awful lot, you know.  So, you know, I didn't hear much of that, you know.  But, again, you know, when I was a kid, I was an avid reader of history books.  For me, history was my thing, man.  I loved reading biographies, and I knew all about George Washington Carver and Booker T. Washington, Frederick Douglass and all his deeds and stuff.  You know, from reading I knew, so, whether or not my memory of the nineteenth century or even before in slavery and all of that, whether it was put in by family members or whether it was because of what I read.  It's kind of hard for me to figure it out right now.
Story_ID: 178538
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you introduced to black history by the schools or was it--
Speaker 2: No.  This was---black history wasn't introduced in the schools until after I graduated from public school.  Black history became the rage, you know, after the Civil Rights Movement had--not ended, 'cause it still hasn't ended--but not until, you know, the late '60s [1960s], when it became a very popular thing to have, you know, African American history or black history in high schools or in the universities, and you could actually get a degree in black history at a school.  But that was, you know, after I had graduated from high school in '64 [1964].  So, no, there was no African American history.
Speaker 1: So was it basically because of your own interest--I mean, in stumbling across this material at the library or something that got you involved?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Not stumbled.  I sought out stuff for reading--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about the past.  No.  And like I said, history fascinated me.  I mean, I'm still a--I don't want to say I'm a history buff, 'cause I don't read history books as much as I used to.  But I was just fascinated by how certain people beat the odds to be what they were.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So you read a lot of biography?
Speaker 2: I read a lot of biographies.  I mean, not just about blacks, but whites, too; by anybody that tried to do something great.  I read biographies of [President] George Washington and [President] Thomas Jefferson, but also Booker T. Washington, and like I said, you know, George Washington Carver.  So I was aware.  Now, ask me if I ever knew who Sojourner Truth was back then, no, I didn't know, 'cause there was no avenue to know that.  Okay.  Later I found out.  But I knew about the railroad, the Underground Railroad from the South to the North; I knew about that.  I knew about abolitionists.  I knew about the riots in New York City [New York] back in the 1860s.
Speaker 1: Now that's kind of obscure, too.  That's the kind of information that, not until recently, you know, people talk about that much.
Speaker 2: Well, it's stuff that I read, though, I mean, you know, so, you know, yeah.  I mean, if blacks were hung and stuff in New York City, because the Irish didn't want to go to fight in the Civil War to defend them, you know.  All that kind of stuff happens.  So, yeah, I knew about it.  But it's not because anybody taught me in schools, 'cause I read it on my own or I watched it on some TV history program, you know.  And then, of course, the Civil Rights Movement, you know, unveiled itself right in front of my eyes on TV every night.  So, you know, all you got to do is turn on the news, and I always watch the news, even as a little kid I watched the--not a little kid; when I was ten, eleven, twelve, I started watching the news.  I had unusual taste as a kid.  And, you know, I could see the hoses and the dogs and, you know, and that.  I remember Viola Liuzzo, the white lady from the Freedom Riders getting shot, you know, marching on Selma [Alabama] or one of those towns, you know, so.  You know, that stuff is vivid in my mind.  But then don't forget, I was, you know, in '63 [1963], I was sixteen years old.  So I was, of course, of an age to absorb that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] marching on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Some of my friends actually marched.  Okay.  I never did.  But I remember people that did it.
Story_ID: 178539
Speaker 1: Now I'mma get to that--more about that period, but can you tell us about your mother [Ella McCreary Brown]; what was she like?  Or is she still--yeah, she's still alive.
Speaker 2: My mother's still alive, my mother's eighty-one years old.
Speaker 1: What is she like and, you know, how was she brought up, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, you know, she was a laborer, you know.  She used to clean house.  As a matter of fact, I was just over at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] talking to the alumni, and they wanted to know how I started at the bottom of the company I work at and worked my way up to the top.  I explained that my affiliation with Northwestern University goes back to when I was four years old, because my mother used to clean house in Evanston for rich white families, and she would take me along sometimes, and she always say, "Ronnie, there's Northwestern University.  Maybe you'll go there one day."  So I used to grow up thinking maybe I'll go to Northwestern University.  So she put those kinds of things in my mind.  But she cleaned house.  My father [Edwin Daly] and mother used to--actually, they came to the North from the South because of this family.  This was a Jewish family, and they were in the retailing business.  And the husband of this family got a job to run a men's clothing store in the Palmer House [Chicago, Illinois].  And so he moved to Chicago [Illinois] and he asked my mom and dad in 1941 to move up and come work for him, 'cause they had done work for him down in the South.  So they came to the North, and, you know, my father would tend bar at their parties and my mother would clean up, you know.  And then my mother would come out and clean their house two days a week.  My father's working two jobs, so she didn't need to work all the time.  Then later when things got tight, she went to work.  She was an elevator operator, she--you know, she worked in a daycare center; and all that kind of stuff.  But, you know, neither one of them were educated.  My mother's education ended in fourth grade.  I think my father's ended in eighth grade.  But they're both smart people.  My father was a bookie on the side.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: And ran numbers.  So he had stuff in his head all the time.  And my mother was very religious, grew up in a Pentecostal family, you know.  And she was always going to church.  My early memories are going to church three nights a week and all day on Sunday, you know; and people shouting and tarrying for the Holy Ghost and all that.  My father grew up Catholic.  He wanted no part of it (laughter).  So those two clashed on religion.  And then at some point, you know--my father used to always complain about my mother forcing her religion down my throat.  My father said, "Leave them alone.  Let them make their own decision."  And at one point I did.
Speaker 1: And what did you decide since we--
Speaker 2: I don't go to church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just don't go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--so, anyway, my mother was into religion.  And then, you know, every--you know, the Pentecostal religion is so strict, okay, you know, people called us holy rollers as kids, right.  It's such a strict religion that sometimes, you know, people go astray; called backsliding (laughter).  So, you know, every now and then, my mother would backslide, but she'd always come back, you know.  And then she became a preacher and she'd go all over the South preaching at revivals and stuff, leaving me with other people, you know.  My father was working during this time.  And that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So she became a minister in the church--a preacher in the church and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  She did.  She's still a preacher today at eighty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a stroke and she's not talking as well as she used to, but she still will get on your case with her Bible in her hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, she's given up on me, but she tries it with other people.
Story_ID: 178540
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  How did your parents [Edwin Daly and Ella McCreary Brown] meet?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  I guess they just met like people meet.  They met at a party or something and fell in love, and, you know, started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Down in Mobile [Alabama]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --down in Mobile, because they came together.  They were married when they came together to the North to Chicago [Illinois] in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you just have one brother.  Right?
Speaker 2: I have one brother.  He's two years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us about your father's personality.  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a laborer.  Funny stories.  He told me he was a porter.  To me that sounded like a reporter.
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: So kids at school would ask me what your father did, I said, "He works for a newspaper.  He's a reporter," you know.  "Bull," you know.  "Your father ain't no reporter.  Ain't no black reporters around."  I said, "Au contraire.  I'm sure there are."  But he cleaned up a clothing store part time during the day, Broadstreet's, the store with the guy he came to the North with.  And then he worked at Continental Can for close to thirty years.
Speaker 1: Over on 76th and--street?
Speaker 2: No.  It was over on the Northwest Side somewhere at that time.  Okay.  And he'd go out North Avenue somewhere.  And what he did was, he cleaned up the presses that printed the cans every night.  That was his job, you know.  And so he worked there from four o'clock 'til midnight; and then he'd work his daytime job from seven until around one o'clock in the afternoon.  He'd come home while I was in school, cop a two-hour nap, and then get up and go to work.  I saw him--almost never saw him, you know.  And then on the weekends he was tired, 'cause he'd worked all week, you know, so.  My father spent a lot of time, like I said, working and sleeping; which is a good thing and a bad thing.  It's a bad thing because I didn't see as much of him as a kid, but it was a good thing in that he put a work ethic into me, I mean, you know.  He used to say stuff like, "Ain't no such thing as a free lunch," and I buy that.  You know.  Nothing's free.  Nothing comes free.  But my father, because of his background of growing up without a father and not having much, had it in his mind that he was never supposed to have anything.  So some of his favorite phrases that he would say almost anytime I talked to him was, "Poor Daly.  You ain't supposed to have nothing."  And he'd say that to himself.  But he'd also say to me that, "Boy, you gonna have it all.  You gonna have it made.  You gonna be somebody."  He would tell me that all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, there's a good and a bad thing the way he was.
Story_ID: 178541
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about growing up.  Tell me about the neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Growing up for me was interesting.  You know, as a matter of fact, I've said that I was going to write a book, and that I was going to title it 'The Nomads.'  Because we were always moving or so it seemed to me, you know.  We would move into a neighborhood that was integrated, where blacks were starting to move in.  And then as soon as the neighborhood turned all black, we'd move again.  And the reason was, you know, the neighborhood always seemed to get bad when it was all black.  City services [in Chicago, Illinois] started to decline.  The grass started to disappear on the streets.  We lived in an apartment building, so, you know, the owners--you got different owners or the owners that had them didn't take good care of them.  So my parents [Edwin Daly and Ella McCreary Brown] were always on the search of the next new nice neighborhood.  So I remember doing that three or four times in my early years.  And then I found myself doing it, too, you know.  Once I got married and we started to have children, I would move constantly seeking the next nice place to live.  So, I mean, I remember that.  That was something I remember.  I remember living--going to schools where white kids were, and not being intimidated by them at all, but noticing that there was a difference in the way they viewed the world and the way I viewed the world.  They expected to have everything.  And I had my father saying we ain't supposed to have anything.  Right.  So I could see a difference there.  Smells.  Food, think probably food.  You know, the movie 'Soul Food' was right on, I mean, the black family was about eating and getting together, stuff like that, which--you know, back then, we always sat down to dinner together.  My father was home from work, we ate together.  And which is something that doesn't really happen anymore.  So I remember the smells in the kitchen.  My mother is a tremendous cook.  You know, even at eighty, eighty-one, I bet she'd be in the kitchen and still burn really well.  As a matter of fact, she taught me how to cook.  I used--I had no older sisters, no older siblings; so I used to sit in the kitchen with my mother and watch her cook.  So I learned how to make pies from scratch, and biscuits from scratch.  I used to dazzle girlfriends when I was a teenager by bringing them over and fixing dinner for them.  I had a different method to my madness.  My mother was always trying to get me into things.  So I was a Cub Scout at some point.  She had me in the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], taking art lessons, until I came home with a picture of a nude I had drawn.  My father saw that and says, "He's out of there."  So that was the end of that.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Eight years old.
Speaker 1: Eight.  Oh.
Speaker 2: In high school, I, as a freshman, I took up violin.  So my mother got me into music lessons.  I went down to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] the summers where they taught children's violin classes.  I took violin.  So my mother was about teaching me things that I probably wouldn't ordinarily have learned in a black family.  It was a joke in my neighborhood about me playing violin.  The kids used to stand in front of the house and laugh at my squeaks.  But, I won't say my childhood was real tough.  I had two parents that worked, you know.  So we had really three incomes coming in.  So, you know, I guess back then we were considered lower-middle class. So things weren't bad, but they weren't great either.  There's a lot of stuff I didn't have.  We never owned a car.  So I remember buses.  So, you want smell, how about the gas fumes (laughter).  Or there were the trolley cars on the West Side--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Diesel (laughter).
Speaker 2: --so there was the electric cars with the snapping sounds overhead of the electricity.  Those are sounds I remember.
Story_ID: 178542
Speaker 1: Did you live mostly on the West Side [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: We grew up--yeah, on the West Side.  We grew up on the West Side.  We used to live at 16th--18th and Saint Louis, then 16th and Saint Louis.  And then we moved to 18th and Komensky.  And at 18 I got married, and I moved to West End Avenue near Keeler.  And then I moved to the South Side a while later, as an adult.  I remember schools.  Like I said, they were integrated.  I remember going to white schools with white kids all my life.  I graduated from Farragut High School [Chicago, Illinois] in '64 [1964], and that school at the time was probably 60 percent white, 40 percent black.  So, I mean, I had no aversion to ever being around anybody white.  It certainly didn't intimidate me.  I learned that I could compete with them in school.  I graduated from elementary school [Roswell B. Mason Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] when I was twelve years old, high school when I was sixteen. I flunked a semester.  I was still only sixteen when I graduated.  I went from being the ultimate super student in elementary school to being a punk in high school.  You know, I just got tired of the religion and sticking my nose to the grindstone, and decided I would have a whole lot of fun.  And so I did.  And at twelve I was in the alley smoking cigarettes, so that's a smell.  And I started drinking wine with my buddies when I was thirteen years old, and got a vulgar gutter mouth.  And I started chasing girls, you know.  Face it, I was a freshman in high school, a sophomore at thirteen.  The girls I was with were fifteen, you know.  And I was starting to grow, so I'm chasing older women, and so I was a mess to deal with as a teenager.  And not unlike teenagers today, they're moving into puberty and adolescence, then they start to "seek the darker side" through the--a phrase from 'Star Wars,' you know.  The dark side of the Force.  So I did some of that.  And then by the time I hit my junior year, I woke up and said, "Hey, man, you're blowing your life, so get better in school."  And I did.  Other sounds, baseball.  Played baseball every day until I was probably twelve years old, then I discovered basketball when I got to high school, and they were dribbling the basketballs at the playgrounds.  I remember playing basketball all day long in the summers.  I got so dark in the summers, I looked like shoe leather from the sun, you know.  And there were the older guys, you know, they were seniors in high school playing with the little guys who were sophomores and stuff.  At lunchtime, the older guys would go get half gallons of beer, and the little guys would go buy bologna and bread, and we'd have bologna sandwiches and beer, and we'd just keep playing basketball.  I did that.  Those were smells and sounds.  All the stores were owned by Jewish people in our neighborhood.  Some people say that's bad.  I say that's good, 'cause if the Jewish folks weren't there, there wouldn't have been businesses in our neighborhood.  There weren't a lot of black entrepreneurs back then.  I remember Sam's Grocery Store.  He gave welfare mothers credit, you know, like crazy.  They would pay when their checks came.  If it hadn't been for him, they probably wouldn't had food to eat.  So I remember that.  That's part of what I remember, growing up.
Story_ID: 178543
Speaker 1: You know what?  When I became a supervisor at the company I used to be at, [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons], you know, the blacks immediately jumped to the conclusion I was a sell-out Uncle Tom, 'cause I got to be somebody.
Speaker 2: I bet they all didn't believe that.
Speaker 1: No.  They all didn't believe that.  I had some close friends who didn't believe it at all.  But a whole bunch of them did, you know.  So the white guys were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Some of that was hating.  You know what they say (laughs)?
Speaker 1: --yeah.  Some of the white guys betrayed me as the affirmative action hire.  And the black ones would say, "You just a sell-out."  How you win?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's tough.
Speaker 1: Did you ever read [HM] Ellis Cose's book--
Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about.  I heard him on public radio, but I never read his book.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'The Rage of the Privileged Class.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was about middle managers, black middle managers that have moved as far as they could up in the corporate hierarchy, and they were just stopped at middle management and they couldn't go any higher, even though they had achieved.  And the feelings of the whites were, "Hey, you're an affirmative action hire.  This is as far as you're supposed to go."  And they would get upset about that because they knew they could do as much as some of the young white men that seemed to move up ahead of them, okay.  But on the other hand, they'd go home and complain to their families and friends, and their families and friends look at them and go, "Are you a fool?  You got a nice house and a Mercedes Benz.  Who are you to complain?"  So they can't talk to either side about their problems.  So they just let the rage build up inside of them, to absolutely try to live that, you know.  Cose was deadly.
Story_ID: 178544
Speaker 1: First of all, since we got on the subject, I don't believe in reparations.  I don't believe in spending all that energy talking about reparations.  Let's just say the federal government of the United States gave every black American twenty thousand dollars, and then we spend it.  What would change?  Nothing.  The world would still be as we see it.  The money would be gone, and some of our people would be just as poor as they always were.  Okay.  Now if she wants to take some money and donate it to some education funds, if she want to do some--do something with upgrading our schools and paying our teachers more or giving us better schoolbooks or something like that, yeah.  But just to hand people a check because of our--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But don't you think the call for them is a just call?
Speaker 1: I don't know whether it is or it isn't.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You don't think we're due anything after--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't think anybody today is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --three hundred years of slavery or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, not necessarily--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the last hundred or so years of discrimination, which is still going on in some places even as we speak--in most places as we speak?
Speaker 1: There is discrimination going on, and I ask myself the question, "Okay.  First of all, where else would we go to have any more chances than we have here?  And the answer is, no place in the world.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But the question was though, do you think it's just to ask for compensation for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --redress for wrongs committed against a people?
Speaker 1: No.  No, I don't.
Speaker 2: So would you say that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I said I wasn't sure initially--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --but now I'm saying, no, I don't agree.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you think reparations in itself is a bad idea for anybody?
Speaker 1: For anybody.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What happened happened.  All I care about is what you do in the future.  You know, there's opportunity in this country for people to achieve and to succeed.  There is.  Okay.  My bigger problem with what goes on with black people is the fact that we don't go to school anymore.  Okay.  If you look at the statistics for the city of Chicago [Illinois], sixty-seven percent of the kids in our poverty schools in the inner city don't graduate from high school.  Okay.  So for a hundred who enter, thirty-three come out.  That's a bigger problem than getting some money from the federal government because of slavery.  I'd rather see us focus on solving that problem.  It's a function of--maybe reparations could be the right thing.  But where do you want to put your focus?  Okay.  So it goes back to the question I asked you before.  If you gave everybody twenty thousand dollars, okay, how long would that last and what would they do with that?  I am not of the mind that everybody that got that twenty thousand dollars will put it to some really good cause, either for themselves or their children.  Okay.  I'm not sure of that.  Okay.  So now, the twenty thousand dollars is gone, and we've gotten that off white America's conscience, but we're still as bad off as we were before.  Okay.  Twenty thousand dollars is like [President George W.] Bush's tax cut of three hundred or six hundred.  It don't last.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what Japanese-Americans got after--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they got twenty thousand dollars after--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --World War II [WII], after--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I don't know if that is what lifted up the Japanese population, as much as the Japanese culture around study, study, study; work, work, work; family, family, family.  Okay.  So what was the reparations?  Did that lift them up or was it something else?
Speaker 2: No.  They actually got it later than--how many--it was--I don't think it made that kind of difference, but what it did was, I think it was some material --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, they got money. And some Jews got some money out of it.
Speaker 2: --you know, answer to a question of justice basically.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know.  You've wronged me, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, where's my compensation?
Speaker 1: And I'm saying, yeah, that might be true, okay, that slavery was unjust, okay.
Speaker 2: It might be true.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.  It is true.  I mean, I'm not denying slavery was unjust.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: But, face it.  Slavery exists today and it's blacks trading blacks in West Africa.  Today.  Okay.  That's a fact.  Okay.  If you go into Cameroon and other places in West Africa, you will see fourteen-year-old black boys chained and sold to other blacks.  Okay.  So that exists today.  Is that unjust?  Hell, yes.  Okay.  That was the way the world operated back then.  Okay.  Unjust.  But that's the way the world works.  Slavery existed in South America.  Slavery existed all over Africa.  Okay.  We can't cry about it forever.  We can't.  I'd rather focus on today and tomorrow rather than the past, and I'm going back to my original point.  If you gave me twenty thousand dollars today, if I gave it to every black family in the United States or every black child, okay, when the money's gone, what's changed, is my question.  And if we haven't focused on education and if we haven't focused on black on black crime, okay, and if we haven't focused on the family structures--you and I have already talked about 'Tally's Corner' and the rest, you solve nothing.  And then what do you do?  The apology's been made.  The money's been given out.  But we've made no gain.  Okay.  So I would rather those folks that are out there harping on reparations and trying to make white America feel guilty, start telling the little secrets that are very evident to me, whether they see them or not, we got a problem with families, we got problems with schools, we got a problem with black on black crime, we have a problem with teenage pregnancy, and we got a problem with drugs.  And I'd rather address those, and they'll still continue to try to make white America feel guilty.  That's my opinion.
Speaker 2: I don't think it's so much about making them feel guilty as it is about making them provide compensation for wrongs.  If someone robs you--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: [HM] Dorothy Tillman wanted an apology the other day from Lehman Brothers for slavery. Okay. 'Cause the Lehman Brothers themselves owned slaves in the 1850s.  She wanted an apology from the company.
Speaker 2: She wanted an acknowledgement of--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: She wanted an apology.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I read the article.  Okay.  She wanted an acknowledgement.  The acknowledgement came, 'cause they filed city documents to say that the Lehman Brothers--I mean, they wouldn't have found out this unless they filed the documents.  That's the law.  And one thing is, Lehman Brothers is the only company of all the companies that filed documents that admitted to slavery.  So if anything they were being honest.  Okay.  Okay.  Now, who didn't--who wasn't involved?  Okay.  I mean a lot of people were and they benefited from it.  Anybody in textiles in the South was in slavery back then.  So I mean it happened.  Okay.  Okay.  I'm about now.  And I'm about tomorrow.  Okay.  And I just don't think a small sum of money given out to everybody is going to do any good.  So I'd rather put my efforts behind what could fix today's problems.  That's what I'm about.
Story_ID: 178545
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Holland Elementary [Chicago, Illinois] on 16th and Christiana 'til I was in fourth grade.  And then I went to Roswell B. Mason [Roswell B. Mason Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  It became an upper-grade center.  I went there until I graduated and went to high school.  And then I went to Farragut High School [later Farragut Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side.  So all of this was on the West Side.  And I didn't go to college until I started working full-time.  So I worked at R.R. Donnelley starting at seventeen.  I went in there as an apprentice proofreader reading telephone directories, you know, from type--that was set on linotype machines.  And then I decided that I didn't want to be a proofreader, 'cause my personality type and sitting there reading names, addresses, and phone numbers, didn't fit. I'm the ultimate extrovert.  That's a very introverted job.  I needed to do something where I can be out moving around, dealing with people and stuff.  So I applied for a semi-quasi-management job as a production coordinator in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Now, we're going too fast (laughs).
Speaker 2: Okay.  '64 [1964] I started and I was seventeen.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Yeah.  I know, but we were still going too fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We jumped from grade school all the way in about five sentences--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: All right.  So, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so I just need you to go back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you want me to go to college?  You know, I--where did I go to college, in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Well, no.  I wanted to go back to--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's go back.
Speaker 1: --and ask you about some of the teachers in school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right.  I get you.
Speaker 1: --and stuff that you remember and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that took an interest in you in school that you remember that were really important in your development?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, there were.  God, I can't remember.  There was a teacher I had in elementary school.  He was Italian.  I can't remember his name.  Now, see, I'm fifty-six, so, the disk drive doesn't turn like it used to.  You know, I can't jump today like I used to, but there's some things I remember really well, but I can't remember his name.  But he really nurtured me a lot.  And there was a teacher, Mr. McGovern [ph.].  Okay.  That was a teacher that pushed me to excel.
Speaker 1: What did he teach?
Speaker 2: McGovern was probably history, and--no.  McGovern was social sciences, and the Italian teacher was history, because I remember him telling me about the end of World War II, and Asia, you know, discovering, us discovering countries like Korea; like we never knew they were existing, you know; there are differences, all Asians don't--just because they sort of look alike, they're different people.  And I remember that kind of stuff.  And that was mind opening.  Favorite classes in elementary school.  I was really good in English, social science, history.  I was okay in math.  You know, since I was so young when it was time to graduate from eighth grade, they put some special rules in place for me to graduate.  I had to have a twelfth-point high school reading average--twelfth-grade high school reading average on tests, and a tenth-grade math score to be able to graduate.  And I did that.  Yeah.  So they had no choice but to let me graduate from elementary school at twelve.  There was--I remember there was a teacher that I hated, Miss Tetra [ph.].  She was mean and she scared me, you know.  But I didn't like her very much.  Big.  Wore a fur coat and gym shoes to work, even before that was fashionable.  Right?  You know.  I remember a teacher in the first grade that I liked.  I can't remember her name, but she wasn't in one day, and we had a substitute teacher who told us--this was a science class--the next we were gonna dissect bugs.  This is first grade.  I was sick the next day.  I didn't want to come to that and see bugs.  I remember those.  These are vivid memories.  I also remember that they also had these little choruses in some of the grade levels.  I liked to sing, and I knew that if I could move my mouth certain ways, teachers would look me and go--you know, I'd see the real singers on TV, the Frank Sinatras and the--oh, God, what's his name?  Can't remember his name.  See my memory--my disk drive is slowing down again.
Speaker 1: Singer?
Speaker 2: A singer.
Speaker 1: Nat King Cole?
Speaker 2: Nat King Cole.  You know, how he would move his mouth in a certain way.  (singing)  "Unforgettable."  (singing) "Mona Lisa."  (Laughs).  You know.  So I'd do that when I was singing, and the teachers would look up and--I--you couldn't tell what was coming out of my mouth is they saw me with the moves, and they were, like, they thought I could sing.  So, it taught me I could fool people.  I remember that from elementary school.  You could sway people with body movements and stuff.  I learned that early.
Story_ID: 178546
Speaker 1: Going into high school [Farragut High School, later Farragut Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I had a homeroom teacher, Mrs. Webbs [ph.]; sweet lady, sweet lady.  I treated her like she was a dog, because I--remember I told you that I got into my punk stage.  And she would do all kinds of things for me, like, if I forgot lunch money, she'd give it to me.  There were some teachers that wanted to be especially nice.  The orchestra conductor, Mr. [Bruno] Zabinski, was especially nice to me.  There's a teacher at Farragut High School today that was teaching when I was there.  And I graduated in '64 [1964].  This is 2003.  He is still there.  He is seventy years old.  It was Mr. [William] McKeever.  I go back there as principal for a day, I always go to see McKeever.  I ask him, when is he going to leave this school.
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)
Speaker 1: He says, "I'll go in a box."  That's how much education means to him.  I always go talk to his class.  Okay.  So, yeah, guys like him, they had an impact on me.  Teachers to me back then seemed to value their craft a little bit more than they do today.  You know, teachers today are in there dressing like students.  So it's kind of hard for them to get respect, I think.  Okay.  You know, and I remember back then, every teacher, male teacher, wore a tie to school every day.  And the lady teachers dressed up as much as they could, as they could afford.  And then, you know, we got into the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], then suddenly teachers were in jeans and stuff like that; sweaters and stuff.  And some of them look like kids, I think, some of the respect (really wanes?)  What else about school.  I was--like I said, I was a screw-up in high school.  And there were teachers that knew I was capable of more that would encourage me to learn.  I just decided I wanted to have fun.  And like I said, when I got to be a junior in high school, I woke up.  The clock went off.  But then remember, as a junior, I was fifteen, so that was--should have been my early sophomore year.  And I'm getting ready to be a senior.
Speaker 2: Did you think that you were, maybe, too immature for high school?
Speaker 1: Oh, no doubt.  No doubt. I would never advocate to a twelve-year-old to go to high school.  Never. You know, because from an academic standpoint, I was ready.  I mean, I could do the work, but I didn't have the emotional.  And then I also had this thing in my mind that I was rebuking and tossing aside religion that had been forced down my throat for a large part of my life.  So I was in rebellion besides being immature.  So that was part of it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't mature.  There's no doubt about it.
Speaker 2: Now, did you--when you woke up--when you were fifteen, did you get involved in school activities at all?  I mean did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I was in the orchestra.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, and I had been on the basketball for a very short time, but I flunked myself off that, because I was in trouble all the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, so your grades were--kinda kept you off the basketball team?
Speaker 1: Oh, my grades were terrible.  I graduated from Farragut at sixteen; eightieth in a class of 105.  Yeah.  So that's not exactly, you know, a resume--a recipe for success in the world, you know.  But I started out there in accelerated classes.  I mean, I came in with these high grade-point averages, and I was only twelve.  So I was in with really smart kids and I learned that, you know, there are some smart people in this world to me.  You know, there were some really rocket scientists.  I mean, black and white.  As a matter of fact, one of the black kids in my class, he and another guy designed a rocket system.
Speaker 2: So there were rocket scientists in there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, seriously.  And they guided this rocket with a telephone with a dial.  And they told this one kid, "You dial nine, the rocket blows up.  That was so in case the rocket's gonna go through somebody's house or something, we're going to blow it up before it gets there."  The kid didn't believe him, so he dialed nine and the thing blew up and he died.  That's a real story from my high school days.
Story_ID: 178547
Speaker 1: I remember race riots during high school.  There was always fighting.
Speaker 2: There were race riots at Farragut [High School, later Farragut Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Not necessarily at Farragut.
Speaker 2: Oh, at other schools.
Speaker 1: Between Farragut and Harrison [Carter H. Harrison Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See, you know, in the summers, summer school wasn't at Farragut.  It was at Harrison.  And I think sometime in my sophomore year, one of our football players was walking to Harrison to school, and some white kid shot him in the head with a rifle and killed him.  I'll never forget his name.  Matthew Tolbert.  So that started a huge riot on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And that area around Farragut and Harrison--and Harrison, you know, was only--was less than a mile away from Farragut.  It was on the boulevard, and Farragut was--in what is Little Village today, a Latino neighborhood.  And so when Matthew Tolbert got killed, that was--there was a lot of battling between the whites and blacks.  I remember coming home from Mason School [Roswell B. Mason Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] one day, walking across the big vacant lot we used call the Prairies.  This is the Prairie State.  So I guess it applies.  It used to be right behind the Kuppenheimer Clothing Manufacturers [sic. Kuppenheimer Manufacturing Company].  It was a factory over on 18th and Karlov.  Between 18th and Karlov and 18th and Keeler, there was this huge vacant lot and a shortcut to get to Mason School.  We played basketball in the vacant lot.  I came home through the vacant lot one night.  That was at dusk in the summer, and a carload of white kids in a '49 [1949] Ford stopped on 19th Street and he pulled out a gun and he start shooting at me.  So I remember diving into the weeds.  I could hear bullets whizzing overhead.  You know, I didn't get hit, obviously.  I was, like--but that's one of my memories from growing up. I remember making a zip gun.  I don't know if you know what that is, but it where you took a piece of wood stock and put--you break and antenna off a car, you put that together, wrap it with a rope.  And then you take a nail and attach it to some really thick rubber bands, and you put a twenty-five-caliber bullet in there, and pull it back, let it go, and it would fire.  And that was the defense mechanism in case these white kids came after me.  So, you know, there was some juvenile delinquency in me a little bit; not bad, 'cause I never really got into any trouble.  I've never been arrested, but there was the preparation for this.  I mean, I'd been shot at, so I watched your back.  So I did something else.  I never fought with them.
Speaker 2: Well, were gangs a problem?
Speaker 1: They were starting to be in the--I lived in a pocket on the West Side between 18th--19th--16th and 19th Street, on Karlov and Komensky when the neighborhoods were so nice.  These were families that moved in and bought.  These are three-story apartment buildings or homes, and they really kept them up.  And the rest of the West Side was starting to deteriorate like crazy.  So the gang members were the Cobras in K-Town, and there used to be Vice Lords on the east side of Pulaski Road.  Okay.  And they would fight, but nobody shot at each other.  Somebody might get cut every now and then, you know.  It wasn't 'til the drugs started to hit the street that things got nasty.  And I wasn't living there then.  But, yeah, there were fights, there were gangs--they were always trying to recruit you, so.  You know, the Cobras were in my neighborhood.  My little oasis in the middle of this desert--never got bothered much, you know.  So we just played ball.  Softball.  But I'd seen gang members every--you know, I used to go play basketball in Franklin Park over on 14th and Kolin, I think it is.  And there were Cobras that would hang out.  Then I watched a guy get stabbed on the basketball court one day--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because he was scoring too much on this gang member.  The gang member says, "You score on my basket with me I'm going to stab you."  And he did.  And then, you know, they would tell you in tournaments in the summer, "You miss this free throw, I'm going to kill-cut you."  So I have been situations like that.  I've been afraid of gangs.  There were times I thought a gang member was going to shoot, okay.  And then some parent in my neighborhood, in this little oasis, just came up and got in the middle of this, and the gang members, they went away.  But they were kids from other neighborhoods coming into ours.  Now, I remember one story when I was in high school, I was on the frosh-soph basketball team, and we were practicing after school one night.  And I was coming home with this kid, Warren [ph.].  And Warren was a basketball player, and there was a gangster on the West Side who didn't like Warren a whole lot.  He was standing on the corner with some hooker.  She had a .38 in her purse.  So as Warren comes by, this gangster starts giving us some trouble and reaches into the hooker's purse and pulls out the .38 and points it at Warren.  Scared me to death.  Okay.  And you know, I'm fifteen years old, maybe fourteen.  And this guy later made headlines really big time on the West Side and he went to jail.  I won't even mention his name.  But he was a big time drug dealer.  Then another time I was coming home from basketball practice and we're walking down 16th Street and we got stopped by some Vice Lords.  And they knew everybody in the group that I was with but me.  So they detained me.  They said, "We're gonna kick your butt," you know.  And so I had a little money in my pocket and I sat there and shot the breeze with these guys for a while trying to talk them out of whipping me up, and say, "Hey, why don't we get some wine?"  And so we went in the liquor store on the corner and got some old guy to buy some wine, and I became their best friend, you know.  So I could talk my way out of situations.  But, yeah, I was exposed to gangs, but nothing like today.  It's nothing like today, you know.  But I can relate to what happens today because of what happened back then.  But like I said, it wasn't as violent as it is now.
Story_ID: 178548
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Farragut High School, Chicago, Illinois], did you have any idea what you were going to do after high school?  Did you have a career in mind?  Or what did you think?  Were you thinking that you had really made a mess at high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought I made a mess at high school.  I realized that.  I know I wasn't going straight to college.  I didn't even try.  But the truth is, no guidance counselor ever tried to counsel me to go to college either, which, when people ask me later in life if I'd ever been discriminated against, you know, I say, "Well, I can't think of anything," and then later it hit me.  Nobody ever counseled you.  You started at twelve, graduated at sixteen.  No matter what troubles you got in, nobody ever came to you and approached you to go to college.  And the counselors were white and black.  But see, the expectation was back then from that school, you were black, you didn't necessarily go to college.  It wasn't an expectation.  So that in itself is a form of discrimination.  In my college--in my high school yearbook it says I wanted to be a reporter, 'cause I liked the news and I liked, you know, the guys on TV, and I read a lot of newspapers.  So I thought, yeah, I would write one now, write columns.  So that's what I had in there.  When I ended up in the printing business, I used to laugh; well, that's close.  You know, I'm not in the business of creating a newspaper.  I'm printing it, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: We got magazines here, all that kind of stuff coming out of this place.  So I kind of rationalized it a little bit.  But that's what I had thought I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Now you said you paid attention to the news.  You read a lot from about age ten or eleven.
Speaker 2: Or even before then.  I was never without a book while I was in elementary school.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who did you discuss, you know, your learning with?  I mean, who did you talk to?  Was it a teacher or somebody in the family or friends?
Speaker 2: Well, with teachers.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, I loved to debate.  So I'd debate anybody.  I'd debate my friends and they'd tell me, "You know so much.  Shut up, Mr. Know-it-All."  You know, I used to drive kids crazy because I had this basic knowledge that I would use, and they didn't want to hear it from me, you know.  And then I got good grades in elementary school, you know, so I was every teacher's pet.  They didn't like that.  I used to get in fights about good grades all the time, which is a problem for me.  It was a problem for me back then.  I think it's a problem for young blacks today, is that to get great grades in school is considered a bad thing.  That's a huge mistake, you know.  But that goes back to that discussion we were having on reparations and stuff.  As long as that exists, reparations, they're not going to help--because we don't want people to achieve, you know.  So, you know, kids used to beat me up 'cause I was smart.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a fact of life for me.  I mean I had--used to fight kids because I got good grades, you know.  And it's no different than in my life today.  There are people who view me as a sell-out because I'm a corporate executive.  Well, oh, you know, I have to fight.  But I don't even pay any attention to that crap anymore.  Okay.  So you had to--what do you do?  So I decided once I got into high school, okay, they called--they treated me badly because I was smart.  Okay.  I'm going to be dumb like everybody else.  Guess what?  They treated me badly anyway.  So I might as well had gone on and been smart, you know (laughter).  Maybe it would have been better off.  So that was a lesson I learned.  Quit trying to be what you're not for other people.  Okay.  That served me well later in life.
Story_ID: 178921
Speaker 1: Yeah, people come from everywhere in the world to the United States to seek opportunity, and it's here.  And the ones that don't benefit the most, they're my people, African Americans.  And I think that's wrong.  Now, whose fault is it, okay, that it's that way.  Well, now, I think the responsibility belongs mainly with us.  Okay.  Now, if you say to yourself--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, don't you think it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: --in terms of a fault, I mean, whose fault it is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that we've are in this situation, it's--I mean, we didn't necessarily put ourselves in this situation.  But, though I wouldn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  But it's up to us to pull us out.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a hundred percent true.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I mean, I agree that brought over here as slaves in the 1600s was wrong.  Yeah.  Hell, yeah. But that was how many years ago?
Speaker 2: Well, it was just during our lifetime that we couldn't do a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Okay.  Now we can.
Speaker 2: Still.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the Arabs come over and open up grocery stores.  I'll tell you one of the most telling events in my life was Spike Lee's movie 'Do the Right Thing.'  Okay.  And there's a scene in that movie where you got a bunch of black men on the corner playing cards.  Looks like a game of Tonk in the middle of the day, and they're looking across the street at some Koreans who have a grocery store.  And the Koreans are running around like crazy, unloading boxes and loading up the trucks and stuff like that.  And one of the brothers, Robin Harris, was one of them, you know, he says, "Look at him.  Look at that crap.  Them damn Koreans got that store.  How come we ain't got that store."  Told you everything you needed to know about work ethic.  Okay.  And Spike Lee, as much as I disagree with some of his positions he takes, when he does a movie, he tells it like he sees it.  And he was making a commentary on African Americans in that movie as well as whites and racism.  And I think it was well done.  But that's true.  You know, there was a time back, I don't know, fifteen, twenty years ago where the black community was all upset because all the grocery stores in the neighborhoods were owned by Arabs.  You know, they were boycotting and bricking the stores.  "Let me ask you a question:  If the Arabs didn't have them stores, would there have been stores?"  Okay.  So where is the entrepreneurial bend in African Americans and how do we create it?  It's a real issue today.  Okay.  And so this opportunity that we see others capitalize on, why don't we.  Okay.  And I don't want to blame slavery for that, because it's been so long ago.  The opportunities that are here now, my question is:  how do we capitalize on them?  I want us to get focused on that.  It doesn't matter to me what the cause is anymore, okay.  It's about now and the future.  You hear me say that over and over and over again.  Okay.  I don't want to be a victim anymore.  I want to be a catalyst.  I want to see more catalysts, and I want to see us achieve.  And we can, because people from around the world are coming over here doing that.  Why don't we?
Story_ID: 178922
Speaker 1: We just had you--we had you graduating from high school [Farragut High School, later Farragut Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you know, so you weren't counseled about college.  You really didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Listen.  I knew about college.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My mother [Ella Brown] had always told me she wanted me to go to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], since she was going to clean the lady's house, you know.  I used to drive past the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Not drive past, but with people, and see that and go "Wow, what a great place, this great Gothic structure."  And I'd hear people say, "That's a great college."  And I'd go, "Yeah, it would be nice to go to the University of Chicago."  I used to think about that.  But when I graduated from college [sic, high school], my parents had no wherewithal to send me, and I had already ruined any chance of a scholarship.  Of course, there weren't many given out then, okay.  And I hadn't been counseled on college.  So I put it in my mind that I would find a job, work for a couple of years, and then earn enough money to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I thought I'd do.  Okay.  And there was one other thing that crossed my mind.  I knew that I wasn't mature enough to go yet.  Okay.  You asked the question about my maturity in high school.  Well, at sixteen, I wasn't sure I could handle college yet.  I knew that.  Okay.  So let's go work a little while, gain some experience, earn my way into college.  I was going to do that.  So I had a job all through the junior and senior years of high school.  I worked part time in the clothing store where my father [Edwin Daly] was a janitor, you know.  So I packed boxes, and I put prices on suits, and I put the other packages and took them to the post office. I would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Some kind of stock--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --deliver suits.  I worked in the stockroom.  I worked in the tailor shop, you know.  I went to the post office.  If somebody needed a suit delivered to the home by a certain time, they'd put me on the 'L' [Chicago 'L' train] and take that suit.  You know, I'd take an 'L' to Evanston [Illinois] and deliver a suit.  I knew the bus routes.  I didn't have a car, so.  I learned to do all that kind of stuff.  And you know, they didn't pay me much, I mean, a buck an hour.  You know, you talk about discrimination; of course, I knew it existed.  They gave me a buck an hour, and then after a year, I said, "How about a raise.  I've been here."  They gave me a buck and a quarter.  I found out the white kid that I worked with got a buck and a half, you know.  Discrimination?  Of course it exists.  Okay.  And that place let me go the week I returned after my high school graduation, because they knew if I work full-time, I'd have to be a union employee.  And they didn't want any more union employees.  They made a lot more money, and the stock boys were a buck and a quarter an hour.  So they let me go.  Best thing that ever happened to me.  Okay.  So now I'm six months without a job, okay.  I'm looking.  I'm looking a lot, because I have this work ethic.  I see my father [Edwin Daly] going to work every day, you know.  I'm used to having money in my pocket, you know.  By that time, my mother and father had split up.  I'm living with my dad on the West Side, me and my brother [Thomas Daly], you know.  We kind of parceled out chores.  I did the cooking and the grocery shopping.  My brother did laundry--my father did laundry; my brother did mopping and sweeping and stuff.  We parceled it out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So both you and your brother lived with your father when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother--see, my father, at one point, left and he came back.  My mother couldn't stand it, so she left (laughs).  Okay.  You know, so they both left, you know.  So we did come from a split home.  But going back to your point earlier about family values and institutions, which was already in my mind, because for the first twelve years of my life, I had both parents there--the first thirteen, you know; and then things started to get crazy.
Speaker 1: Do you think maybe the split-up of your parents kind of contributed to your lack of focus in high school sort of?
Speaker 2: That had already started before.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have made it worst, but it had already started.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One is tempted to think it wouldn't have helped you, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nah.  It couldn't have.  But, you know, see, the point is, they both worked at nights.  So neither one of them was home anyway, you know.  So this was the perfect opportunity for me to get into all kinds of dirty work; having parties, you know; bringing girls up to the house, you know; drinking in my house, you know; didn't do any drugs back then, but--
Speaker 1: So this is about 1964?
Speaker 2: This was '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In there.
Story_ID: 178923
Speaker 1: So you're out of high school and you're looking for a job.
Speaker 2: I'm looking for a job--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Six months.
Speaker 2: --six months go by, I don't have a job.  My father [Edwin Daly] says, "Look, you've earned unemployment compensation.  You've been paying into it, so go down there and claim it."  I went down there and stood in line, I saw these poor people and I couldn't do it.  I just got out of line.  I was too proud.  So my father thought I was an idiot because I'd put the money in.  I said, "That's okay, I'm going to find a job."  So couldn't find a job right away.  So what I did was, I decided to go into the [U.S.] Air Force.  My girlfriend's brother had just enlisted in the Air Force and he was telling me how great it was.  So I thought, "Maybe I'll join the Air Force."  This is 1964.  And I applied to join the Air Force and did a written exam, and I waited for the results.  And they sent me results after a while, but at the same time, around the same time I took the written exam, I saw an ad in the newspaper, it ran one day.  It said R.R. Donnelley and Sons was hiring apprentices, ages seventeen through twenty-six to do various crafts.  So I was interested.  And I got on the bus, went down to Donnelley dressed up in a suit; had on a blue sharkskin suit--never forget--with a blue Oxford cloth, button-down collar shirt, and a red-striped tie with a hankie in my pocket.  Why?  'Cause my father always said, when you go for a job, you dress up.  Okay.  And there were guys in there with the, you know, the T-shirts with the cigarettes rolled up in the sleeves applying for a job.  So I stood out, you know, and I learned that at an early age.  The other thing is, I had great clothes.  'Cause remember, I'd worked at a clothing store for two years, and I could buy clothes for 55 percent of full price, you know.  So I had suits and--you know, they didn't pay me much money, but I had clothes.  Right?  So I go down to Donnelley, and I applied for a job.  And Donnelley got a very rigorous process or hiring people, so they didn't just hire you; they tested you and tested you, and brought you back.  And so after a month I wasn't sure whether I was going to get hired by Donnelley or not.  And then a letter came from the Air Force and said, "You passed your written exams.  As a matter of fact, you passed with very high scores.  We can offer you electronics, we can offer you intelligence, we can offer you all of this stuff."  And the same day, I got a letter from Donnelley saying I had a job.  So which one do you think I took?  (Laughs.)  I took the job.  Right?  So I started working at R.R. Donnelley at seventeen as a proofreading apprentice.  And the reason it was proofreading is because that was a craft that required good English skills, and I had told you I had really good English skills.  And so there I was proofreading telephone directories; name, address and phone number for, I think I started at a buck ninety-two an hour, okay, which was huge in 1964.  Okay.  Remember I'd been making a buck and a quarter at the other place.  A buck ninety-two?  You know.  And the second full year at Donnelley, I made more money with overtime and bonus--they paid you a bonus, for piecework bonus.  I made more money than my father did in his two janitorial jobs.  So that was a mixed problem for him.  He was proud on one hand, mad on the other hand that an eighteen-year-old boy could make more money than he did, and he'd been working, you know, one place for seventeen years; and the other place for twenty-something years.  He just thought was so wrong.  And, you know, I suppose it is, you know.  But he was a janitor, and I had a craft.  And I thought I was a man.  So this girl that I been dating, whose brother was in the Air Force, she got pregnant when I was 18--I was 17, she was 15.  And when I was 18 and she was 16, we got married.  So that's--my oldest daughter, she's now 38.  Okay.  And I got married and we stayed married for 13 years.  We had two kids and then we split up.  And I took the kids out of the divorce.
Story_ID: 178924
Speaker 1: But I--still at [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] working, and like I said earlier, you know--you know, you asked me about smells and times and stuff, I remember in 1967 we had the great snowstorm, July 26, 1967--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --I was working at Donnelley.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It wasn't July.  It had to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  I mean January 26.
Speaker 2: January.  All right.
Speaker 1: January 26.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  January 26, 1967, had this huge snowstorm, and I was working that day when the storm started.  Then when it got to be a foot, it was obvious nobody was going to get to work in the second shift.  So I ended up working overtime, worked the entire second shift still proofreading those telephone directories, and I got put up in a hotel for the first time in my life that night.  Never stayed in a hotel before that.  And then I ate in a steakhouse for the first time in my life.  Went to George Diamond.  It was there, you know, and had a steak and then played poker almost all night with these white guys I worked with and one other black guy who was with us.  There weren't many black apprentices back then.  And I had a great time drinking beer, playing poker; then got up and went to work the next day.  The snow stopped and we asked, "You want us to do it again?"  And they decided, "No.  You go home tonight."  And I felt like an Eskimo, you know. It was one of the more interesting times in my life was the time that Chicagoans were actually helping each other.  People seemed to like each other, trying to get through that snow storm.  It was a unique time, you know.  I would imagine people in New York [New York] with September 11th and the hope that everybody gave everybody else was that sort of thing.  Of course, the snow storm wasn't as great a deal or as bad a tragedy, but it was that kind of thing, where you just pitched in and so it was cool.  So, you know, I hadn't seen my wife and my daughter in a couple of days.  So I finally got home through the snow, had to go try to find milk and stuff 'cause the stores were all empty and all that, you know.  So I remember those things.
Story_ID: 178925
Speaker 1: Other sounds and smells, sights from that time, in '68 [1968], we had the Democratic Convention and all that ruckus in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was working overtime at Donnelley that night.  I was working the second shift.  I could see the flashes of light off in the north, you know.  There weren't many big buildings to block it.  I didn't know what was going on.  I found out on the news the next day.  I remember [Abraham] Ribicoff and [Richard J.] Daley screaming at each other on that convention floor, you know.  And I remember McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] burning down.  Okay.  I was walking to work one day in the winter, and I looked over and I could see beyond [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] the old McCormick Place that was supposedly fireproof and indestructible, it burned--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it just--it just been built like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it burned to the ground.  I remember seeing that.  I remember in 1969 the presses in the west plant of Donnelley blew up and nine people got killed.
Speaker 2: They blew up?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  See, these were solvent--used solvent-based ink systems, used solvent tanks in the basement.  And we don't know if somebody was smoking down there or whatever happened, but those solvent tanks blew up, and there was a huge gaping hole in the roof of the west plant, which was next door to the plant I was in.  And that plant was only three stories high, and mine was, you know, eight stories high; so I was on the sixth floor.  We were able to go and look down this gaping hole in the roof.  And rolls of paper blew out of there and everything.  I remember that.  Other sights and sounds from those times, in '68 [1968] when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, I was living on the South Side then.  My wife and I had moved from the West Side to the South Side.  We lived on 68th and Champlain.  I was turning 21.  Right?  Bought my first car.  Never had a car.  My father [Edwin Daly] never owned a car.  My mother [Ella McCreary Brown] had one now.  She had a second husband.  But I never had a car in my life.  And I tried to get my mother to teach me how to drive.  Never let your mother try to teach you how to drive a car.  She screams at every turn you take.  She makes all kinds of noises.  She makes life miserable.  I said, "Mom, thank you, but no thanks."  I hired Sears Driving School.  A guy took me out the first night on the Outer Drive (laughs).  From 68th and Champlain, we went down 67th Street, boom, hit it; 66th--I can't remember--Marquette Boulevard, hit the Drive, and then I was driving a car.  I learned how in about a week, went and got my license.  And the day I turned 21 in 1968, I bought my first car.  Bought a Chevy Nova.  Okay.  Well, it was some time for delivery.  This is February and I ordered it, the car, I wasn't going to get that for a while.  I picked it up the day King was killed--the day after King was killed.  So Midway Chevrolet was on 67th--66th and Cottage Grove.  Houses were burning.  They wanted every car out of there.  "Come get your cars."  I went and picked up my car and I'm driving down Cottage Grove, and I'm looking in my rearview mirror looking at flames.  Yeah.  I remember that too.  I remember the next day was the White Sox home opener.  And it was a tradition for all us Donnelley guys to go to the Sox home opener.  Most of us were Sox fans.  So we went to the game and we did a lot of drinking of beer and stuff, and there were fights in the stands, but we didn't get into any of that.  And then our parking lot, the Donnelley parking lot, there was a restaurant next door to it called Sauer's.  And Sauer's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: ----it was a beerhouse that sold some hamburgers and fish and stuff like that.  And Sauer's used the Donnelley lot on second shift, you know, because most of Donnelley people went home.  And so my car was in that lot.  And so I went to pick it up and some of my drunken buddies were screaming, "Black guy stealing a new car."  And the Donnelley guards drove by--remember, we got riots all over the city--the guards--Donnelley guards come in, block my exit from the lot.  I get out and say, "Wait a minute.  I'm a Donnelley employee."  And I reached in my back pocket to pull out my wallet to show him my Donnelley I.D., and they pulled their pieces, you know.  I could have gotten shot over silliness, you know.  But those are sights and sounds.  Even before I moved to the South Side, I remember looking for an apartment.  Remember I told you about the nomad things?  My wife and I--my first wife and I moved into an apartment where a guy had had a two-story building and he broke up the second story into two apartments and you shared a bath.  And my wife's cousin and her husband lived in the front half, and we lived in the back half.  And it was basically a bedroom, a living room that used to be a back porch, and a kitchen.  Okay.  And we shared a bath.  I hated it.  Had to get away from those two.  So I was walking around further west, further north, looking for an apartment, and I was dressed up, 'cause, you know, back then, you know, we were into dressing up.  You know, you were Ivy Leaguers or Gousters or something, but you were into clothes, if you were a young black man, you know.  So I had on my Dobbs Double Life hat, and I had on a black leather coat, nice slacks and loafers to show I was an Ivy Leaguer.  I was cool.  And I had on a sweater, Oxford cloth button-down shirt, and I'm looking for an apartment and two cops stopped me and throw me up against the wall and accuse me of being a burglary suspect.  And I said, "Tell me more about this burglary?"  And he says, "Well, this guy was seen escaping through a coal bin of an apartment building around the corner."  I said, "Look at me.  Do I look like I've been in a coal bin?"  And I was about nineteen years old.  They let me go.  But just the whole thing.  I mean, talk about profiling, that ain't nothing new.  That stuff--it's been going on forever.  These are memories that I have from those times.  How did they influence me today?  Do I dislike cops?  No.  I like cops.  They protect me.  Are they always right?  No.  No, they're not.  Okay.  But, in the main I like cops.  My nephew's a cop.  So anyway, you asked for sights and sounds that are fabric of my times back in the '60s [1960s], that's kind of what it was like.
Story_ID: 178926
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what happened that--when did you decide to go to school?  I've read that [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] encouraged employees to go to school and provided some help.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: They did.  They weren't necessarily encouraging me.  But one of my good friends at Donnelley, who's retired now in Arizona; he's an argumentative, fussy old man now, but he was an apprentice like me, and he was going to night school.  He said, "I ain't doing this crap job for the rest of my life.  I'm gonna be something else."  And he was going to night school taking a full load.  And I was watching him, you know.  And he was working full time, had a wife and two kids like I did.  He was going to night school.  And I said, "(Unclear), if he can do it, I can do it."  So I started going to night school, too, you know.  And then we both started vying with the same--for the same job as a product expert that I was talking about earlier; this quasi-management job reporting to the foreman.  He had his degree, I did not.  I got the job, he didn't and he was upset about it; which opened up my eyes to another dynamic that happens to African Americans in the business world.  Sometimes we think that there's only one of us that's going to get jobs.  So we end up competing against each other instead of the population at large.  It's a scary situation, but it causes two blacks--you know, sometimes I see it with women, too.  They think there's only going to be one of us in the boardroom or as a C.E.O. or as a business unit president or a sales vice president, and so we start targeting each other.  And so I realized that was going on between me and him, and I didn't want that to happen.  But it did a little bit.  So there's this huge competition, I got this job, and now I'm in this quasi-management job, but I'm seeing people at the next level come in with degrees, even master's degrees as supervisors, and I want to be a supervisor, 'cause I think I can do it.  So I decided to go to school and get serious about it.  And I spent eight of ten years in the '70s [1970] going to night school, and I ended up with M.B.A. in finance from Loyola University [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Now did Donnelley encourage me to go?  Not initially.  But I'll say this for a boss that I had.  He made it easy for me to go to school, because some of the classes I needed to take were during the day, so I shifted off to nights.  You know, they got a regular shift rotation?  He let me rotate whatever was good for me as long as the other guys didn't mind it too much, and they didn't, you know.  So Donnelley made it easy for me to go to school.  So since that time, anytime an employee I've got wants to go to school, I do my best to make it easy for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know.  I believe in that.
Speaker 1: --now, you initially went to Prairie State [College, Chicago Heights, Illinois] and then Governor's State [University, University Park, Illinois].  Am I right?
Speaker 2: I went to Prairie State then Governor's State--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: For your B.A.--I mean, or--
Speaker 2: --for my A.A.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: A.A.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and B.A.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Prairie State--yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and B.A. from Governor's State, you know.
Speaker 1: And then Loyola for your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Loyola for my M.B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178927
Speaker 1: Are there any things that stand out about your college days that you want to talk about, teachers or ideas, that you came across that changed your life?
Speaker 2: One of the things I say to young people today is:  If you had a bad time in high school, it doesn't mean anything about college, because when you got to college you're a different person than you were in high school, especially if you go later, 'cause you're an adult, okay.  And the driving forces behind you going to college are different than the ones you might have had when you were eighteen years old.  At eighteen you might have gone because that seemed like the right thing to do or your parents were encouraging you.  At twenty-one or twenty-two, okay, it's about making a living, supporting a family, and in most cases it's your money.  It changes your focus on anything.  So now when I go to college--and you remember, I told you, I was a crummy student in high school.  In college, I'm an A, A-minus student, okay.  At Prairie State [College, Chicago Heights, Illinois], I might have gotten two Bs in all the classes that I took.  The rest were A's.  No Cs. Okay.  And I'm working full time, and I got two kids now, not one.  Okay.  I got a baby boy now, and he's thirty-three now.  He was born when I was twenty-two, okay.  So I got two kids, I'm living in the south suburbs.  I'm living in a townhouse in Park Forest [Illinois], you know.  I wanted to get out there because I wanted my little girl, who was starting to school, not to have to go to a school where kids were--the Blackstone Rangers were there--asking for protection.  I didn't want her to deal with that.  And so I moved out to the south suburbs to get her in a really good school.  My kids never went to a city school.  They always went to suburban schools.  So anyway, education's got a different meaning for me now.  So I went after it.  I got all kinds of honor certificates at Prairie State, you know, in business.  I was always asked to go to the awards dinners.  And at times, some of the younger students, I would kind of counsel them, because, you know, they were kind of lost, and I was an adult going to school with them.  And so I'd give them some advice.  It was kind of a cool situation being.  Teachers, yeah, there were a lot of teachers that I liked.  There was a literature teacher, Mrs. Benson [ph.].  I think that was her name.  She was an alcoholic.  She always looked like she was hung over when she came to school.  She taught literature.  She was an existentialist.  So all the books we read were, you know, weaved with existentialism.  We read [Fyodor] Dostoevsky.  We read [Albert] Camus.  We read Joan Didion, who wrote a book called 'Play it as it Lays.'  It was about women and dealing with things as they are, and not how you want them to be.  We read, you know, Jean-Paul Sartre.  We read other existentialists.  Opened up a whole new way of thinking for me.  I remember taking humanities in college.  I can't remember the teacher's name, but it had a lasting impact on me, because we studied comparative religions.  And I had these opinions about religion, you know, from growing up.  And now I had something to compare it to.  I now knew what the Muslim religion was about and what the Hebrews were really about, and even beyond; there were the Greeks.  And I love the Greek myths.  Even as a kid I read Greek mythology like crazy, you know.  You know, I knew all about Zeus and the boys.  It was fun reading that, you know.  And so now I'd start to--it gave me an ability to reason.  That's why you take humanities in college.  Anybody that doesn't want to take humanities is crazy to me, because it is about humankind, you know, and culture.  And so I enjoyed that.  I actually, at Prairie State, took classes in anthropology.  I had electives to take, so I took anthropology, and, of course, I had to take humanities.  That was a requirement.  But I took two cultural anthropology classes, 'cause I wanted to know about the world and the world's peoples and stuff.  I'm fascinated by it.  So anyway--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Can you--just a question on that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: Can--as someone who's now a C.E.O., can you tell the difference between employees who've gone to school for just technical skills and not taken humanities and those who have?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A definite difference.  There were times in my career at Donnelley and when I was an officer, where I would specifically ask HR [Human Resources] to find me a liberal arts graduate and not another engineer.  Because I wanted to bring somebody in that knew how to interact with people rather than somebody who is just a technical expert at something.  Yes.  So you can tell the difference.  Yeah.  I think people that have a liberal arts background, whether it's a major or whether a minor subject, whether they just take electives, are able to grasp new concepts and to think a lot better than people who live and focus on strictly analytical sciences.  So, yeah.  Yeah, I agree with that.
Story_ID: 178928
Speaker 1: Okay. Because there was a mood--at one time they had a lot of technical college trainees--you know, and students were, I guess, talking since the late '70s [1970s] through today about, you know, cutting out the fat and then, coursework and going right to--
Speaker 2: Oh, God, you know, that drives me crazy.  I hate that.  I mean, like, the schools who cut out music.  I mean, I learned how to play violin in high school.  Right?  Okay.  I have developed the taste for classical music that'll last for the rest of my life.  If it hadn't been for that class, I never would have had it.  Now, cultural institutions are important to a city.  If you want to attract talent, say, from New York City [New York] to come to Chicago [Illinois] and work in your company, if you think--if they think they're leaving all their cultural institutions to go to a cow town that has nothing, they won't come.  Okay.  You need an orchestra.  You need a museum.  You know.  So if you don't teach that, people don't embrace it.  I learned these things in school.  I have these tastes today.  I'm on the board of the Chicago Symphony today, you know, which is both a passion and an honor to be in such a position.  Wouldn't have happened without the schools.  Okay.  An appreciation for art.  I loved to learn French Impressionism in that humanities class in college, you know.  I can tell you the difference between a [Claude] Monet and a [Edgar] Degas and a [Pierre-Auguste] Renoir.  Okay.  I've been to art museums in a lot of places in the world.  Okay.  I think that kind of teaching helps people think and open up the ideas much more readily than people that are just taught strictly how to get a job.  As a matter of fact, I absolutely reject the idea that school is about teaching people to get a job.  Okay.  Now, I know the government today is worried about people being left behind.  I know [President George W.] Bush says, "I want no child left behind."  I agree with that.  In the city schools in Chicago now there's a program called 'Education to Careers.'  It is getting kids that won't go to college and be C.E.O.s or sales people or anything else the opportunities and the skills to get a job when they graduate, and I encourage that.  But I don't think skills-school is about just teaching people to get a job.  I think school is about broadening people's horizons and teaching them to think as much as anything else.  And so if you start to suppress the cultural programs, if you start to suppress the arts and music education and just teach everybody to be a carpenter and stuff, you're going to have a bunch of citizens that can't reason.  So that's the way I view it.
Story_ID: 176219
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I was asking you about your educational level and your promotions.  Did they seem to match--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  What happened was, I graduated from Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in 1980 with an M.B.A.  I was a manager before I graduated.  I was a manager for three or four years after.  Then I got asked to move to New Jersey to run an acquisition that [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] had just made.  And I took that move.  Now the reason I moved is 'cause I was dying to get promoted and do something different, and this was the chance to go run a fully-contained business that had every function that you would want in a company.  I was literally a general manager.  I had H.R., human resources; I had engineering; had I.T., and I had all the manufacturing; had everything but the sales.  That was somebody else.  But I could assist in sales effort.  I said, "This is a great opportunity."  All my friends in Chicago [Illinois] told me "Don't leave.  You crazy?  This is a risky operation.  We know you're good with acquisitions," But, you know, I had my second wife then, and she looked at it as a new venture.  She wanted to quit teaching anyway.  She was a high school teacher at Eisenhower [Dwight D. Eisenhower High School, Blue Island, Illinois] in Blue Island [Illinois].  And so off we go, you know, kids in tow, going off to New Jersey to live in Cherry Hill and to run a business that (unclear).  And my career took off after that, because I ran that for three and a half years when they shut it down because it was not a success, but I worked like a dog.  People recognized that. And I got promoted actually after we shut it down.  Now, the good thing about that is I got great business experience.  You know, you can learn as much with a failure as you can from a success.  And so I learned, you know, things that you do, about strategy, you know.  I saw strategy violated in our failure, so I made sure that, you know, the future people had to be on board.  I mean, this is one of the things I really believe.  I got that out of that acquisition.  And I--and, you know, one of the things I believe in, is everything that you do in life you should learn from it.  If you don't, then that's probably a bigger failure than some of the other things you could do.  And so I took my learnings, I went to Pennsylvania, and I'm running a plant now with a thousand people in it.  You know, some of (unclear). And I wasn't wanted, because I had come out of the pre-press side of the business, you know.  I had been in electronic composition, data base management, and now I was running something in the core of the company, the printing operation.  And I actually had one of the executives that told me, "We made a huge mistake bringing you in here.  There's nothing you can handle in this place."  And I promptly threw him out of my office, okay.  And I went about learning about that part of the business that I didn't know by spending eight hours a day doing my job as the plant general manager, and four hours a night working overtime with the people in the plant learning their jobs.  So not only did I learn a lot about their jobs, but I learned--I got the chance to meet a huge cross-section of people in that factory.  And I got highly respected for the fact that I would get out there and work in the bindery hauling books, jogging signatures.  I even walked rounds with the janitor, you know.  So I got to know people.  And that served me really well.  So, you know, I did for twenty months, and then I got asked to go back to Chicago to run the operation I used to work as a proofreader as a vice president of this division, financial planning.  Did that.  I went back there and I worked there for two and a half years, and the next thing I knew I was off to Port Authority doing something even bigger.  It was another acquisition that Donnelly had bought on the West Coast.  It was a plant in Portland, Oregon, and a plant in Greeley, Colorado.  And before I left there, we expanded that to about five plants, 'cause we made some acquisitions for some grateful startups for some of our customers.  And so, then I was out on the West Coast wheeling and dealing.  That business and thing was 150 million [dollars] when I started; it was 250 million [dollars] when I left.  So, you know, I was rocking and rolling.  And then I became the senior vice president when I was out in Portland.  Then I got promoted to head of our global software services manufacturing business in the Americas.  But I also had responsibility for engineering and I.T.E. [information technology equipment], and, oh, God, the technology quality management over the world.  So now, I'm interacting with the Chinese; and, you know, people in Singapore; people in Japan; people in New Zealand; people in Ireland, and Germany and France and the Netherlands, England.  It was exciting.
Story_ID: 176220
Speaker 1: I only did that for six months, because the head of the directory business at Donnelley Telecommunications, he left to become president of a paper company.  And since I had spent a lot of my time in directory business, running plants, and I actually had a craft card, I really knew the business well, I got picked to be the president of the telecommunications business.  That was in 1995.  So, you know, my--by this time, my second wife and I adopted a daughter in 1983.  So she was following us around.  By the time she was--we moved back to Chicago [Illinois] at thirteen--she was thirteen; by the time she was thirteen years old, she had lived in six different houses.  That's how much I moved, you know.  And my wife would always look at it as an adventure.  She was very positive through this whole thing, you know.  And, you know, if it wasn't for her, I wouldn't have got my M.B.A., because I was married to her, she already had her master's degree.  She was an educator, you know, so she wanted me to get my education.  So, she's got more education in the household than I've got, 'cause she has some points towards her Ph.D.  So anyway, you know, I'm moving around the country.  It was the right thing to do.  So, you know, I moved from being a department manager in 1984 to a president of one of our major business units in eleven years.  So the education wasn't necessarily the driving force.  It did not hurt, 'cause I really believe companies look at what you're willing to invest in you before they determine how much they're willing to invest in you, you know.  So you have to invest in yourself.  And I think they saw that in me.  I think it was harder for me to get those moves because I looked in my H.R. file that one of my managers gave me later, and there're all kinds of notes in there about, "Well, he's only marginally able to do this based upon some scores and tests that he took in 1968.  So we don't highly recommend him for a supervisor or production coordinator or sales person, you know.  But since we're looking to put black people in these positions, we should probably give him a try."  You know, so, you know.  I used to think affirmative action was a bad thing, and then I looked in my file and realized that one of the reasons I got the moves was affirmative action.  Had it not been for affirmative action, Donnelley [R.R. Donnelley and Sons] wouldn't move me around, no matter how much education I would have gotten.  But it was the moving and education and a willingness to do it; and then the ability to execute in all those positions that kept me moving up.  So then, you know, I did this job as president of the telecommunications group.  I thought I did exceptionally well.  We made a lot of money for the company.  We did really well.  I had a strategy.  I stuck to it.  I changed the business.  I made a good business better.  You know, sometimes you get a good business, you tend to want to leave it alone, 'cause you'll just let it fly.  You know, when you hear that phrase, "if it ain't broke, don't fix it?"  I didn't believe in that.  I said, "Let's make it better.  We can."  And we ended up growing the business around the world.  I ended up building directory operations in China and in Poland, and expanding in England, and we did stuff in South America.  So now I'm a globe traveler.  You talk about sights and sounds and things that turn you on, you know.  I remember I was living in Portland, Oregon, and I was rushing to catch a plane.  I got on a trench coat and I got a briefcase and I got my luggage in my hand.  And I'm looking in a window at the terminal, and I see my coat flying in the breeze and these two briefcases.  I looked at myself, and I said, "Holy shit.  You've become what you wanted to be."  You know.  Great feeling, you know.  So all the work and everything, and I realize, it's really worth it.  You know, you really can be what you want to be. Another sight and sound from this time frame, 'cause I was doing business in Mexico.  I was president of the directory business.  I went down to Mexico and I was in the ritziest shopping district in Mexico City [Mexico].  There were beggars all over the streets.  You know, Indian women with little kids holding out cups.  And it was, ten o'clock at night when we got through with dinner.  The little kids were still there.  I said, "Why aren't these kids in bed?  Don't they have to go to school?"  They said, "These kids don't go to school."  And my travels around the world have showed me that this is probably the only country in the world where you can change your class status.  In most countries, if you're born poor, you stay poor throughout your life.  You talked to me about the people in Egypt that ran a concession by the Pyramids for hundreds of years, right?  Okay.  They're stuck there.  Can they run the oil company in Egypt?  No.  It's not in the cards.  It can't be.  This is a place, here, the U.S., that you can change class status.  Okay.  So I've seen that happen over and over and over again, you know.  So that's a good thing about America.
Story_ID: 176221
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, the biggest position you attained at [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] was--
Speaker 2: The president of Donnelley Print Solutions, which was effectively a number two job with them.  I ran two-thirds of the company's revenues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, before--I don't know if this even relevant, but I remember one of the biggest events in the black community, you know, took place at Donnelley Hall.  That was the celebration for the election of Harold Washington back in 1983.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: And I don't know if you were in town--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't in Chicago [Illinois].  I was living in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I wasn't involved.  I'll tell you another big event.
Speaker 1: Well, when you say Donnelly Hall to somebody in Chicago, they think about Harold being, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in that--in Donnelley--you know, but they know about what Donnelley does and all that, but when they mention Donnelley--when you mention that, that's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, Donnelley, that was--so back in '84 [1984], Donnelley would have been based over on 22nd Street.  Okay.  After that, Donnelley moved its corporate headquarters to where it is today, on Clark and Wacker, okay. Now I'll tell you one of the coolest things that I've ever participated in, in my life.  I'm in Portland, Oregon--let me show you how all this school and learning and stuff comes together in terms of civic pride.  I learned classical music in the Chicago Public Schools, right.  We don't teach it anymore.  Okay.  We don't have bands and orchestras anymore.  But I learned to, okay.  So now I'm in Portland, Oregon, and I get asked to be on the symphony board of the Oregon Symphony, okay, whose conductor is a black man.  Blew me away.  It's James DePreist, the nephew of Marion Anderson.  Check that out.  Is that cool or what?  And he started his life out in music as a drummer in a high school band.  He ended up in jazz and became a classical conductor.  So I'm on the board.  There was a conversation one day in a board meeting.  It's 1994 and DePreist wants to record two pieces of music that were written in tribute to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And the board doesn't want to do it.  And it's not 'cause they didn't want to do it because of Martin Luther King.  They do want to do it.  It's just that every CD the symphony has ever recorded lost money on it in these tough times.  They're having a hard time raising money.  Okay.  And so I go, "Well, wait a minute," you know.  I'm the eternal optimist.  "This is James DePreist, the preeminent black conductor in the world doing music, you know, recorded in memory or written in memory of Martin Luther King.  We're going to release it on his birthday in 1995.  How many do you think you're going to sell?"  "Well, Ron, we've never sold more than three thousand CDs."  I said, "You ought to be able to sell fifty thousand of these."  And so I started pushing, "Look at what the costs say.  Look at what the revenues say."  So they agreed to do it.  And so after that meeting was over, I met with one other Symphony staffers and he went, "Holy shit.  We talked them into doing it.  We better help them sell it."  She used to work at Nike, okay, before she joined the symphony staff.  She knew the guy at Nike who was personal friends with Coretta King.  Guy named Matt Hennessee.  I'll never forget him.  He ran all the customer service operations for Nike.  So all the shoes that got distributed around the country, went through a warehouse that he managed.  Okay.  So I went out to see Matt Hennessee.  We pitched this concept of the CD.  Well, what did want from him?  We wanted Coretta King to write something in the Foreword for the CD jacket.  And we wanted her to come to a CD release party the week of Martin's birthday in 1995.  So he gets on the phone.  He calls Coretta's agent, and she says Coretta never leaves Atlanta [Georgia] during Martin's birthday week.  She's in mourning.  And we said, "Well, can you just tell her what we're trying to achieve?"  So she did.  Coretta agrees to come.  So then me and the president of the symphony, we start going on local television doing interviews on black talk shows and stuff talking up this concept of the CD.  And then it hit me that we had a new director of the Urban League in Portland, a guy named Lawrence Dark.  I'll never forget him.  I wish I could get in touch with him now.  And Lawrence Dark liked classical music.  As a matter of fact, he played piano.  So I go to Lawrence and say, "Listen, man, I want the Urban League behind this CD program."  He gets behind it.  Okay.  He ends up on the Symphony board with me.  Okay.  And when we record the piece of music, one of the pieces of music, the whole first five, six rows are loaded with African American kids from Portland schools that are seeing this happen live.  Okay.  So we record the CD.  So now we go on TV.  We're on cable TV, and I'm talking to the president of the symphony in the parking lot, he says, you know what's great, we got a CD release party in Chicago, I mean, in Portland, but, I mean, it's no big deal.  Nobody's gonna notice it in Portland.  I say, "Yeah, we need to do something in some big cities."  I said, "Maybe I can talk Donnelley into doing something in Chicago."  Not knowing how in the hell I was going to do that.  Okay.  So he said, "Go ahead and try it."  Well, as it turns out, Matt Hennessee talks to Dexter King.  They decide to talk to Coca-Cola.  They do one in Atlanta.  I go to Donnelley.  Donnelley's launching their big diversity program in Chicago in '94 [1994].  I talk to the Senior V.P. of H.R. [Human Resources], I pitched this concept.  I said, "Let's do it with a bang.  Let's let the world know that Donnelley stands for diversity.  Let's do this in the lobby of the Donnelley corporate building."  Okay.  He agrees.  Cost fifty grand.  Okay.  Get Nike to co-sponsor it in Chicago.  We put up a fourteen-foot television screen in the lobby.  Okay.  And we project a picture.  When the guys who did the video of the recording of one of those pieces of music--they had a camera facing James DePreist, who is usually a pretty laidback conductor.  But when they showed the passion on his face conducting these pieces of music, okay, it was in the video.  I had that video, that eight-minute segment they shot for KOIN-TV in Portland, showing in the Donnelley lobby.  We got Yolanda King to come to Chicago for the CD release.  Dexter and Martin Jr. were there in Atlanta--Martin III.  And then Coretta was in Portland, Oregon.  We pulled this thing off.  They sold thirteen thousand CDs the first year.  And they rerelease it every year on his birthday. Go and get that fifty thousand, okay.  And on the CD jacket, there was a thanks to me and Lawrence Dark at the Urban League in Portland, and Jodi Hoganson [ph.], the symphony staffer that helped to get this going.  Okay.  All that came from people working together for a cause.  But it wouldn't had ever happened if I hadn't played a violin in a high school orchestra in Chicago, Illinois, back in the '60s [1960s] with help.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's some story.
Speaker 2: That was one of the most fun things in my life, you know.  It was.
Story_ID: 176222
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about being the second man at R.R. Donnelley [and Sons].
Speaker 2: It was cool.  I mean, it was heady stuff, you know.  It was--I worked at this company for thirty-seven years, you know.  I had been somebody that they said was "marginally capable of being a supervisor."  Okay.  But since that time, I had educated myself.  I had gotten a master's degree.  I had done the work.  I--you know, my grandmother used to say from the Bible, "The race neither goes to the swift or to the strong, but to the one that endures to the end." [Ecclesiastes 9:11]  I have done the endurance.  I'm there.  It was great.  I felt fulfilled.  Okay.  And then I realized I didn't want to do it anymore.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: I got tired of doing the same--I'd been in the printing business all this time.  I'm the top guy.  I reasoned that I wasn't going to get to be the number one guy.  Okay.  There was only three years difference between me and the number one guy.  Okay.  I said, "Well, if he stays 'til 62, when he leaves, I'm 59.  That's too old to make a CEO."  Especially, I had committed myself to retire at 62.  So they're not going to put somebody in for three years.  They want continuity.  I said, "He ain't going right now."  Which was wrong.  It turns out he left the year after I left.  He announced his resignation.  But I still don't think I would have gotten the job, because I had only been in that job--would have only been in that job for a year and a half when he announced his retirement.  They wouldn't have given to me.  I hadn't been groomed or prepared.  So, you know, either way it goes, I don't think I would have gotten the top job.  Along comes Oce and says, "We need a C.E.O. for North America."  And they were encouraging me to do some of the things that I had been restricted from doing at Donnelley.  Okay.  And I don't need to go into what all those are.  But this was a technology company.  I like technology.  It was a company focused on growth.  Yes.  And the competition was interesting to me.  It was competing head to head with Xerox and Hewlett-Packard, and people like that, you know.  You know, nobody knows the folks in the printing business, you know, because we don't put our names on anything.  We do everything for everybody else.  And so I just wanted the challenge to do something else.  And then, you know, a lot of people, like me, you know, throughout their careers always think, "I wonder how I can do in some other arena.  You know, I know I can do it here, but can I go do it somewhere else?  Are my skills transferrable?"  And I'm one who's always asking myself those questions.  Here I am now fifty-five years old.  If I'm ever going to make this jump, it's got to be now.  So I did.  So--and an interesting learning from that.  All the years that I was in the printing business, people would ask me about other jobs.  I had looked at other jobs before, but something kept me in the print business, and I believe it was because I was a craftsman with a journeyman's card. I believed in our business.  We educated the world.  We entertained the world with the stuff that we did.  I can see the tie in what we did in printing throughout the fabric of everything that happened in our culture.  You know, so it was important.  I had this passion for it.  And I said, so my passion is for printing.  I can't leave.  And then as soon as I got into Oce and started competing with Xerox and Hewlett-Packard, I was passionate about that, too.  Then I realized the recognition was that the passion that I had wasn't about printing.  It was just passion for me.  And it was transferrable to almost anything that I did.  So it's my way of attacking the world. I do it with passion.  I'm a passion person.  So I'm attacking Oce just like I ever did anything at Donnelley, you know, with the same vigor.  And I'm having fun.
Story_ID: 176223
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us a little bit about Oce [North America].  What is Oce?
Speaker 2: Oce is a 125-year-old company.  It was founded in the Netherlands by a family of scientists, who invented a food dye that make butter look more yellow, 'cause it always didn't come out of the cows that way.  It was also applied to oleomargarine.  They later turned their chemical expertise into producing chemicals for coatings for paper in blueprinting machines.  Okay.  Then they got into the making of the machines, and then they got into copiers.  And then they made acquisitions in the United States and built a billion (dollar?) business in the United States.  Okay.  It is forty percent of the company's revenues, and they said, "We want you to grow this thing exponentially, because America's our biggest opportunity to work."   And the company has always been run by a European; either Dutch or Italian.  They wanted to put an American face on the business.  Well, why?  Because Americans can interact with other American businessmen better than Italians could.  As a matter of fact, they didn't feel a part of the culture.  They looked at my resume and saw I was involved in all these cultural institutions, I know people in town, I know how to network, I'm involved in local politics, national politics; they've seen that from me, you know.  So, hey, here's an American face that can help take us to the next level, so.  I seemed like that guy.  I seemed like an interesting challenge.  I went and met with the executives over in the Netherlands, liked them all.  And they offered me, you know, a board--a seat on their board of directors.  So now I'm on their board of directors.  Okay.  And, you know, I had never been on a board of a publicly-owned company.  That was my first.  Now, I'm on another one.  I'm on the board of SuperValu, which is a large grocery distribution and retail grocery chain.  So, you know, it's a new challenge.  It's very much like the old challenge.  I'm finding that business is business.  The dynamics are the same in a lot of cases.  I'm--you know, Oce is tangential to the printing business.  I sell a lot of equipment to printers.  So that knowledge helps.  But I'm also selling it to other markets.  But good knowledge of marketing and finance and human relations and how to deal with people, it's transferable anyplace.  I'm finding out.  And the same positive dynamics exist in this company as do the negative dynamics.  People go into silos.  People don't want to cross boundaries.  They don't want to work with other people for various reasons, you know, that exist, you know.  So, you know, all my skills I think are transferable to Oce from Donnelley that I learned.  And if I went somewhere else, I could probably say the same thing again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you see yourself retiring from Oce?
Speaker 2: Probably.  Yeah, you know.  You know when you leave a job, you go into a new place like this, you sign an employment contract.  I got one for at least five years.  If I stay seven, I'll retire at 62 from Oce.  Yeah.  Plus on an interview like this, I can't say anything else, 'cause then my boss-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No (laughs).  That's okay.
Speaker 2: --will come running in to--(simultaneous).  (Laughs.)
Speaker 1: That's okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: But nah, nah.  I mean, I wouldn't mind retiring from Oce.  I don't necessarily need to be the chairman of Oce.  I would never be the chairman of Oce-NV, because it will always be a Dutchman.  Let's face it, you know.  Their company is a Dutch treasure.  So I don't expect that, you know.  And so one of the things I had to accept, leaving Donnelley to go to Oce, is that I'll never be the chairman of the board of the whole company.  It's okay.  I got six companies over there.  I'm the chairman in the United States.  I'm on other boards of directors.  I feel fulfilled.  So.  That's cool.
Story_ID: 176224
Speaker 1: You probably get asked this question all the time, but, what advice would you give young people going into business?  I mean--and you started at the very bottom basically, you know, and came all the way up to the top, I mean.  What advice would you give?
Speaker 2: If you have aspirations to be a leader in a business, one of the first things you have to do is to be a part of the business's culture.  Okay.  I've seen too many young blacks come into a company and say, "I don't want nothing to do with those people."  Meaning white people.  Okay.  "I don't want to do anything after work."  Okay.  One of the things that I always did was, I was on the softball teams and on the basketball teams, and yeah, a lot of blacks did that.  But then there were they're company dinner dances, you know, or there's departmental dinner dances.  You know, there may be 10 blacks in the department, they didn't go because, "I don't like their music.  I don't want to do the polka.  I don't like their food," and all that other kind of stuff.  Well, then you say, "You should be doing it my way.  You should be serving ribs and chicken or whatever you want to eat, and you should be playing our kinds of music.  We want to hear the Temptations."  You can't make those demands until you've become a part of that culture, and then raise yourself into it.  Okay.  Those people aren't going to change just because you say so.  And so I think I was able to make more institutional changes in [R.R.] Donnelley [and Sons] because I understood the culture, and it was a part of the culture that somebody who had never took part in it.  You know, the company would spend money on golf outings.  You know, I don't golf.  It's company money.  I was an employee.  Why shouldn't I share this?  So, you know, I--the way I look at the world, I remember when I moved to the suburbs in 1970.  I moved to Park Forest [Illinois] so my daughter could go to a better school.  I already said that.  My brother, Chris, asked me, "What are you trying to be?  White?"  I said, "Nope."  He said, "Then why you moving out there with all them white people?"  I said, "I'm moving out there because it is a better place to live.  Okay?  It is less dangerous and the schools are good.  I'm going to live the American Dream, and I don't think that I have to be poor just because I'm black.  And I don't think I have to live in a rough neighborhood just because I'm black.  Okay?  So it's out there to get, this American Dream, and I'm getting my share.  I'll go wherever I have to to get it."  He said, "Man, that kinda makes sense."  And my brother was sort of militant back in the '60s [1960s].  Thought he was anyway.  He wasn't really.
Story_ID: 176225
Speaker 1: What were we saying before you left?  You were--we were on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was about--we were finishing up about Oce [North America].
Speaker 1: Right. Yeah.  We knew that Larry had asked you about advice to a young person, and you were talking.
Speaker 2: Oh, I said, yeah.  If you're gonna try to influence--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right, now.
Speaker 2: --you've got to get involved.  You just can't come in making demands, you know.  So get involved.  Learn as much as you can.  Advice I always give African American kids when I go out.  You asked me what--I've been involved in charities and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I had started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to get on that, 'cause you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I used to be involved in Junior Achievement, teaching kids how to get jobs.  I ran a printing company in R.R. Donnelley [and Sons] in an empty room, teaching kids how to make a business out of matchbook covers, calendars, invitations, and stuff like that, okay.  They're all minority students from the South Side.  Later, Junior Achievement became something where you taught in the classroom.  I taught in a classroom.  I was on the board of Junior Achievement in Chicago [Illinois].  I ended up being the president of the Chicago District Board of Junior Achievement in Chicago.  When I moved to Portland, Oregon, two weeks after I got there, Junior Achievement discovered me out there, and I was doing the same thing out there.  I told you about the relationship I built with the Urban League out in Portland and the results of that.  Kids going to concerts and stuff like that.  When I came back to Chicago, I got involved with the Elliott Donnelley Youth Center over on 39th and Michigan as a board member, because for the United Way Day of Caring we went out there to pull weeds out of their playground.  And I met the director, and she asked me to be on the board, and I said, yeah.  And the reason is because Elliott Donnelley, one of the Donnelley grandsons, was a founder of the Chicago Youth Center[s].  Okay.  And I also recognize when I was in places where I learned how to swim when I was about ten years old.  Okay.  Somebody brought me way from the West Side over to that swimming pool to learn how to swim at that Y [Young Men's Christian Association, YMCA].  So, okay.  I got involved with that.  I'm the president of the Board of Leadership of Greater Chicago.  We train leaders for the city of Chicago, the future.  African Americans go through that.  Latinos go through that.  Whites go through that.  Everybody goes through that.  Okay.  But I think it's one of the greatest contributions I can make to the city--to anybody's community.  Do I get involved in stuff?  Yeah.  I get involved in politics.  I'm supporting [HM] Barack Obama like crazy right now.  Okay.  I'll talk about him at anytime.  So do you get involved?  Absolutely.  You have to.  Okay.  This is a tough battle trying to raise the standard of living for African Americans in America.  It's doable, but it's not easy work.  And you can get frustrated and beaten down by the enormity of the past.  But, you know, you got to fight on.  And so I do what I can.  And the older I get, the more I do, because I'm much more capable of doing than I was as a young man.  Before I had to put talk behind it.  Now I can put money, indeed, and power behind it.  The interesting story I'll tell you is, I had--when I was going to grad school in the '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s], my cousin--I won't mention his name--but my cousin was a communist.  Devout communist.  He didn't tell anybody.  He was a professor.  He wrote books.  He wrote militant books.  He wrote books of black poetry.  He was all about communism. He went to see [Fidel] Castro in '79 [1979], you know, to Cuba.  We had this raging debate in my living room.  And I lived in Hazel Crest [Illinois] then.  I had a house there.  And the debate went like this:  Who can do more for black people?  You or me?  I said, "I can do more."  He says, "You're going to be a capitalist to get this M.B.A."  I said, "Look, you nut, I can do more for black people as a business executive than you can ever do as a rabble-rousing communist."  Okay.  And I proved myself right.  He's no longer a communist.  He's a professor at a university today.  Okay.  He's still teaching.  Okay.  But he can't get a whole lot of people jobs, and I can and I have.  Okay.  So.  You know, I like to say that when I was the number two guy at Donnelley, my management staff was the most diverse in the country, because I had three African-American males, including myself, four women, and I used to say, I threw in six white guys for good measure.  But if you looked at that team, a picture of that team, you couldn't look at any management team with any 3.7 billion dollar organization anywhere in the United States and see it be as diverse as mine was.  And I've had professors at universities tell me that, because I took my team off to do competitive analysis at a university, and I says-so I said to the professor who was running the class, "Have you ever seen a business group like this who is diverse?"  And he said, "Never.  Never.  It's almost all white males."  So I lived up to what I said I was going to do.
Story_ID: 176226
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which brings me to the question:  When you look back on the things you've done, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I'm not in the legacy stage of my life yet.  I think there's more for me to do.  I would like to say that I would be an example of somebody that's shown the way for other young people, that you can achieve, that you can start in low levels of society in this country, and you can rise to the highest.  It's doable, 'cause Ron Daly did it.  I'd like to be that kind of example.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And have you ever thought about starting your own business?
Speaker 2: No.  Never wanted to 'cause I never wanted to be small.  I wanted to run something big.  My mother [Ella McCreary Brown] used to say, "What are you going to school for, boy?  What are you learning?"  I said, "I want to be an international financier."  I didn't become an international financier, but I became an international businessman traveling all over the world running something of size.  You know, running my own business is a struggle I don't want to get into.  I admire anybody who tries.  Okay.  But I've never had an idea for a business strong enough that made me want to walk off and do something else.  I want to run a major corporation.  And in that--in a position like that, I can do a lot for a lot of people.
Story_ID: 176227
Speaker 1: The one final question is--unless there's something else you want to add.
Speaker 2: I mean, I can't think of anything else I want to say right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the last question is similar to legacy, but not--a little bit different.  And I know you're still young and you're still like, you know passionately engaged in this, but:  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll you the truth.  When I quit working [at Oce North America] at sixty-two, my goal is to teach business at an inner-city university so that black kids can see a role model, okay, of somebody that's done it and is teaching it, and they can believe that it's real or true and achievable.  So, Professor Daly is where I want to be.  That's how I want to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
