Story_ID: 188014
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Greg Greer.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Carl Davis, C-A-R-L, D-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: And your middle name is--
Speaker 2: "H".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Henry, but I legally changed it to "H."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 19, 1934, I was born here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired as of now.  My former occupation was as a record producer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 19th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: I think your address is 1900 South Michigan Avenue, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's correct (laughter).
Story_ID: 188015
Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they are lightweight questions and they only deserve a lightweight answer, basically, but the first question is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Shrimps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Shrimp, all kinds of shrimp, fried shrimp, stuffed shrimp, baked shrimp, whatever, shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I like to go different places.  In fact, next month, my wife [Dedra Davis] and I are going to the Cayman--Grand Cayman [Cayman Islands] and last year we went to Guadalajara [Mexico].  So we just go all over.
Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, not a favorite one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --probably it'll come out in this interview if there is such.
Speaker 1: I hope so.  I hope so.
Story_ID: 188016
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'll ask you about your mother's side and your father's [William Davis] side but first I'll ask you about your mother's side of the family.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mattie Anna Gibson, that's her maiden name.  M-A-T-T-I-E, A-N-N-A, G-I-B-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The place of birth is Donaldsonville, Louisiana.  Now the date of birth, we probably got it written down there but I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah it's written here, I guess.  Well what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace 'em and--
Speaker 2: Well, what I can remember, you know, from conversations, it was that her family was like railroad porters and things of that nature way back when that wasn't popular for blacks but somehow they were very light-skin.  I think her parents were Dutch, Van Houten's, I think that's what her parents name was.  And my mother used to sing at church and different places and her brothers used to work on the railroad, in Donaldsonville.
Speaker 1: Okay, so her parents were Van Houten's.  They were--they were related to some--or they had a lineage through Dutch--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --people said they were part Dutch?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was part Dutch.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the name was Van Houten and then they married into Gibsons.
Speaker 1: Now were your mother--were your grandparents--was your grandmother or grandfather alive during the Civil War era 'cause I see your mother was born in 1893?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know my--
Speaker 1: Grandparents.
Speaker 2: --I knew my mother's parents but I think her dad married this Van Houten and then they became Gibsons and there's a whole line of Gibsons.  As a matter of fact, there's a book about this thick that's been written about the Gibsons, it's called, I think I listed it, 'Trinal American Family' [Trinal American Family Gibson, by Edward "Boo" Gibson] and it's real extensive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's not a lot about my dad [William Davis] but it's quite a bit about my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are the--some of the--are there any stories about the Gibson side of the family you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there's a lot of stories.  The one I remember mostly is that they used to ride horses and they used to, you know, attack people coming through the woods and they would jump off of trees and knock 'em off the--I mean it was--it's a whole big mess.
Speaker 1: Why would they--I mean, were they trying to rob the people or what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I think they were--they were--they basically coming after so-called black folks and black folks kind of got tired of it and so they just--
Speaker 1: Oh, you're saying the--okay, so you're saying that the white riders, or patrols or stuff would like come--
Speaker 2: Come through--
Speaker 1: --in the black community and the Gibsons would actually drive 'em out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They'd ambush 'em and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Ambush 'em, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that was to prevent lynchings and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's significant.  Any more about that sort of thing?  I mean, did it--
Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) if I had thought you'd ask about it, I would have brought the book.
Speaker 1: Did any of them ever get in trouble?  So--
Speaker 2: I've got a book about that thick--
Story_ID: 188017
Speaker 1: What's the name of the book, again?
Speaker 2: It's--I think I wrote it on there somewhere, it's called, 'Trinal American Family' ['Trinal American Family Gibson,' by Edward "Boo" Gibson], T-R-I-N-E-L [sic, T-R-I-N-A-L].
Speaker 1: Okay, right, 'Trinal American Family'.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's about the Gibsons, right.  Is that a--
Speaker 2: Right, and it's, I mean it's--if you read that book, it's just--it's marvelous, I mean, it's just amazes me what--the things that they talked about that they went through.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this book available in the library or is it published by a family member or--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's published by a family member out in California.
Speaker 1: So I wouldn't be able to get it in the library or anything?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's--his name is [Edward] Boo Gibson, well his name's not Boo but that's what they call him, Boo Gibson but--I should have brought that book.  I can get you--I can get you one, you can--if you want to read it.
Speaker 1: That'd be good to have it for the archives here at The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought I sent some information on some red paper like this.  Have you got that in that package I sent?
Speaker 1: Yeah, here it is.
Speaker 2: And it's--
Speaker 1: That's the family tree, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the Gibson family tree and it basically traces it all the way back into the 1800s but the book, you have to read the book, the book is just absolutely interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll get you a copy.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 188018
Speaker 1: Now, what about your father's side of the family?  What's your father's full name and can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 2: Well my father's real name was William Adams and he was a young man, his mother--his father had died and so his mother remarried a guy named Davis and my father just started using the name, Davis.  He was never adopted and there was never any legal papers done.  He just started using Davis.  So his name was William Adam Davis and--and everybody from that point--there was nine boys and two girls in my family and out of all eleven children, they were all born as Davis' except me.  For some reason we had moved up here [Chicago, Illinois] at that time and things had gotten rough.  He had--I think he broke his foot and he couldn't work so he applied for public assistance and the guy was trying to tell him, you know, you have to be careful, you've got to answer all these questions right and, you know, so he ended up giving his real name, was Adams.  So when I was born, my birth certificate said Carl Adams and I never knew that because when I started school, it was always under Carl Davis and it was only till I was sixteen years old and I wanted to join the Service, that I went down to downtown to the City Hall to get my birth certificate and there was no such thing.  So I came home and told my mother that I couldn't find a birth certificate, she said, well go back and see if there's one under Carl Adams.  And sure enough, there was one under Carl Adams.  So, you know, for a long time I thought I was adopted, you know, but of course I looked just like my dad but--and then she explained to me that for that one instant, he gave them his real name, which was Adams.  So out of eleven children, I was the only one that got the name Adams and everybody else had Davis.
Story_ID: 188019
Speaker 1: But my father [William Davis] was, I don't know what you'd call him, he was--he was pretty rough.  He--what he was doing is he was like, I don't know what you'd call it, bodyguard, way back in the days, but the Gibson family were musical.  They played instruments and piano and sang and things of that nature and my father used to drive up from St. James [Louisiana] 'cause they used to like cut trees and do a lot of logging and sawing and stuff--
Speaker 2: St. James, Louisiana?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so he would come up to Donaldsonville [Louisiana] on the weekends and he was pretty rough.  So, he used to fight a lot and I think the Gibson boys hired him to kind of be their bodyguard or--when they performed and that's how he met my mom [Mattie Gibson Davis] 'cause that was the Gibson system.  And so when, you know, when they would perform, he would stand down in the audience, if anybody got rowdy, he would probably tear their head off.  That was my dad.  He was--his grandmother was full-blooded Indian [Native American] and I don't know what tribe.  I think I wrote it in there somewhere, the name of the tribe, and I remember her name was, they used to call her Mama Faye [ph.], but it turned out that my dad was working at a sawmill and the guy that owned the sawmill, or was the boss of the sawmill, taught my father how to saw and he became probably the best sawer that they had in that mill.  Well, they didn't have any black guys sawing.  He was the only one and so the white guys were really jealous of him and didn't like him and, of course, he didn't really care 'cause he would, you know, he didn't care about nothing.  My father was kind of rough.  So I think it turned out that after my mother and he got married, she was coming home from wherever and some white guy said something to her out of the way that she didn't think was proper so when she got home, she told my father and then he went back up there and found the guy and broke his jaw.  So when he got back home the owner, or the boss of the mill where they worked, came by the house and they told him--and told him and said listen, "They're getting ready, you know, to come and get you and lynch you because you broke this guy's jaw."  And he says, "So what I want you to do is I want you to go in the house and pack, get all your stuff together and pack it up," and he says, "And I'm going to sit outside your house with my shotgun until you get everything packed up."  And he made a few phone calls to Chicago [Illinois].  And so they packed up everybody and shipped them out to Chicago.  When they got here [Chicago, Illinois], he had a job waiting for him and that's how we came to Chicago.  I think it was only three--three kids were born in Louisiana and the rest of us were born up here.  So it was like eight was born up here and three was born down in Louisiana--
Speaker 2: Okay, now, now, where do you fall in the family?
Speaker 1: The last one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The absolute last one.  I was the eleventh child.
Speaker 2: So you're the youngest?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  How old were--you were born here though, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You were born--okay, that's why you were born here, all right.
Story_ID: 188020
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what neighborhood [in Chicago, Illinois] did you live in?
Speaker 2: I was born at 48th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue] and then we moved to 44th [Street] and Drexel [Avenue] and then from 44th and Drexel we moved to 711 East 69th Street, which is right off of Langley [Avenue], 69th and Langley and that's where basically we lived most of our life until I joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: So you lived on Langley for the longest period of time?
Speaker 2: Seven eleven [711] East 69th Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was right off--
Speaker 1: Langley and 69th, okay.
Speaker 2: --between Langley and Evans [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's like Park Manor right now, you would call it, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what they call it now.  We used to go to church at--around sixty--I think it was 66th [Street] and Evans, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church there but I don't know what they call it, probably Park Manor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It sounds about right.  Right down--we went to [James] McCosh Grammar School [later, Emmitt Till Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 1: You're right near Cottage Grove, block away from Cottage Grove.  That'd be Park Manor, I guess now.  I think, 69th, yeah that'd be Park Manor.  That--you were one of the--there weren't many black families there at that time, were there or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was all black in that area.
Speaker 1: 69th Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think Fuzzy Adams [ph.] and them had the Crusaders, used to be a softball team and Arthur Logan, used to live right there, 67th [Street] and Langley, around the corner.  It was all pretty much black.
Speaker 1: About what year is this when you moved there?
Speaker 2: That was in--we moved there in like '41 [1941], somewhere in '41 [1941] and I went to McCosh, graduated in '48 [1948], I think it was, and then went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 188021
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, give us some idea what it was like growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells that you remember in growing up?
Speaker 2: Mainly I remember the streetcars, the trolley cars, going down 67th Street [Chicago, Illinois] and--and I remember in the wintertime we used to have our sleds and when cars would come down the street, we would run after the cars and flop down on the sleds and hold onto the rear bumper and you'd have exhaust in your face and all that but that was what we used to do all the time.
Speaker 1: That sounds dangerous.
Speaker 2: It was.  And then sometimes we used to run after the trolley trains and pull the wire off the track, you know.  The train would stop and the guy would have to get out, put the thing back up on the wire, but, you know we had a fun neighborhood, pretty much.  Mostly everybody played football out in the streets or on somebody's lot.  And we used to play a lot at the playground.  The smells, I don't know.  It, you know, the stockyards was there then, in those days, and you could always smell the stockyards.  You know, if you lived anywhere south, if the wind blew, you could do that.  But--
Speaker 1: That's a smell that's gone now from here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, absolutely.  A lot of people have never known what it was.  They weren't around when that was happening.
Story_ID: 188022
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of a little boy were you?  What were you like and--
Speaker 2: Probably more like my father [William Davis].  I was--I was kind of rough.  I was kind of abrasive.  I was kind of kid that, you know, would start a fight for no reason and--
Speaker 1: Why would you do that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why would you do that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really--I never figured out why but my--my brother, George [Davis], who was about a year and a few months older than myself, he was like, you know, goody goody two shoes.  He was--he was really good.  He used to work at the local grocery store and he was always, in those days, patrol boys where you had the little white belt and you would go--
Speaker 1: The badge and everything, right?
Speaker 2: And when you walked to school, he was the one that either stopped you or let you--allowed you to walk and all that and I was just the complete opposite.  I was--I would--if a guy tried to stop me, I, you know, I'd push him out of the way and go across the street when I wanted to go across the street.  And at the end of the school day if you were somebody we didn't like, when the bell rang, I'd take off and running after the kid, whoever he was, and throw him down or something and fight.  I was just that problem--I was bad, you know, but that was just, you know, the way I was, back then.
Story_ID: 188023
Speaker 1: Did you like school?  Did you go to [James] McCosh [Grammar School, later, Emmitt Till Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] the whole time or did you start off at another school?
Speaker 2: No, actually I went to McCosh most of my career and then, you know, in being bad like that, they had called my mom [Mattie Gibson Davis] and told her that they were going to, you know, put me out of school 'cause I was, you know, wasn't doing too well.  And so one of my neighbors was a Seventh-day Adventist, you know in that religion, and told my mother about this school.  It was on Oakwood Boulevard.  It was right off of Lake Shore Drive on 39th Street and it was called the Shiloh Seventh-Day Adventist School [Chicago, Illinois] and so I got a transfer out of McCosh and I went to Shiloh for the last two years.  So actually I graduated from Shiloh Academy [sic, School] and it was a Seventh-day Adventist school and they didn't take no crap.  I mean, they--if you didn't do what you were supposed to do, they had a huge paddle and they'd take you down to the basement and make you grab your ankles and they would tan your butt up with these paddles.  So I think that kind of straightened me out, you know, to some extent.  I still used to leave school and if there was somebody in there that I didn't particularly care for, I'd catch up with them on Cottage Grove or something and start a fight or something but for--from--mostly that school kind of straightened me out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seventh-day Adventist, it was kind of--so they had a big paddle but they're like--they're vegetarians and--
Speaker 2: Well you know I--funny you mentioned it because [HM] Earl Calloway, from the Defender [Chicago Defender] is a Seventh-day Adventist and I didn't know that till years later but they were really a strict school and it wasn't that thing where schools couldn't have corporal punishment because this school definitely had it, you know, and they were pretty strict so it worked on me.
Story_ID: 188024
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that you remember that were particularly helpful to you or that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: There was--yeah, there was a couple teachers that, I just--I can't remember their names.  The principal was also one of the ministers in the [Seventh Day Adventist] church.  I think his name was Bibble.  And--
Speaker 1: Bibble, B-I-B-L-E?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Like Bible?
Speaker 2: B-I-B-B-L-E.
Speaker 1: --B-B-L-E?
Speaker 2: Yeah and--
Speaker 1: B-I-B-B-L--
Speaker 2: He used to be the guy that would make you grab your ankles and give you that paddle [at Shiloh Seventh-Day Adventist School, Chicago, Illinois].  It may be Kibble, not Bibble.  It's K-I-B-B-L-E.
Speaker 1: Kibble, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So--but I remember probably him more than anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you do in school?  Were you a good student, pretty much or--
Speaker 2: I wasn't a good student in [James] McCosh [Grammar School, later, Emmitt Till Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] but I, you know, I learned to be a good student at Shiloh because they didn't take no crap.  You had to, you know, you had to do your work.  It wasn't that I wasn't capable of doing it, it was just that, you know, I found other things that kind of caught my attention.  So, but when I--when I got down to brass tacks, I could do the work.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what were your favorite subjects?  Or activities in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't like math.  I liked French, I liked all those, English.  I liked history but I did pretty good.  I graduated from Shiloh and--and I did pretty good there.
Speaker 1: What year did you come out of Shiloh?
Speaker 2: In '48 [1948].
Story_ID: 188025
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Then where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Then I went to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Englewood, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, Englewood.
Speaker 2: And I started playing football at Englewood.  Coach Toomey [ph.] was the same coach that coached Buddy Young and so I started playing football and I really liked it a lot.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I was playing running back and defensive back 'cause in those days you kind of played both ways.  So I was like a safety or a linebacker and then I played running back.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so this coach is the one that coached the great Buddy Young, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So Buddy Young graduated before you got there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: He was--he was at Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think this coach was at Phillips before he came over to Englewood.
Speaker 1: Buddy Young went on to play with the University of Illinois [at Urbana Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] and then with--
Speaker 2: Right, and then he played with the--New York [Yankees (football team), New York, New York] or some kind of a--I forgot what it was.
Speaker 1: It was a pro team right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Pros, right?  I forget too which one he played for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but he was a great star.
Speaker 2: J.C. Caroline was playing there during that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was another great who played with the Bears [Chicago Bears, Chicago, Illinois].  Caroline was defensive back too.
Speaker 2: But--so I played football and then one year I had a math teacher name was Ms. Levin, L-E-V-I-N, and I didn't like math that well and she told me she was going to flunk me in that, you know, in that course, and if you flunked, you couldn't play ball.  So, I got really upset about it and I went to the coach and the coach tried to talk to her and she said well, I haven't made up my mind but the way he's going, that's where it's going to end up.  He's going to flunk out.  So then I went and joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: So you just--
Speaker 2: I couldn't play ball--if I couldn't play ball I wasn't going to be at school, you know, so I left and I joined the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Now wait, what year is this?
Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so I joined the Air Force.  I put my age up 'cause I was really only like sixteen--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I put my age up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--so you'd get in, okay--
Story_ID: 188026
Speaker 1: All right, so, you had basic training [for the U.S. Air Force] in New York and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Geneva, New York.  We had basic training and then you chose a career and I chose--well what they do is they ask you a lot of questions about yourself and, you know, do you like your fingernails clean and do you--all kind of different stuff and then they--from that conversation they determine what field you should go in.
Speaker 1: Now before we go any further, why did you choose the [U.S.] Air Force, anyway?  Now you're a tough guy-type, I thought you might wanna be a Marine or something like that but actually the Air Force seemed to be a better choice but why did you make it?
Speaker 2: In case my brother joined the Air Force before me.
Speaker 1: The--the good guy [George Davis]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a matter of fact, we both went down together to join and they took him and they didn't take me.  So now I'm really mad 'cause you know he's in.  And so then I went back and I started forging documents and I took my brother's, my other brother, I took his birth date, which was like April the 4th, 1931.  So I took his birth date, I kept my name, and then I went and got like a baptismal record, and I changed it, you know, so it would corroborate that birth date and then I went back and I finally got into the Air Force and so that's how I got in 'cause that's not my real birth date, my real birth--and then when I got out of the service, I got them to change my records back to my real birth date.  But that's why I went into the Air Force because my brother was in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was hoping we could have got stationed together but he went to a different base for his basic training.  And then I think he went to like Lackland Air Force Base in [San Antonio] Texas--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and then he ended up in Greenland.  He went to Greenland.
Speaker 1: Now that may be worse than Montana.
Speaker 2: Oh, and then he ended up at--at what they call the Offutt Air Force Base which was a SAC Command, a Strategic Air Command--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and that was in Omaha, Nebraska.  I went to Geneva first and then Cheyenne, Wyoming and I was a clerk typist.  So they figured that, you know--
Speaker 1: So you knew how to type?  You knew how to type already or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew how to type a little bit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but all of the things that in this--you take this test and based on your score and what you score high in, they determine what your what AF--what, I forgot what it's called, AFCA [Air Force Communication Agency] or something like that and so it came up in clerk typing.  So I--I said it sounds all right to me.  So, they sent me to Cheyenne, Wyoming and that was the most desolate place that I've ever seen in my life.  And I remember I used to sit--I used to go to the post exchange and I used to sit there and the jukebox didn't have any black music on it, you know, so you have to sit there and listen to whatever anybody else was playing.  And I remember I ran into a guy from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and he was a--he was a boxer and he went on to become--he fought Joey Maxim for the light heavyweight title.  I know his name, I just can't think of it, but he was really good and he and I kind of, you know, got hooked, we were real good buddies.  So, then he used to travel to different places to box and I used to go with him, you know.  So, but then after we went to school, that was where we went to school for a clerk typist, I mean after that, they sent me to Barksdale Air Force Base which was in [sic, near] Shreveport, Louisiana.  And I didn't know about all this prejudice stuff 'cause I was from Chicago [Illinois].  I mean, Chicago wasn't that great but it wasn't as obvious, you know, as the South--
Story_ID: 188027
Speaker 1: So you never returned to Louisiana with your parents [William Davis and Mattie Gibson Davis] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: My mother would not let me go.
Speaker 1: So I guess they--
Speaker 2: My other brothers and sisters went but she didn't want me to go 'cause she figured I was going to get in trouble.  So I never went down there and when I was in Shreveport [Louisiana], I remember I used to go in town and they had a way of trying to make you say, "Yes, ma'am" and "Yes, sir".  So when you went into a store to get a pack of cigarettes or something, they would say things like, "So, uh, you're from up North, huh?"  Now that sets you up to say, yes ma'am or, you know.  And I would say, "That's right".  And then they would find another way and if you know, they would--one day I was walking down to--you go into town and you stay till a certain time and then you had to get back to the bus to get back on the base.  If you didn't get back to a certain time, you just had to stay in town.  And I remember me and my friends, and he was from the South, so he knew all about this stuff, I didn't know that much about it, and we were walking and then a squad car pulled up in front of us and he rolled his window down and he said, something like, "Where you going?"  And I said, "Why?"  What did I say that for?  And he said, "Well"--no, we were running, that's what it was, both of us was running and he rolled his--
Speaker 1: Were you running trying to catch a bus?
Speaker 2: Trying to catch the bus and he said, something like, "Where you going?"  I said, "Why?"  And my friend said, "Oh, why'd you say that?"  That guy's jumped out of the car and he had his sticks and he said, wait a minute, he said, "Are you from the North or the South?"  "Where you from?"  I said, "I'm from Chicago [Illinois]".  He said, "Oh, you're a smart nigger?"  I said, "Well, no, I'm not smart", you know.  So he said, "I'll tell you what I want you to do."  And he said, "You go back down to where you came from, to that street, and you run back down here and I'm gonna ask you the same question and if I don't get the right answer, I'm going to take your head, put it through this door, I'm going to roll the window up on your neck and then I'm going to take this stick and I'm going to hit your upside of the head."  So, my friend, "Come on now Carl" and so we ran back down to the corner and then we ran back and then he would ask you the same questions and my friend would say, "Yes, sir" and I said, "Yes, sir" and we kept on running and they didn't bother us but if you didn't, then they would just find ways to just turn--beat on you.  And I didn't understand all this 'cause I never had that, you know, in Chicago but I was pretty upset about it and I used to find ways to get around not saying, "Yes, sir" or "No, sir" 'cause I didn't think that was too cool but when you go to the store they would always try to set you up, you know, so that your response would have to be "Yes, sir" or "No, sir" and I used to say, "That's right" or "That's wrong" or--
Story_ID: 188028
Speaker 1: I had the same problems on the base.  You're not supposed to have anything on Barksdale Air Force Base [Louisiana].  I used to be in the supply department, typist in a supply room.  And they had civilian ladies working in this area and you'd sit there all day long and the phone would ring and if it was for me, the ladies would say, "Carl pick up the phone", and I'd go pick up the phone and find out whoever it is and so after a while, you know, the phone would ring and they'd--and I answered it and they would be asking for Judy [ph.] or Lynn [ph.] or whatever the name was and so finally one day I answered the phone, they asked for--and I said, "Lynn, telephone" and she said, "What did you call me?"  I said, "Lynn, that's your name, right?"  "My name is Ms.--Ms. Lynn to you."  And so anyways they told the lieutenant that was in charge that I, you know, I called her by her first name.  It was a big mess.  And then the lieutenant came out and we had--you know how they--like you go into a saloon they used to have those swinging doors, well it wasn't like a swinging door, it was--it was like a room divider but it had doors that swing open and he came out and got real upset because I called this lady.  I said, "Well listen, they called me by my first name, why can't I call them by their first name?"  "'Cause you're black."  "Well," I said, "what does that mean?"  I says, "You're not supposed to have any prejudice in the service."  So he came out and attempted to slap me and he got pretty close and you know he swung at me and I just happened to catch it, you know, and then I hit him.  I mean that's what I think--longed to do all my life.  I hit him and he kind of fell back into this thing and broke the little doors down and he fell over.  So then I ran--I left.  I ran out of the supply room and I ran to--to the--to, I think to the office where the commander of that squad was and he was from New York.  So I just sat down and I told him what had happened and so we just sat there.  Next thing I know, here come the MPs [Military Police] and everybody and this lieutenant that--and he came in there and they wanted, you know, to arrest me and they would, you know, put me in the brig and all that.  And so the captain just told them and said, "Well listen, you know, you certainly have a right to press charges against this guy here 'cause he's a, you know, he's a corporal, airman second class, and you're a lieutenant but the reason why you swung at him was because, you know, something that had to do with segregation, you know, so if you press charges against him, then I'm going to press charges against you, you know, for trying, you know, segregate him."  So, they kind of worked it out but I had to get out of there so they transferred me out and sent me to another area and that's when I worked on a machine that was the forefront of the computer.  It was called a DSJ Composamatic machine.  It was a machine that you actually had an anvil and you hit the button and the anvil would come up, you put the type in there and then you would type and you had to deal with increments so that it would begin and end even and you'd figure the amount of increments in a paragraph and figure out what a word--and so then I started getting awards from the U.S. Air Force about saving money and stuff and I'd take one form that was three pages and I'd make it one page.  And so we saved them a lot of money.  We got a lot of notoriety for that.  And that's actually what got me into the music business after I got out of the Air Force.
Speaker 2: Hum.  Now how--what's the relationship?
Speaker 1: Well because this machine was the--was--everybody was trying to buy one so when I got out of the service, it had--one of the manufacturers happened to be in Chicago [Illinois] and so I went down to their office, it was on Jackson and Dearborn, and they had a list on their bulletin board of people who had purchased the machine, you know.  But you figure well, if they bought the machine, they got to have somebody to operate it 'cause anybody couldn't operate the machine.  And I looked down the list and I saw Al Benson.  Al Benson was the biggest disc jockey in the country but in particular in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Did you know that at the time?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 188029
Speaker 1: I'd just got out of the [U.S. Military] service so I was just looking for a job.  So I went there and he [Al Benson] had bought the machine so I asked him, did he have an operator?  And he--he was getting ready to send one of his girls to the school to learn the machine and I told him I was already, you know, an operator for this machine.  So he hired me.  So part of my job was--is to do his top twenty tunes list and all the record stores used that list as a bible to determine what they were going to buy and also what the radio stations would play.  And what they had was they had the top twenty tunes and then they had top twenty up and coming tunes.  So in doing these lists I used to get all these--record people used to come up there and give me their records and try to get Al Benson to play their records and things like that.  And I used to take the top twenty up and coming tunes, I could do what I want with them but I used to listen to 'em and I would try to determine what tunes were going to be hits that would end up going in the top twenty.  When I first started, I was like 80 percent wrong and 20 percent right, you know, but over about a year or--a year or two years, I got to be 80 percent right and 20 percent wrong.  So, I felt like I'd at least had an ear for music and that turned out to be true 'cause kids used to come up there to get Mr. Benson to play their records and they also used to bring me songs that they had not even recorded yet.  I started listening to them and I--I started listening to some of the product and I found some stuff that I thought was great.
Speaker 2: Now, when--what year was it when you started with Al Benson?
Speaker 1: In fifty--'55 [1955].  Nineteen fifty-five [1955] I started.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what kind of music was--I mean, that's--that's sort of at the beginning of rock 'n' roll, right, '55 [1955]?
Speaker 1: You know, rhythm and blues [R&B] is what they called it.
Speaker 2: Rhythm and blues?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, so--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think the--
Speaker 2: What would be on your top twenty list in those days?  What kind of records would be on there in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Who were the most popular artists would you say?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  You'd have mostly blues, a lot of blues artists.  You'd have Muddy Waters and you have Tina--Ike [Turner] and, you know, Tina Turner and--
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955]?  Fifty-five [1955]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was later on like '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but '55 [1955], would it be like Fats Domino or somebody like that or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fats Domino.  I don't remember all them artists.
Speaker 2: Dakota Staton, maybe, you know, I don't know?
Speaker 1: Well she was jazz.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, Dakota Staton was jazz and Ahmad Jamal and all them, they were mostly jazz.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: These were really like rhythm and blues or blues records.
Speaker 2: Lloyd Price, maybe.
Speaker 1: Lloyd Price, yeah, you know.
Speaker 2: Bill Doggett.
Speaker 1: Bill Doggett.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of that.
Speaker 2: LaVern Baker, maybe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of early ones, you know.
Speaker 1: Yup, LaVern Baker.
Speaker 2: And some of the groups, were they--were they popular on the radio then like the Orioles and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: Orioles, and you had the Dells and you had the Spaniels--
Speaker 2: Spaniels, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all of them.
Story_ID: 188030
Speaker 1: So in a couple of years you become pretty adept at choosing who's gonna--at predicting what kind of music was going to be popular down the line?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I just wanted to know what some of the--examples of some of the songs that were big then, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to know many of the Orioles and all those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--and then I had this group called the Dukays, D-U-K-A-Y-S, and there was a--it was--actually, first before that, there was a guy named Bunky Sheppard, well his name was Bill Sheppard, and he used to come up there and he used to bring Al Benson some vodka or gin or whatever, trying to get his record played and Mr. Benson wouldn't play none of that stuff.  So he had a group called the Sheppards and I thought they were really good.  And so I told him I would try to help him get his record played.  So and he and I got to be friends and then we both discovered this group called the Dukays and we were going to take 'em into the studio and cut four sides on and it was like 'Nite Owl' was one of the tunes, and 'Kissin' In The Kitchen' was one and--but there was another one that they were rehearsing.  We had already settled on the four tunes we were going to do and we had booked time at Universal Studios here in Chicago [Illinois] and my brother, Cliff Davis, was--he was a good arranger and so he used to do the lead sheets for us.  In those days, you did like lead sheets that all of the musicians could basically follow and then everybody made their own little contributions.  And so they were out there rehearsing for the session but they were rehearsing a different song, it was like, I don't know what they were saying, I thought they were saying, "Duke Cover", they were saying like "Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl", you know and I didn't know what they were saying so I went outside, I asked them, "What is that?"  And they said, "Oh this is just a new song that we was gonna--we were thinking about doing for the next session."  I said, "No, no, no, we're gonna do that at this session."  "Well, we ain't got no--we don't have the words for it, all he had was the chorus.  And so I called their manager, a lady named Bernice Williams, and I said, "Listen, go home, and write this song, put this song together."  So they did.  They went home and then they called me at home and they said, "Well, we know if a guy's is a king and he has--he owns land, it's his kingdom," and he said, "so what if he's a Duke?"  I said, "Well it's Dukedom, put that in there."  And we talked about some other different things and so she ended up writing these lyrics and so they came back on the day we were going to do the session, and we did these four tunes and we had made a deal with a guy out of New York, named Bill Lasley, he was gonna release two of the four.  So we sent him all four tunes and he picked two.  He didn't pick this 'Duke of Earl', he sent those back.  So, they released 'Nite Owl', which one they released 'Nite Owl' by the Dukays.  And so I was sitting talkin' with Bill Sheppard and I was saying, you know, maybe what we need to do is, let's take these other two songs, with this 'Duke of Earl' 'cause that's the one I really like, I said, but the guy's name was--the lead singer's name was Eugene Dixon and I didn't like that at all but Jeff Chandler used to be a movie star that I really loved, he used to play Cochise and all that--
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --I liked that guy so I told him, I said why don't you take your name, instead of Eugene, we'll call you Gene and then you use Jeff Chandler's last name, so your name is Gene Chandler.  I said, now you make a decision whether you want to stay with the Dukays or you want to go out as a solo artist, as Gene Chandler.  So, he thought it over a couple of days, then came back and said I want to go out as Gene Chandler.  So we put that record out--
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?  What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is in 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188031
Speaker 1: And what was the radio station that you--that Al Benson was on?
Speaker 2: W-G-E-S.
Speaker 1: G-E-S, okay.
Speaker 2: W-G-E-S was the big station [in Chicago, Illinois] and Al Benson had like eight hours a day on the radio.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: --he started giving away--he gave [HM] Lucky Cordell an hour, he gave Norm [Norman W.] Spaulding an hour, he gave, what's the guy who used to be on, I can't think of all their names, but he gave away a lot of the time.  He only kept three hours so he gave away five hours.  And what he used to do is that he would have two stacks of records, maybe like forty records in a stack, and what he would do is that he would play down one stack and up the other stack.  He didn't know--he didn't care what he was playing.  He would sit there at the turntables and he had an engineer and so he would just sit there, reading the newspaper or something, and the engineer would play the records and would tell them, you know, what title he--you know and he would--at the end of the record he said, "And that was so and so and by so and so," you know.  So--but he was the hottest jock out there and he was--I remember he was sponsoring a cleaners, I can't think of the name of the cleaners--
Speaker 1: So he'd do the commercials himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd do the commercials himself and what he did was he would buy the time from the station, okay, he would--
Speaker 1: Then he'd sell his own--
Speaker 2: He would pay the station for three hours, then he would go out and sell those three hours to a Pekin Cleaners, that was the name of the cleaners, P-E-K-I-N.  He would sell Pekin Cleaners or he would sell Parker House Sausages and that's how he made a lot of money, you know, beside the fact that every record company would give him an "X" amount of dollars to make sure that he played their records, you know.
Speaker 1: That's known as "payola", right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it wasn't payola back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--everybody did it, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Later on it turned into payola but--but all these guys became famous because Al Benson gave 'em that five hours worth of time.
Speaker 1: Now is Al Benson black or white?
Speaker 2: He's black.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I just wanted to establish that because I don't--I don't, you know, I didn't know.
Speaker 2: He had a nephew named Ernie Leaner, who was the--who opened up a distributor called United Distributors, the first black distributor in the country and mostly what we call Record Row.  If you went from Roosevelt Road to 22nd Street [Chicago, Illinois], you had distributors on both sides of the street--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --whether it be Allstate Distributor [Allstate Record Distributing Co.] or Garmisa Distributor [Garmisa Distributing Company] or United Distributors or M.S. Distributors, they were all up and down this street right here [Michigan Avenue], on both sides of the street, down from Roosevelt Road to 22nd Street.  That's where they were located--
Speaker 1: On Michigan, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Capitol [Records Distributing Corporation] had an office on that street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Chess [Records] had his down the street.  Vee-Jay [Records] was across from Chess and then they eventually moved to 1449 South Michigan, which is where Vee-Jay went bankrupt and then I--by that time, I went to the--the government had a--a sale and I went to 1449 and I bought all the furniture that they had--well, between me and Leonard Chess.  Leonard Chess bought some and then I got a lease on the building.  So I ended up opening up my company at 1449 South Michigan--
Story_ID: 188032
Speaker 1: Well let's not get too far ahead of ourselves but like when we were talking about Gene Chandler and the 'Duke of Earl', right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, their record was--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --released like--we released that record like the middle of November, by Christmas it was the number one record in the country.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I remember we flew into [Los Angeles] California to do 'Shindig!' which was a--one of the big TV shows out of California.  And I remember we were on a commercial airline but they stopped the plane out on the tarmac and we got off and got on a private jet and just drove from the tarmac to the gate and--
Speaker 1: You're trying to give the impression that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're always traveling on a private jet?
Speaker 2: And when the doors opened, Gene Chandler had on his top hat and cane and cape and there was five thousand kids out at that airport waiting on him to get off that plane and it was--I mean, I've never seen anything like it.  And they had signs out there, the 'Duke of Earl', the 'Duchess of Earl', the whatever--
Speaker 1: Whose idea was it to have the private plane and--
Speaker 2: That was 'Shindig!'s', did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the only thing about it is that the TV shows were either on either coast.  They were either in [Los Angeles] California or in [New York] New York, so--
Speaker 1: At that time they had the 'Dick Clark Show', 'American Bandstand'--
Speaker 2: That was out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: 'Hullabaloo', that's one--
Speaker 2: 'Hullabaloo'.
Speaker 1: 'Shindig!'--
Speaker 2: 'Shindig"'!'.
Speaker 1: --and I don't know, there's a lot of local shows in certain towns, too, like Baltimore had the big local shows and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some of the other towns, you know.
Speaker 2: They used to have a show, what they called it the "Chitlin' Circuit".  You know, you went from the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and you'd go to Baltimore [Maryland] and then you'd go to Washington [D.C.], then you'd go to the Uptown [Theatre] in Philadelphia and then into New York to the Apollo [Theater, Harlem, New York].  So that was like the circuit that everybody would travel in.  But the TV shows, they were out there mostly in California.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the 'Duke of Earl' was just gigantic.
Story_ID: 188033
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, Gene Chandler, the 'Duke of Earl', that's out in 1962, takes the country by storm, and so, I mean, did you get rich real quick?
Speaker 2: Well you know the thing about it is that I told you that two of the records that we had we gave to a guy in New York, and these--the two we did, that [Eugene] Dixon [later, Gene Chandler] wrote, went to Vee-Jay [Records], so Vee-Jay put it out and like I said, by Christmas, it was a million seller.  So, but you got to remember that we were dealing with forty-fives, in those days, so, you know, you--I remember getting the first royalty check, is that I got like something like $25,000 and that was an awful lot of money and then the artist got maybe $35,000 that they split between the four--five of them.
Speaker 1: And to put that in perspective in those days, a college graduate in '62 [1962] coming out of school, if he was making $5,000 a year, he was making good money.
Speaker 2: He was making good money, yeah.
Speaker 1: He could have his own apartment, new car--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --TV set, all that, you know, so $25,000 is like five years' of work for the average guy that's got a college degree.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so listen, I mean, I couldn't believe that this kind of money existed but that was our first royalty check and so Bunky and I--Bill Sheppard and I, we split that, and I bought my first home at 8714 Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And still had some money leftover, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I put down $5,000 on it.  I think it was $5,000 or twenty-five hundred.  I think it was twenty-five hundred we put down on that house 'cause the house was twenty-five thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we put at least ten percent down on it.
Speaker 1: So this is 87th [Street] and Calumet?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's 1963, something around that, '63 [1963], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], and I'm just trying to remember what we had done--but we went from that with Gene Chandler, I also got a chance to go to work for Columbia Records while I was dealing with the 'Duke of Earl'.  I was employed by CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] doing promotion, local promotions, in Chicago [Illinois].  When they found out that I was--I had did the 'Duke of Earl', they sent for me and I went to New York City [New York] and they offered me a job as heading up what used to be called a "Race" label, it was called OKeh, O-K-E-H--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OKeh Records.
Speaker 1: --that's the label that Major Lance was on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some other artists (unclear) yeah--
Story_ID: 188034
Speaker 1: So, then I did--I headed up that label [OKeh Records] and the first thing I put out on that label was like Major Lance.  I did 'Monkey Time' with Major.
Speaker 2: Now that was big in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Oh, that was--
Speaker 2: That was huge, yeah, 'Monkey Time'.
Speaker 1: I had like seven top ten records with Major Lance with 'Monkey Time' and 'Oh Girl' [by The Chi-Lites] and on and on and on.  So then I got a call from a friend of mine in Detroit [Michigan] and I went over to Detroit and she wanted me to go to this lounge to see this kid named Walter Jackson.  And so I go in there and here's this--I'm waiting for the show to come on and here comes this guy on these crutches.  He's got crutches and he's got braces on his legs that he has to lock into place and he starts singing '[That] Old Black Magic' and I mean he just floored me, he was just that great, you know.  So after the show was over, they introduced me to him and I told him who I was and I convinced him to move to Chicago [Illinois].  I found him an apartment and brought him over to Chicago and we went to the studio and we did--Curtis Mayfield wrote a couple of songs for him, as he did for Major Lance, and--
Speaker 2: Now who wrote 'Monkey Time'?
Speaker 1: Curtis Mayfield.
Speaker 2: Okay, I thought so but--
Speaker 1: He wrote that, he wrote--Gene Chandler--I had a hit on Gene Chandler called 'Man's Temptation', he wrote that.  He wrote quite a few songs and--
Speaker 2: Now, who was producing the Impressions, I mean was Curt--
Speaker 1: Curtis.
Speaker 2: Curtis, okay.
Speaker 1: Curtis, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was with the Impressions but you weren't producing his album, I mean, his records or anything.
Speaker 1: No, no I wasn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, he was doing it himself?
Speaker 1: What happened was I hired Curtis--I hired Curtis as my assistant at Columbia Records, assistant producer, so he basically, you know, he didn't help me produce the records but he wrote most of the songs but we had a real good rapport and I used to go out to his house and he would get out a whole bag full of tapes out 'cause Curtis had a habit of writing maybe seven, eight bars of a song and then he'd put the tape away and go onto the next and go onto the next.  And so, you know, I'd go out to the house and he'd get all of his tapes and he'd play something and if I said, "Oh, I like that," and then he said, "Oh, I'm doing this one on the Impressions."  So it got to the point that I realized what was going on.  He was trying to get my ear to figure out what was good for--I mean he would use it on the group.  So then I got to the point where he would start playing tapes and I would say, "Oh, that's good, that's fine, that was nice."  Then after it's all over, then I'd say, "Well, listen, which one are you gonna use?  "Um, well I was going through this one and I was going through this one" and I said, "Well, what you got left?"  And I knew I wanted the 'Monkey Time' in the first place.  So he said, "Well, you know," and then I said, 'Well, if you're not gonna do it, Curtis, I'll, you know, give it to me, I'll cut it."  So, that's how I used to get my songs and I got a lot of good songs.  And then, you know, Fred and Sam, they was the other part of the trio--
Speaker 2: Sam Goodman--
Speaker 1: I used to get mad at Curtis--
Speaker 2: Sam Goodman and what was Fred's last name?
Speaker 1: What the heck was Fred's last name?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry to put you in that spot but I knew Sam Goodman's name but I don't know the other one.
Speaker 1: I'll think of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But they'd get mad at Curtis 'cause I'd end up with the best songs but I had to get 'em, you know--if I told him I liked the song, I ain't gonna get it.
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: But if I--I'd just say, "Yeah, hey man, all of 'em sound good," or even if I heard one that I really didn't like, and I would say, "Oh, yeah, that's dynamite, yeah, I'm gonna do that on the groove."  So I knew how to work my way in there.  So I got my share of songs from him and then I hired him to be my assistant producer at Columbia Records and we did a good job together and I used to help him with the--some of the Impressions stuff.  I ended up actually recording the Impressions after Curtis left.  Curtis went out as a--on a solo--
Speaker 2: Solo.
Speaker 1: --but then I had Billy Butler, which is [HM the Honorable] Jerry Butler's brother, and we had success with him.  And I had a group called the Vibrations with 'Hang on Sloopy' and some other stuff we did with that.
Story_ID: 188035
Speaker 1: Now 'Hang on Sloopy' was a--I know when I first heard it from a black group and it later became a--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Vibrations.
Speaker 1: --okay, and it became a big hit with a white group [The McCoys] later on, you know.
Speaker 2: It may have.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they made a song that really--
Speaker 2: That's what was going on back in those days, you know, the white--they would--LaVern Baker, they would, you know, 'Tweedlee Dee' [later recorded by Georgia Gibbs] and all them kind of songs--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they would take the songs and give it to a white group and it would be gold.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the McCoys out of Dayton [Ohio] that did 'Hang on Sloopy'.  Yeah, the Vibrations did it originally--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from here [Chicago, Illinois], okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of--a lot of, you know, what's the guy that used to do all the Beach songs?  He used to--I'm trying to think of the guy who used to do all those Beach--so he used to do--he used to, you know, if the--if it was the--whether it would be the Orioles or whether it would be, what's the name of that group I'm trying to think of that was on Vee-Jay [Records]?  The Spaniels.
Speaker 1: Hum.
Speaker 2: You know, they would--they would cover back in those days, white acts would cover songs that black acts did and where we couldn't get 'em played, they could get 'em played.  So they--they sold more records than the original one who wrote it except the only advantage that we got was that we mostly wrote 'em so we got the writer's royalties out of it but they made the big hits with it, you know, but it was a--the music business was great, it really was.  It was a lot of fun and it was a situation where anybody could take a hit record and go to a radio station and you got eight disc jockeys on that one station and if you didn't get two to play it, you get another two to play it.  And you could get a hit because they could determine what they wanted to play.  And now, you know, you've got to go to the program director and then he's going to determine, well who else is playing it.  Well if you don't start, nobody else is gonna play it.  So, you know, then you almost have to have it in the top twenty somewhere else before they would even put it on.  So, you don't have hits like we used to have it back in those days 'cause every disc jockey could play what they wanted to play.  And I remember one time, E. Rodney Jones took a record that I had and played it ten times in one day and by the time I got home, I got calls from all the record stores saying, "Hey, ordered hundreds and thousands of that record" and he just played it that morning.  You know, but they could break records and that's what disc jockeys did back in those days, they'd just break records and they don't do that now.  It's almost gotta be a hit before they even play it now.
Story_ID: 188036
Speaker 1: Now what's the difference--I mean, why do they [disc jockeys] act that way now?  I mean, why do they behave that way?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they call themselves 'controlling' their radio stations.  They're saying, well, you know, they want to avoid payola, you know, so they're saying, "Well, here's what it is.  You bring your record to my radio station and give it to my program director," he will go into a meeting with all of his staff and they will play that record--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they will all determine whether or not they think this record is worthy of being on that radio station.  And so the program director basically decides what goes on and what doesn't go on.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so you don't have those starter stations.  You don't have the stations that don't have program directors so you can't get anybody to play it and you can't get the top forty stations to play it because, you know, it hasn't established itself yet.
Speaker 1: Is that why a lot of the music today sounds alike--whatever city you go to you hear the same--same music basically?
Speaker 2: Right, everybody's playing the same thing because this program director in New York [New York] is talking to the program director in Chicago [Illinois] but what is your list and, you know, and then they compare lists and they're all playing pretty much the same thing.
Speaker 1: 'Cause in the old days, it'd be, say songs in Ohio that we'd hear say in Dayton [Ohio] or Cincinnati [Ohio], they'd be different songs in Detroit [Michigan].  Sometimes it would be hits in--and I'm certainly--I mean I'm sure I've been to enough oldies sets here in Chicago to know that the songs in Chicago that are oldies classics like--there's a song called 'Go Go Gorilla' and we've never heard it in Dayton.
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: We never heard the song (laughter) but,(singing) "Go, go, go, go Gorilla" it was a big hit in Chicago, apparently in the '60s [1960s] 'cause all the kids from the West side know it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, but it never cracked--
Speaker 2: It just wouldn't play--you know they wouldn't--they don't play it today, they just don't play.  And I'll give you an example about rap, you know.  At some point, nobody was playing rap or selling it and what happened is that in New York, with--at Def Jam [Recordings], they started doing different rap stuff and they started recording it on cassettes and I mean these cassettes you'd buy blank cassettes at the store and they would have maybe a three track or four track machine and they would put it on there.  They would sample people's music, you know.  They would sample some music and put it in--take four bars and just keep extending the four bars and then the guy would rap over it.  And then they would go out on a corner and they'd have a couple of hundred, you know, cassettes of that same album, in the trunk of their car and they would start selling it on the street.  And all of a sudden, they were selling so many that the major record companies woke up one day and said, wait a minute, you know that's a whole market that we don't have.  Now they still weren't playing rap, you know, 'cause rap was people's expression of the conditions that they lived in, you know, what they were--and kind of lifestyle they lived--
Speaker 1: And wasn't controlled by FCC [Federal Communications Commission] either so the language could be any way--
Speaker 2: Right, I mean, it wasn't being played so--but then all of a sudden, you know, they--the large companies woke up and realized they were losing millions and millions of dollars because this was going on on every street corner, on every city just selling cassette tapes.  And they used to go in and perform in different cities and pick up five, ten, fifteen thousand dollars a night performing.  People didn't even know what was going on and these guys created their own.  And then when the major companies got wise to, you know, what kind of market they had, then they went out and made deals with it and then they would go into the studio and they would edit it so that, you know, it would either beep when they said a bad word or whatever, you know, and then it started getting to the point where they allowed a little bit more and a little bit more and the next thing you know it you're talking about, you know, kill the cops and, you know I'm gonna stick my penis in your ear and, I mean, just crazy stuff so, but that's how rap got started and back in my day, that's how rhythm and blues [R&B] got started because, you know, we talked about things that was going on in our--you know, we didn't dare say--we wouldn't even say "damn", you know.  We couldn't get nothing played with that in it.  What we used to go to the radio stations, give a guy our record, he would play it on the station and by the end of the day you'd have a--you know whether you had a hit or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just not like that today.  That's why the music business is nowhere near what it was--used to be.  It used to be a lot of fun.  The only difference is I would sell a million forty-fives and Babyface [Kenneth Brian Edmonds] would sell a million LPs [Long Playing Records].  You know, we were selling more records than they do now but we weren't getting the amount of money, which is the same way with baseball players, I mean, you know, if they paid a hundred thousand dollars for Babe Ruth, I mean that was astronomical back in his day, you know.  Now it's a hundred million dollars but so it all becomes relative about what era you live in.  But it was just much easier for someone to get a hit, you know, that just sat down and wrote a story about his life and somebody added music to it.
Story_ID: 188037
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the other artists that you represented, I mean, that you were associated with?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see.  After Major Lance and Walter Jackson and the Vibrations and then Billy Butler, I had a group called The Artistics--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I had a group called The Chi-Lites--
Speaker 1: The Chi-Lites, everybody knows them, yeah.
Speaker 2: I had The Chi-Lites, I had Barbara Acklin, I had Young-Holt Trio, the 'Soulful Strut'.  You know, I had Jackie Wilson with 'Higher and Higher' and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At one point it was almost Gene Chandler.  Almost everything we were doing was a hit.  I mean, everything we--we went into the studio and cut, it turned out to be a hit record.  So, that was a period between '62 [1962] and probably '79 [1979] that we just couldn't do no wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you started your own studio, Carl Davis Productions and was that in '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you worked for CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] and then Brunswick [Records], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well you know, in 1975, the [U.S.] government took Brunswick to trial, you know.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well they claimed that the company was selling records, you know.  They would go and rent a U-Haul truck and they would load up albums on all of these artists we talked about and then he would take it down South and all over the country and they would sell records, you know, without it going on the books and they were paying disc jockeys to play their records and all of that stuff.  So, our company got indicted and we had to go to trial in 1975 in Newark, New Jersey and it was like seven people.  By that time, I was a stockholder in the company so, you know, I got indicted because I was a stockholder in Brunswick and--'cause also I had Tyrone Davis and I had a group called Manchild, which included Babyface [Kenneth Brian Edmonds].  Babyface was a guitar player and a background singer in this group, Manchild.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Babyface Edmonds from, yeah, from Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: You know, this trial lasted for like seven weeks--seven, eight weeks in Jersey and the initial results of the trial was out of the seven people that were on trial, the first five people were found guilty of twenty-four counts.  And I was found not guilty and one other guy was found not guilty.  So, even the judge gave every artist on that label a release that said, you're automatically released from this company because they were selling your records and you weren't getting paid for it.  And I was the manager most of those acts so that meant that they were stealing from me as well, you know--
Story_ID: 188038
Speaker 1: And so I left [Brunswick Records] and I started Carl Davis Productions, Inc. and all of those artists, you know, Gene Chandler, and The Chi-Lites and all of them came to me.  And so we started a label called Chi-Sound [Records].  We did really good with that.
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: And until I think 1983, when the record business just did a nose dive because they started coming up with disco and all that old disco music and I just didn't--I really didn't like disco at all, although I did do a million seller with Gene Chandler on a tune called 'Get Down' and that was basic disco.  I really recorded it and produced it but then I gave it to an Italian guy who did this disco mix on it, you know, which means they take things out of place and then they, you know, they put it all back together and it's--it's extended, it's like ten, fifteen minutes, you know.  The same song but done a different way.  And--but it went gold.
Speaker 2: Now, Gene Chandler had this one hit, 'There's a Rainbow' and--that he did over and over again in different years and it still sells--every time he did it, it sold a million copies, right?
Speaker 1: I produced that--I produced that with Gene.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Singing) "There's a Rainbow."
Speaker 1: We did it live at the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois], the first one, it was done live at the Regal and then years later we did it in the studio and whenever we put it out, it sold.
Speaker 2: This is one of those popular songs--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --especially on college campuses for homecomings and stuff.  Gene Chandler was on the circuit, I remember he came to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was about every--I kept hearing him come to college campuses, all on up through the '70s [1970s] doing another version of 'Rainbow' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yup, and then we used to go to Europe.  I took The Chi-Lites and Major Lance and Otis Leavill and we'd go over to England and there was an Englishman over there, his name was John Abbey, he had a magazine called Blues and Soul Magazine.  So we'd get him to book the venues and he'd get ten percent for booking the venues and then we'd go over there and perform all through England and Belgium and places like that.  And so we did pretty good.  As a matter of fact, we're probably hotter in England than we are in the United States 'cause England they really know their music.  I mean, they know who did the background on every session.  They know every musician that played on every session.
Speaker 2: There's a story on--they recently made a movie about Motown and they talk about how James Jamerson, the bass player from Motown showed up in England for--well, he didn't go--he didn't go on the trip but they kept asking the bass player, are you James Jamerson 'cause they knew who the bass player was when most people did--over here, did not know.  I never knew until last year who James Jamerson was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--and the thing about it is even during the time that I was doing Jackie Wilson, the whole rhythm section for Motown used to jump in the van on weekends and they'd drive over to Chicago [Illinois] and I would use them.  I paid them cash, you know, and I'd take them in the studio and I did--I must have did fifteen, twenty tracks on my artist using the Motown sound and [HM] Berry Gordy found out about it and he fined 'em and threatened 'em and everything else and they said, "Okay, okay, okay," and next week they'd be right over there again, you know.  But a lot of the stuff that we put out we used that rhythm section and we used the background singers, a group called The Andantes, we used them and a girl that played conga, we used her.  So, you know, it was interchangeable, you know, as far as the musicians--
Story_ID: 188039
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the personalities of these artists like?  There was--what was Gene Chandler like, I mean, to work with?  And what's he like to work with?
Speaker 2: Gene Chandler was rough.  Gene Chandler was, you know, he knew what he wanted, you know, and if you weren't on the same page, you know, he'd let you know.  I don't know--he and I had some frictions, you know, but we respected one another and we got the things done.  And--but, you know he--he was rough and Walter Jackson was the complete opposite.  Walter didn't want anybody to do anything with him but me, you know, including Curtis Mayfield.  You know, he said, "Well, Curtis, I love you and you can write songs but nobody's going to produce me but Carl."  And Jackie Wilson was the same way.  If Jackie came in town and they said, well, Carl's out of town but, you know, Sonny Sanders is here, or some of my arrangers, he would say, I'll wait till Carl gets back, you know.  And The Chi-Lites, you got Marshall [Thompson]--Marshall is just a wonderful person.  Marshall is the only person that kept this group together.  You know, he--when I first heard the group, it was Marshall and The Chi-Lites and when he signed with me, I said, "Marshall, we're going to cut out that.  It's going to be The Chi-Lites."  So, he went along with that but he's kept that group--that group right now works every week, you know, and they make good money.  Eugene [Records] was the lead singer.  He's no longer with the group.  Eugene decided to go into religious music.  He, you know, he's a very religious person and so he went into that field.  But Marshall is the leader of the group and he keeps them working.  And, I'm trying to think some of the other one.  The Young-Holt Trio, you know, was--used to be Ramsey.  The Ramsey Lewis Trio was--was [HM] Ramsey Lewis, [HM Isaac] Redd Holt and [HM] Eldee Young.  Well, at some point, they fell out and Ramsey let 'em go so Eldee and Redd came to me and we found another piano player and we just called it The Young-Holt Trio and we went into the studio and I did like, 'Wack-Wack' and a couple of other tunes on 'em and then I finally ended up doing 'Soulful Strut', which is a huge record with a million seller, we did two months from the time we released it.  And the same with Barbara Acklin.  Barbara Acklin was my receptionist at the office and she wanted to record--she wanted to record.  She wrote a song for Jackie Wilson and so we did the song on Jackie called 'The Whispers Gettin' Louder' and it was a big hit for Jackie.  And so Jackie got to know Barbara and Barbara kept telling Jackie, "You got a tough crowd and record with me 'cause, you know, I can sing," and so Jackie kept hounding me, "Let me produce it, I know how."  So I took her in the studio and Eugene Record wrote a couple of solos for her and 'Love Makes A Woman' and that just took off, the first thing we did.  So, you know, we were pretty fortunate.  Most things that we did were, you know--and everybody wanted to record for us, you know, everybody in Chicago [Illinois] and then finally I got, you know, [HM] Tyrone Davis and we did that with 'Can I Change My Mind' and--
Speaker 1: That's right, and Tyrone Davis is a big star, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then--I'm trying to think of some of the other ones but one of my favorite groups is this group called The Artistics, you know, 'I'm Gonna Miss You' and we used the Motown rhythm for that session.  But they were good and it was just, you know, I'm probably forgettin' a lot of people, you know.  It was--but we just really got lucky.  We built our own studio up at 1449 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and the engineer that I used was a guy named Bruce Swedien.  He used to work at Universal Studios which was like the biggest studio and I talked him into coming to work for me at Brunswick Records and then [HM] Quincy Jones came in and talked him into going out to California so--and then the first album they did was the 'Thriller' with Michael Jackson.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: He made like two million dollars off being an engineer.
Story_ID: 188040
Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about Columbia Records and how you left Columbia Records.  It's just a wild kind of a story but--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was hired by Dave Kapralik, a Jewish guy that was in charge of the A&R [Artists and repertoire] Department for Columbia Records.  He brought me into [New York] New York and asked me if I wanted to be the general manager for this label called OKeh [Records].  That's the one that I had told you previously that I had done Major Lance and the Vibrations and Walter Jackson.  Well, at some point Dave Kapralik decided he wanted to be a manager and he--Sly and the Family Stone was really hot.  I mean, they were burning up.
Speaker 1: This is like 1967 or '68 [1968] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With Sly, it gets hot.
Speaker 2: So, he left Columbia Records and took the position as Sly's manager.  They brought in another guy named Len Levy to head up the Epic [Records], OKeh label and so, as things progressed, you know, Len Levy and I didn't--didn't get along too well, you know.  Len Levy was the kind of guy that if Chuck Jackson was hot, then he would call me and say, "Cut something like Chuck Jackson" or if Lloyd Price was hot, "Cut something like"--well I just said, "Len, you know what, I'm trying to create my own sound, you know.  You got the Detroit [Michigan] sound, you got a New York sound, you got a LA [Los Angeles, California] sound, I'm doing the Chicago [Illinois] sound."  The Chicago sound was a combination of the North and the South, Curtis Mayfield, Carl Davis, [HM] Johnny Pate doing the arrangements and we were creating our own song.  I said, I don't want to--I don't want to copy somebody else.  So, he didn't like that.  And then, in managing that label, I had to deal directly with the disc jockeys because Len Levy did not want to deal with--I don't know if you remember the jocks names back in the '60s [1960s] but it was like Okie Dokie or Funky Monkey or, you know, all kind of weird sounding names and when they would call New York and then--"who's calling?", you know, Funky Dunky, here--Len Levy, I don't want to talk to him.  So, you know, he wouldn't take the call, they'd call me.  So it got to the point where, you know, I knew all of the guys.  So, you know, I got my records played and I was doing really well.  And then finally, I got a call from a gentleman, I can't think of his name now, but he was managing Mary Wells.  Well, Gene Chandler and Mary Wells were really good friends.  And one time I went to New York to catch Gene Chandler performing at the Apollo [Theater, Harlem, New York, New York] and he said, "I got somebody I want you to meet."  So he introduced me to Mary Wells.  Mary Wells and I got along really good and she told me that she was about to leave Motown because she--for whatever reason I won't even go into it, but she was leaving Motown.  And it was--it was common knowledge--
Speaker 1: You can't go into the story about why she left Motown?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: I mean, a lot of people are, you know, may not even be around now.  Are you sure--
Speaker 2: No, no, the people I'm talking about are still around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, she had her reasons for leaving Motown and the consensus was--is that, you know, [HM] Berry Gordy did not want anybody to pick her up.  I mean, his thought was, well if you don't record for me, you know, you're not going to record for nobody else.  So, she couldn't get nobody to produce her records so she went to Gene, Gene came to me and I took her in the studio and I produced this, 'Dear Lover', which went top five, you know.  And I wrote the song myself and Gerald Sims, guitar player.  And so, you know, Mary didn't skip a beat.  She was doing very well.  Walter Winchell was a reporter in New York, you know, he was all over the country but particularly New York.  And he had a gossip column and in that gossip column he had, "Carl Davis, President of OKeh Records, is rumored to be dating Mary Wells".  Now whether that was true or not, we, you know, I'm not going into.  The fact is, it was in his column.  Len Levy, who was the president of Epic and OKeh Records, saw the column, got angry with me and wanted to know why I was going out telling people that I was the president when in fact I was just the general manager of that label.  So, they called me into New York for a meeting and they got me in front of all the A&R guys for Columbia, Epic and OKeh, and then he tried to front me off in front of everybody and I was not having it.  As I said before, you know, when I was young I was kind of a Rambo, you know me, so I wasn't about to take that.  And I told him to, you know, take a flying roll at a rolling donut.  I used other words but I'm trying to clean it up.
Story_ID: 188041
Speaker 1: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I told him, I said, "You know what Len [Levy]," I said, "you're the one that won't accept calls from Okie Dokie."  I said, "You're the one that won't accept calls from, you know, all these Georgie Woods or all these disc jockeys.  You know, you didn't want nothing to do with them."  I said, "So then they all started calling me and I developed a relationship with them and if somebody said that I was the president of the label, it's because I was doing all the work.  I was cutting the records, I was going on the road promoting the records, you know, I was doing everything for the company."  So, one day I was at home, I was working out of the CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] building, you've got to understand something, at 630 North McClurg Court [Chicago, Illinois], there was no blacks in that building that had any office.  I was the first black that had an office in 630 North McClurg, which is CBS building right now.  And so I had two offices and I had--they had a pool of secretaries.  So I picked this young lady, black lady, and she was working for me for about six months and then she said, Carl--she's going back to college.  She wants to go back and--you know, she said, "I just want you to hire my--you know friend of mine to take my place."  Well, the girl was a Jewish girl, name was Adrianne Lasker [ph.].  So she came down, I interviewed her, seemed nice to me so I hired her.  So, you know, it was all over the building that this Jewish girl was working for me, you know.  And I was there--there was--the day I was there, November 22nd, 1963, when I was walking the hallway and everybody said [President] John F. [Fitzgerald] Kennedy got assassinated.  I was in that CBS building right there.  I was also very good friends with [HM] Gale Sayers and Dick Gordon, some of those guys and--
Speaker 1: These are [Chicago] Bears [Chicago, Illinois] players, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I took Muhammad Ali, but his name was Cassius Clay, into a studio and I did an album on him.  So, Bruce Roberts, who was the sportscaster for CBS, you know, came to me and he said, "Man, listen, you know, everybody in the world is trying to interview Cassius Clay, you know, and I've seen him at your office, you know, and I need you to get him to"--'cause he wouldn't interview with nobody.  So I talked to Cassius and I used to go to his training camp with him, you know, and just hang out with him, and he--he did.  He interviewed with Bruce Roberts at CBS and Bruce was just really grateful and he hooked me up--but in the meantime, one day I was at home and I get a phone call from Adrianne.  She says, "Carl, Len Levy is in your office," you know.  I said, "What do you mean?"  She said, "I'm just calling--"and the engineer also called me at home and he's a white guy and he says, "Hey, Len Levy and the other guy is here and they're coming back here, they're checking all of your tapes and stuff".  And so I jumped in my car and I came down there and they were sitting in my office and I went in there and so he said, "Well, you know, we don't get along well and so I want to get your credit card"--'cause they give you air travel card, where you can travel whenever you get ready and they give you an American Express.  So he came in there to fire me and took all my credit cards and stuff like that and all I could do is just get my personal belongings out of the drawer and leave.  And I was so devastated, I remember that I got in my car and I went home.  I told my wife [Dedra Davis], I said, "You know, this is the worst day of my life."  And she said, "Well, wait a minute, let me go get this calendar."  So she went and got the calendar and she wrote this date down in the calendar and she said, "And what we're going to do is we're going to check this calendar a year from today and we'll see just how bad it was."  And a year from that day, I was making more money than I ever dreamed I would make.  I had more hits.  I mean, he fired me and he let--brought somebody else in there to head up the OKeh [Records] label.  They never got another record, period.  Even the jocks wouldn't even play their records.  He got fired because he wasn't delivering anything, you know, Len Levy.  I went on to start my own company, which is a company called--it was started off called, Jalynne, J-A-L-Y-N-N-E, and it was the daughter of the disc jockey out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], had two daughters, one was Jane and one was Lynne and we put the two together.  But everything we did, including Mary Wells, happened as a result of me leaving, you know, the label.  But I really thought--I mean I had never been fired in my life, you know, and I knew that I had done a good job because I had taken that label that was--that was in mothballs and brought it back to prominence.  I had seven top five records with Major Lance alone.  Walter Jackson was in--I had four albums on him on the charts.  So he just did it because he didn't like, you know, I guess he didn't like my--my ways.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, count the goose that laid the golden egg on that one, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah I've often--and I've kind of tried to follow his career since that time and it's been like, obsolete.  I have never heard anything about him since.  That was my career at Columbia Records.
Story_ID: 188042
Speaker 1: We talked somewhat about what you did since [leaving Columbia Records].  Since this is kind of out of order, now we have to try to figure out where we were, but that was a good story.  I was asking you about some of the performers, Gene Chandler, and some of the other people you were telling me about the personalities and how they were to deal with.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, you know, Gene was a--he was a good entertainer.  You know, he was even a good producer in his own right, you know, he was good.  Now he was just, how do you say it, he was stuck on himself.  I mean, he just, you know, he was just that kind of person.
Speaker 1: Well you kind of got the impression when he was on stage that he kind of felt really important, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.  He felt like he was.
Speaker 1: Like he was the Duke of Earl.
Speaker 2: Right, he, you know, the things I remember about Gene is--is more destructive, you know.  I mean, he would come into a situation and he would try to make things bad, you know.  I mean, he just turned good things into bad and so at one point, you know, we agreed to disagree and I gave him his release and he moved down the street and opened up his own record company and I think he had some success but some artist that he had, I can't remember what it was, and--but then years later, he came back and I re-signed him.  But, there was a lot of friction and a lot of people that we were working with, you know, had said, if he's here, I'm gone, you know.  So, I had to make some decisions whether I was going to lose everybody, you know, or just let him go.  So, but he's really not a bad person, he's just--he's just over confident in his abilities and I think he needs direction, you know.  And when he listens and when he takes directions, he generally does well.
Story_ID: 188043
Speaker 1: And that was about--Walter Jackson was--he was like Luther Vandross.  I met Luther one day and Luther told me, he said, "You know what, I know you produced Walter Jackson, he was like a singer's singer."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I mean every big singer loved Walter Jackson.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And every big singer did not want to go on the stage after Walter performed.  You got to remember, here's a guy that would go on stage and generally he was like the first or second artist to go on.  And he would go walk out on stage with crutches and with braces on his leg, that he had to pop into place and when he opened his mouth, it was just velvet.  I mean, you know, the tones and the way he delivered a song.  You know my wife [Dedra Davis], unfortunately, my wife passed away after--right after we bought the house--I told you I bought a house after we had the 'Duke of Earl' success.  Well, she had an aneurysm and she died but before that, she just loved Walter.  I mean, you know, just--'cause he was such a good singer but he was just a good person.  Unfortunately, he passed away in '83 [1983].  And then--we mentioned The Chi-Lites and how Marshall [Thompson] really held that group together and I remember we went out to California, we did the 'Flip Wilson Show' and I took Walter out to do the 'Sammy Davis Jr. Show'.  So we really got a lot of exposure on all of our artists and the Young-Holt Trio did very well.  And--but, you know--
Speaker 2: They were really--
Speaker 1: I had a problem with them.  I had a problem with the Young-Holt for a while.  As a matter of fact, they, you know--I'm the one that did the hit with 'em on 'Soulful Strut' and then they wanted--they did something.  I'm trying to remember what it was.  It had something to do with an arrangement, you know.  I know what it was.  The original track on 'Soulful Strut' was done for Barbara Acklin.  The original track was done for Barbara Acklin.
Speaker 2: She was going to sing it?
Speaker 1: Yes, she was going to sing it.
Speaker 2: Sing along, okay.
Speaker 1: But when we--when we did the session, she had this cold and so we put it in a key that was comfortable.  And then when she came back to do it, she couldn't.  The key was too high or too low or whatever it was, so she didn't do it, you know, and so then I used that track to put the Young-Holt Trio on but the track belonged to Barbara Acklin.  So what I told the Young-Holt Trio I said, "I'll tell you what we'll do," I said, "I'll put you all on this track with the arrangements and all of those things still belong to Barbara."  And what they did was, since the record--when we released the record, it went right out of the charts, it was a million seller, it was a smash.  Then they came back and they said, "I want those arrangements."  I said, "You can't have those, those belong to Barbara.  So now what you do is, you take this record and give it to my brother, Clifford, and he'll write you all an arrangement based on your group," 'cause they had about five or six pieces in a group.  So he got pissed at me and started telling me, "Well, if I don't get that--those arrangements, then I'm, you know, maybe what you need to give up management and so and so and so."  Well, no problem with me.  If you want to leave, you know.  So I did.  I gave them back their manager--I mean I charged them $25,000.  So, they went to New York and they got the head of Brunswick Records to take over their management.  So he called me and I said, 'Just send me a check and you can have 'em."  So he did.  Then he took 'em in the studios, they haven't had nothing since.  But they were all right.  You know, they eventually came back and apologized.  So, all these different personalities, even Babyface [Kenneth Brian Edmonds] with the group Manchild, we used to have 'em come in from Indianapolis [Indiana].  We'd go down to Indianapolis and see 'em and then we brought 'em into Chicago [Illinois], up at Paragon Studios on Huron [Street, Chicago, Illinois], and we recorded them at that studio.  And, you know, at that time, Babyface was basically just doing background and playing guitar.  And that group was really a good group.  I mean, they were really a good group and one of the guys in the group went on to do--produce Chaka Khan, you know, and one of the guys went on--they all went somewhere.  They did really well, you know, and then Babyface got with [Antonio M.] L.A. Reid and the rest is history from there because it was L.A. Reid and Babyface.  But, you know, I saw--I saw Kenny Edmonds [Kenneth Brian Edmonds] at a convention in Atlanta, Georgia and there was another guy that was with him, he was the drummer in the group, but he was also working with them and he came over and sat down and we had a long conference.  Kenny didn't speak.  I mean, he had gotten big then.  So he never spoke.  I haven't spoken to him since.  But, you know, it goes like that.  You know, you don't worry about that.  So, I think most of the acts were pretty good.  I had no problems with any of them, you know.  Mary Wells was great but she was like Gene Chandler, she had an opinion about everything, you know.  And--but she listened because she wanted to, you know, continue to be whatever it is she was.
Story_ID: 188044
Speaker 1: Now you've been--are you still producing records?
Speaker 2: I am now.  You know, for years what I've been doing is I've got about thirty-five albums on--maybe four or five of them with Gene Chandler, Walter Jackson, The Chi-Lites and Manchild and different groups that I recorded years ago and I do a lot of business in all the foreign countries.  I mean, every year I sign a contract with somebody in Switzerland or whatever it is to release one of my albums over there and you know for "X" amount of dollars plus a royalty rate, you know I let them have the master and they release it over there, I get my upfront money and then I get my royalty.  So I've been doing that for like fifteen years.  But recently, there was a kid out of Newark, not Newark, New Jersey, Farmingdale, New Jersey.  He's an engineer but he also produces, what's the name of the guy they call "The Boss"?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Bruce Springsteen.
Speaker 2: Bruce Springsteen.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He produces Bruce's wife [Patti Scialfa].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I'm producing him, he's a singer too.  So I did an album on him about two years ago and it's doing really well.  And--but then I heard they had a talent show up in Buffalo, New York and a kid named Jason Godwin, they call him "XL" for extra large but, you know, he won the contest that they had up there.  So the prize for the contract is to--for the contest was to get a demo session with me.  So we flew him into Chicago [Illinois] and took him to a studio in Chicago.  We did like four songs on and, which were like demos, they weren't like real sessions, and so they came out really, really good.  So in the last week or so I signed him to a recording contract with Chi-Sound [Records] and we're in the process of doing an album on him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's going to be good.  He sings a lot like R. Kelly and he writes a lot like R. Kelly.  So, I'm pretty excited about that.
Story_ID: 188045
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today, just in general?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I really think that we've made a lot of strides, you know, as a community.  And--but in no way have we made enough and I would really like to see, you know, this community do some of the things that you are doing.  I mean, if we don't begin to chronicle what black people have accomplished, you know, then we're going to lose it, you know.  I think about Barry White died.  I don't know if you all got a chance to interview Barry White, you know.  I think about, you know, Luther [Vandross] had just had a stroke, I understand he's, you know, he's recovering but you've got to get him on tape.  You know, you got to--I don't, you know, obviously you--we didn't get Sammy Davis, Jr. or--there are so many people that we haven't chronicled that one of the reasons why I was affiliated with this young man named Greg Greer [ph.] is that he started off with Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] and then tried to do something about that.  I mean, maybe the grassroots of that were trying to find contributions that our blacks are making and making it available to libraries and universities and things of that nature because we've done an awful lot and a lot of people don't know about it, you know.  I was a grown man when I found out that George Washington Carver discovered the peanut and God knows what else that we--we did the stoplights out there.  When you see the stoplights, the green, and the red and the yellow, it was a black guy that invented that.
Speaker 1: Garrett Morgan, right.
Speaker 2: I think, you know, the first what, cancer surgery that was--and you know so we--there's just so much that we've done that our kids don't know about.  So I think you all are really doing the right thing, you know, and hopefully it's in more fields than just entertainment but everything you can think of, needs to be--they ought to be able to go to a library or university or something and punch it up and be able to see the kinds of contributions that have been made and if we don't do it, it's going to get lost.  And I've always, you know, I've spoken with city head of--at Harold Washington Library [Center, Chicago Public Library, Chicago, Illinois] one time, and I was trying to tell the kids out there that, you know, pick me because I don't want you to go and make the same mistakes I made, you know, but if you don't go to somebody and say, hey, I'm interested in doing, you know, carpentry work and you don't go and find somebody who is an excellent carpenter, then you're going to stumble and fall and make mistakes trying to learn the same things that this guy spent thirty years learning.  So, we need to chronicle all those things that people do so that we can refer back to 'em.
Story_ID: 188046
Speaker 1: In this digital age, what is the future of--of the recording industry as you see it now?
Speaker 2: Well, my feeling about digital is that, you know, it's great because the sound is so clean, you know, but sometimes when it first came out, to be honest with you, it was too clean.  I mean, there was no room for, you know, you need to, you know, people started doing samples.  They started using electronic equipment for instruments, you know, and they would sample different instruments and they would--it'd be electronically put down.  And I think that in the last few years, even someone like Keys, what's her name, Alicia Keys--
Speaker 1: Alicia Keys, right.
Speaker 2: --went back and got live musicians.  You know, nobody uses live musicians any more so that--what we used to do in the studio was pass out lead sheets for a song and say, now this is what you have to follow, guitar player, here's the lead sheet for the guitar parts but we expect you to contribute something of yourself to that.  So you gotta follow the guidelines but if you feel something else, put it in there or we don't get that no more because everybody's playing something electrically and you got some artists who are going back and using live musicians.  I would love to see that because musicians are like, you know, going by the wayside except if they're not playing for the symphony orchestra.  And we used to use, you know, string players from the symphony orchestra here in Chicago [Illinois] and Earth, Wind and Fire--Maurice [White] used to be my drummer, my studio drummer.  And, you know, a lot of people never understood that, you know, a lot of people recorded here in Chicago but the companies that they were with were located in New York [New York] or LA [Los Angeles, California], so they were considered New York or LA artists but in fact, you know, Natalie Cole was from Chicago.  Earth, Wind and Fire's from Chicago.  I can name five or six artists that originated here but the companies are in, you know, other cities.  But, I don't know, I think the digital sound is great.  I mean, I have no problem with it because I'm doing some digital, you know, but I don't know if it's as spontaneous as it was when we used to use live musicians--
Story_ID: 188047
Speaker 1: What is the digital sampling doing to the recording industry?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know--I don't know what it's doing to the industry.  I think that a lot of young men have built their own studios at home and a lot of them are using four tracks.  I don't know if you ever saw the commercial when--what's the kid that--that's on an airplane, he's got earphones and he's working out his beats and stuff on--I can't think of his name but, that's what they're doing.  They're doing their own stuff at home and then they transfer it over to--into a studio and then they mix it down.  So, you know, one guy's playing every instrument that's being sampled from other people's thing.  I'll give you an example, 'Crazy in Love' by Beyonce Knowles, they sampled my record on The Chi-Lites, I think it's 'Are You My Woman'.  So they took the horns completely out of the track and that's what's on her album and it's selling millions and billions.  Now, as a producer, I don't get a thing.  Now, the kid who wrote the song, he's cleaning up.  Jay-Z, which is Beyonce's boyfriend, he sampled another one of my tracks on The Chi-Lites and he's using it in his song.  So, you know, what's happening with the music business is, years ago you used to have black departments.  You used to have guys who were heading up black divisions, RCA [Records], Columbia [Records], you know, all these major record companies, they're gone.  They're gone, it's non-existent.  I think you got one black person heading up a label and that's--and she's a female.  I think it's Atlantic [Records].  But--because it got to the point where you don't need--you don't need it 'cause program directors, you don't need promotion guys going around 'cause your records played 'cause all you gotta do is form a relationship directly with the program director and get your product played.  You know, at one point, if you were heading up the black division of a company, and I came along and said, "Well, hey, you know I've got some products for you to play," and you said, "Well, yeah, but I'm, you know, I'm scared to bring you in, Carl, 'cause if I bring you in, you're going to end up with my job."  So, you didn't bring me in.  And then later on, you got fired because you didn't do nothing.  So, that happened, multiplied, and kept multiplying and kept multiplying to the point now we don't have no black division on no label and now the whole record industry is down to what, three labels.  Three labels owns all the record companies.
Speaker 1: Who are they?  Who are they now?
Speaker 2: I think you've got MC--MCI--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --MCA [Records] and, you know, you got the company [Sony Music Entertainment] that owns Arista [Records], but it ain't that many.  Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Records], you know, but, there ain't that many companies.  I mean, you used to be able to come up with, you know, all these different companies, you know, Atlantic and Brunswick [Records] and God knows how many record companies--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --are out there but now, now you produce your product and you send it to one guy.  For example, [Antonio M.] L.A. Reid is heading up Arista and you may send it to him and if he likes it, he gives you a deal and, you know, they'll release it on their label or maybe they'll even distribute your label but it's all going through three companies, you know, so the record business ain't what it used to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's got to cut the variety down a little bit.
Speaker 2: You know and then so many people are losing out because, you know, the Internet, you know.  First of all, most albums, there's only maybe two, three songs out of fourteen songs that are worth anything.  I mean the other eleven, you know, it's just something that the guy wrote to make sure he gets royalties on.  So, they go on the Internet and they pull those three off of your album and they're not going to buy your album 'cause they pulled the best of what you got--they pulled it off the Internet.  And that might be all right, they're beating your record company out of money but they're also beating that songwriter, he doesn't get paid, the artist doesn't get paid for what you pull off of the Internet.  So, the whole record business is kind of hurting and they're trying to come up with gimmicks on the Internet that you--you know the sound would be messed up, you know, when you try to, you know, sample it from the Internet.  They got some kind of a thing that they're trying to do to screw it up but they ain't done it yet.  And so, you know, I think they're talking about dropping the sale of CDs down to nine and ten dollars, you know, 'cause it was fourteen, sixteen, eighteen dollars so, it's affected the industry as a whole.
Story_ID: 188048
Speaker 1: We're talking about some of the musicians earlier but you said that Maurice White was a studio drummer for you here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who--and I think sometimes the studio musicians don't get enough credit.  Who were some of the studio musicians that played for you here in Chicago besides Maurice White?
Speaker 2: Oh, well you had--you had Maurice on drums, you had, what's this jazz piano player, he used to play with Floyd--you had Floyd Morris, used to play piano.  You had the trumpet player, whose name was--I think his name was [Rahmlee Michael] Davis, he's with Earth, Wind and Fire.  All those guys that were playing horn for Earth, Wind and Fire, (singing) "dadadadadada", they were all Chicago studio musicians and then [Louis] Satterfield was bass player and now I think he's playing trombone, or something, but all those guys were in the studio and Maurice was a really good drummer.  He was a good drummer and he started this group out of Chicago.  I don't think it was Earth, Wind and Fire when he started it, it was another, and then he went into Earth, Wind and Fire.
Speaker 1: I think it was the Pyramids--no, no, The Pharaohs.  Was it The Pharaohs?
Speaker 2: The Pharaohs.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: There was another name, I can't remember what it was but--
Speaker 1: It might have been The Pharaohs, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HM] Johnny Pate was a bass player--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but he, you know, he was a good arranger.  Riley Hampton, he did like arrangements on 'Moon River' with [HM the Honorable] Jerry Butler and he did a lot of stuff with me with Walter Jackson.  My brother, Cliff [Davis], every session you ever had in Chicago, Cliff Davis was playing the solo on it.  So all those records you--when you hear 'Love Makes A Woman' and you hear the solo, that's my brother and that was on everybody, not just my stuff, he played for Chess [Records], he played for different companies.
Speaker 1: Is that the same good brother that was good in school and everything?  Or was that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --this is a different one, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: All right, Cliff was a musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother, George [Davis], is the one that--a goody two shoes, but he actually went--ended up working for--he went into the service.  I told you he was in the [U.S.] Air Force?  He did twenty years and when he came back out, I hired him at Brunswick Records Studio, head of my publishing department 'cause he's, I mean, he's great with that, you know.  He handled the publishing--so he did for Brunswick for years and then he started his own publishing company.  So, he's doing well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's retired too.
Story_ID: 188049
Speaker 1: When you look back at the things you've done and you've really accomplished a lot, having dropped out of high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and joined the [U.S.] Air Force, that's a lot, I mean, you know, did you--I guess when you look back at all of it, what would you consider as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: I would like to think that--that I've always brought people in.  I mean, I always wanted to be an inclusive kind of a person.  In other words, I felt like whatever my world was, reach out and bring other people because they're going to bring something to the table and I always felt as though that rather than look at it as a negative, like, you know, if I bring this guy in and then he takes my job but, you know, the fact is is that I'm going to be recognized as the person who brought him in.  So I've got some kind of a good judgment of talent and I just think that there's so many talented people out there that can contribute, that if my legacy is anything it's that--that I like people.  I mean, I'm a people person.  I think that you can get more things done by getting everybody to contribute than you can about trying to, you know, do it all yourself, you know, because I even--we talked about doing these kind of things about, you know, people and what they've accomplished and I want to do a roundtable discussion about everybody who has been in the music business with me during the period I was in it and put a mic in the middle of the table and we start from the beginning and start talking about a certain particular thing and then everybody would join in with, "I don't remember it that way, Carl, I remember it this way."  And then you sit--everybody starts coming in and then you really, really get the true picture of what was going on from that time up to now because everybody has his own thoughts about how that transpired, you know, and if you--so I like inclusivity, if that's such a word.
Story_ID: 188050
Speaker 1: Well one thing I forgot to ask you about, and it should be obvious but, what was your relationship with WVON [1690AM Radio Station, Chicago, Illinois], good guys back in those days?
Speaker 2: It was probably the best thing that ever happened to me because, you know, the funny part about it is that [E.] Rodney Jones had went to a radio station called "WYNR", W-Y-N-R, I think it was the name of it.  It was--what happened was, WGES [Radio Station, Chicago, Illinois] was sold to this--some outfit and so they brought Rodney over there to supposedly be the program director.  And in somewhere along the line, I don't know what happened, they fired him and he was like me, I mean, you know, nothing like that had ever happened to me and then later--so Leonard Chess had went and bought a radio station and it was--I can't remember the call letters but it was--it turned into WVON which was the 'Voice of Negros', that was what 'VON' stood for and he reached out and got Rodney Jones and brought him over there and Rodney reached out and got [HM] Herb Kent and reached out and got, you know, all these--he got [Joe 'Youngblood'] Cobb, he got all these guys together and WVON was so strong that, you know, you turn your radio on in the morning to find out what was going on in the world, you know.  They used to--and Roy Wood, I don't know if you remember Roy Wood was like the news announcer and he was almost like, you know, if he says something, you'd run out and, you know I mean.  Roy was like very dramatic about how he did the news but you checked with VON before you did anything and they were always behind the black causes, whatever it was, they were behind it.  So, VON, I mean they--I mean it was only a, I think a thousand watt--five thousand wattage at the most station--
Speaker 1: I know weak signal--
Speaker 2: You know, yeah and at night, you know, you could--it would go out to like, you know, you could hear it further than you could hear it during the day but it was an AM station and that was who got me most of my hit records because I could take it to three different disc jockeys and I'd have three different hits--
Speaker 1: Um.
Speaker 2: --you know, 'cause they would play your record and if they thought it was good, you know, and that's when disc jockeys, you know, utilized their ear.  That was when disc jockeys had an opportunity to determine what was good and what wasn't and now they can only play what's on the list.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they can insert their personality into what their work in those days a lot.
Speaker 2: Right, there's no personality now, I mean, sometimes you get, you know, maybe on V--what is it, GCI [WGCI 107.5FM Radio Station, Chicago Illinois], the guy that comes on doing drive time, crazy somebody--
Speaker 1: Howard McGee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know maybe he gets a chance to be a personality but not like it used to be.  Everybody was a personality back in that day.
Story_ID: 188051
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you had to do it over again?
Speaker 2: The only--I would probably not put out a forty-five and put an album out, I don't think I would ever--if I could do it different, instead of selling a million singles, I would be selling a million LPs [Long Playing Records], you know, but who knew that later on there was albums that were going to be, you know, the big sellers.  But, you know what, I enjoy the years I was in the music industry.  I mean, I enjoyed it because I got a chance to do everything I wanted to do, you know.  I've got eight kids.  I've sent all my kids to school.  They all--they had the opportunity to go to college.  Most of them did go and they all graduated and they're all professionals and so, no, I wouldn't have done anything different as far as, you know, because I always try to project, you know, on a five-year period where I wanted to be five years from that day.  And it worked out pretty good for me so I have no regrets whatsoever.
Story_ID: 188052
Speaker 1: Okay, and one last question, now.  It's similar to legacy but different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, I'd have to be--to be honest with you, I'd have to tell you that there's been some bitter moments in my life simply because I know that if I wasn't responsible for the Chicago [Illinois] sound, I was one of two people who were responsible for it and I've seen awards being given out to people two and three times and I've never got the first one and I got--I stopped watching all of these, you know, different award shows and stuff.  I won't even watch it because, you know, people that I thought should have gotten credit for things that were done doing it, haven't gotten the credit, you know, and they--so, you know, I don't intend to sound bitter but I just felt as though that I never really got the recognition that I thought I deserved, or we deserved, as a record company, as a group of guys who produced, you know the Willie Hendersons, different people who produced Sonny Sanders, Tom Tom Washington, all these people were great.  I mean Tom did all the--a lot of arrangers, Earth, Wind and Fire.  Sonny did arrangements at Motown and for us so--but these people never got the kind of recognition because Chicago was not the mecca, it was either New York [New York] or LA [Los Angeles, California] I mean they got most of the notice.
Speaker 1: And Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: And Detroit, the opposite of Detroit, yeah.  But if you noticed when [HM] Berry [Gordy] moved from Detroit, went out to LA, he didn't get the same kind of success as he had in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, but--
Speaker 1: You're right, I mean Chicago's not known for--for Chicago sound but there is a Chicago sound.
Speaker 2: Certainly.
Speaker 1: And there is a legacy here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: And there was a book written called 'Chicago Soul' [Chicago Soul (Music in American Life), by Robert Pruter] and Robert Pruter listed a lot of people in that book that was responsible for the success of all the things that were going on in Chicago with some of the artists.
Speaker 1: And is even Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has gotten credit and so has Memphis [Tennessee], even--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but no Chicago yet, you know, so Chicago's just startin' to get recognized.
Speaker 2: You know, it just--it was a lot of things done in Chicago and it certainly should get the recognition and, you know, things like this and you, you know, you would hopefully--you'll make that happen.
Story_ID: 188053
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, could you go ahead and tell us a little bit about the photograph we're looking at here?
Speaker 2: This was when my label, Chi-Sound [Records], was being distributed by United--I'm sorry, 20th Century Fox [Records].  I had a distribution there with 20th Century Fox and that's me on the left and Gene Chandler on the right and Bunky Sheppard, Bill Sheppard, the guy I was telling you about that we started together.  So, that's in Bunky's office out in California.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and who's this?
Speaker 2: That's me, that's [HM] Carl Davis.  It was an awards banquet.  I used to be the football and basketball coach at St. Ailbe's Grammar School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Really?  Where, on Stony Island [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know where that is.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I bought all the uniforms and the--and I used to drive the kids back and forth to the basketball games in my Rolls Royce and they used to (unclear) about the little rich boys that all lived in Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois].  But I had an awards banquet show and, what's his name, Don Cornelius was there 'cause I think he's probably on some other pictures.  [HM] Lerone Bennett was there.  So--
Speaker 1: That was when I was in the [U.S.] Air Force.  I'm--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How long were you in the Air Force?
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951] till '54 [1954] and I got a discharge 'cause my father [William Davis] died and there was no one at home with my mom [Mattie Anna Gibson] so they let me out.
Speaker 2: Okay, are you ready?
Speaker 1: This is a studio that we built at 1449 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  That was The Chi-Lites.  All the way to your right is Marshall [Thompson] and to his left--to his right is Squirrel [sic, Creadel "Red" Jones] and the guy with the hat on is Robert ['Squirrel'] Lester.  Eugene [Record] is sitting down next to me and Tom Tom [Washington] is all the way to your left.  He was one of our arrangers.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're ready now?
Speaker 1: That was at that banquet that I told you about for the football and basketball players and that's Don Cornelius and Lerone Bennett, who was the editor of Ebony magazine.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Those kids must have been happy?
Speaker 1: Oh, very.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And we also had Dick Gordon of the [Chicago] Bears [Chicago, Illinois] come out and--
Speaker 2: --that's a picture of me.  I think there's Gene Chandler, all of The Chi-Lites and all of the Dells.  And you don't need me trying to go through all these names?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All of The Chi-Lites and all of the Dells.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of the Dells, all of The Chi-Lites, me and Gene Chandler.
Speaker 1: Did you produce the Dells too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, I kind of (unclear) by me.  I guess you (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of myself and Mayor [Michael Anthony] Bilandic.  He was the mayor that, I think, took the office--
Speaker 1: Right after old Mayor Daley died.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when Richard J. Daley--
Speaker 1: J. Daley.
Speaker 2: --when he died, they put him in.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What was the occasion?
Speaker 2: The occasion was, we had an organization called, WECAN [Woodlawn East Community and Neighbors].  It was an organization of basically our community, black community, and we were trying to empower the black business people to, you know, to deal with the politics and all of the things that we wanted to get done.  And so we started off with Eddie Vrdolyak and with Mayor Bilandic and I don't know if you know [HM] Jacoby Dickens?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Jacoby was in it.  I was the chairman of the organization and Jacoby was the co-chairman.
Speaker 1: What was it called, was it--
Speaker 2: WECAN.
Speaker 1: Oh, WECAN?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mattie Butler, WECAN.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: WECAN.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And--
Speaker 1: That's [HM the Honorable] Jerry Butler's sister, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, WECAN.  I knew George Butler pretty well.
Speaker 2: Now there's the goody goody two shoes, that's my brother, George [Davis], all the way to the right.  And in the middle is [Robert E.] Bob Johnson, of Jet [Magazine].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's me on the left.  And I don't know what the occasion was.  It looked like a party but--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  He's not looking so goody goody two shoes there.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: That's gotta be--
Speaker 1: Probably late '70s [1970s], maybe?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], it's like '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Now this was--they had a testimonial for me at the--at the Hilton--Chicago Hilton [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm trying to figure out who that girl is.  She's pretty?  But that's Don Cornelius and me and I don't know who that other gentleman is but that was at the Chicago Hilton and Towers and they had a testimonial for me.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right. Let me get a close up first.  And your hair was really different (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was that you in the middle?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the 'Soul Train' with Don Cornelius, Gene Chandler and, what is his name?  He was a choreographer?  He does all of the dance work for, I almost said his name, for the Gladys Knight and the Pips, for the Four Tops and that's me on the end.  But he was a--he would take, you know, a record and he would design steps for the whole music and then you would write the arrangements out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Now that's Chuck Jackson that's singing in my studio at Brunswick. Chuck Jackson, right, that's right, 'Tossin' and Turnin''.  Did you produce that one?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Tossin' and Turnin''?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I didn't produce him at all.  He was just using my studio--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he asked me to come back there and--I was known as a singer producer.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Walter Jackson is so good, just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's Eddie Robinson, the football coach at Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and me and, I forget this gentleman's name to the right, he was--he represented Johnson Products and we were at a Grambling game down in Grambling, Louisiana, back right off of the dressing room.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We taped [HM] George Johnson yesterday.
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Can you push the bottom of that in 'cause it's catching it?  Perfect.
Speaker 2: That's that testimonial that I told you about, and that's Pervis Staples on this end, that's me, that's Georgie Woods is the third one, Frankie Crocker, disc jockey--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard--
Speaker 2: --with the sun glasses, E. Rodney Jones, I don't know who else there is, and Don Cornelius and this is August Sims and George Williams and I think that's Willie Henderson.  That was at my testimonial.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: That's E. Rodney Jones and me.  I think that was at the same testimonial.  Rodney is very ill now and that would be somebody that you all need to reach out for.  He's down in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Rodney Jones?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: We haven't been to Baton Rouge yet.  We've been to New Orleans [Louisiana] and--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm ready to go too.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very happy to go South this time of year.
Speaker 2: That's Gus Redmond to the right who does promotions, that's me in the mink coat and that's Major Lance next to me and that's Otis Leville next to Major.  And this young lady used to work for Queen's booking agency [Queen Booking Corporation] out of New York [New York] and I don't know who that person is.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I had a real good head of hair.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I had a minister from a church outside, called it "butter".  Every time you'd see--he called my hair, "butter".  But I had a really good grade of hair but I did have it, you know, processed, so it made it even look better.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When was this picture taken?
Speaker 2: This was taken in, oh, '73 [1973], somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Okay.  This is a portrait of your parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And when was that painted?
Speaker 2: That was like--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Was it done from a photo or real life?
Speaker 2: Yeah my--my mother died in '83 [1983].  This photo was done in like maybe '75 [1975].  The guy who did that one for me did another for me and he was really good.  He did it from a photo.
