Story_ID: 1736
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please? (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  [Microphone for Ms. Gines not on].
Speaker 2: All right, here we go.  I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Alford J. Dempsey, Jr., and that's A-L-F-O-R-D, middle initial J, also James, J-A-M-E-S, Dempsey, D-E-M-P-S-E-Y, Jr.
Speaker 2: And what is your place of birth and your date of birth?
Speaker 1: I was born on March 19, 1947 in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm currently a Judge of the Superior Court, Fulton County.
Speaker 2: And today's date?
Speaker 1: It's April 20, 2011.
Speaker 2: Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 1: It's in my, the office, my office in my chambers here in Fulton County Courthouse in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Now, I'm just gonna ask you some fun questions.  Tell me what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 1: My favorite food is twice-baked snapper--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and that's it.  That's my favorite, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: Green.
Speaker 2: And what about vacations?  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: The one I haven't gone on (laughter).  I'd like to go to Italy.  So, but I like to go--well, actually, long story short is that my wife and I were gonna travel when we retired.  And so I have no real preference right now, but I do wanna go to Italy, so.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: The spring time.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: I liked it better before allergies set in, but (laughter).
Speaker 2: What about a favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Well, in the court--I've got a lot of them, but in the courtroom, I guess one of the ones I use quite a bit is from an old blues song by Albert King and when I'm telling someone that we're putting on probation, I tell 'em that "if the washing doesn't get you, the rinsing sho will" which is basically, if you don't do right, when you come back in here, then don't--you don't wanna get rinsed by Judge Dempsey.  So that's an old, it's called "Laundromat Blues" was the name of the song.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: So I say that quite a bit.
Speaker 2: All right.  Let's talk about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 1737
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name and where and when he was born if you know?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Alford James Dempsey, Sr., and he was born in Americas, Georgia on December 10, 1911.
Speaker 1: And did he share any stories about him growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did, but at an early age, the family moved to Aliquippa, Pennsylvania cause, my grandfather passed when my father was two.  And it was a railroad, he worked on the railroad, and he had a railroad accident.  And then his mother died when he was about ten.  And so my Uncle Matt was quit a bit older and he moved the family to Aliquippa to get away from the segregated, racist environment down in Americas, Georgia, cause you know, Americas was the home and one of the hotbeds for the Klan [Klu Klux Klan].  So they move, like a lot of other black folk in those days to the North for a better life and more opportunity.  So the stories I heard were mostly about Aliquippa, Pennsylvania as opposed to Americas, Georgia, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me some of the stories that he told you about his growing up in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very active in sports just like I, I was, and I guess I took after my father in that regard.  And he was in school with, most folk will remember Pete Maravitz.  Well, Pete's father, Pres Maravitz, was from Aliquippa, and they played ball together in high school.  And then he used to be lifeguard at the local pool.  And he didn't talk about that that much, but my cousin, Marguerite, said all of the girls used to like to go down to the pool cause my dad was down there as the lifeguard (laughter).  And, of course, he drove--my Uncle Matt had a trucking company, among other things.  They had a general store there.  In fact, they, during the Depression [The Great Depression], they basically would give folk whatever they needed so they could get by and give it to 'em on credit, and they--most of that didn't get paid back.  And they owed about, this was back in the '30s [1930s] or so.  They owed about $30,000 and they paid it all back, even though they didn't get paid back.  But that was the way they operated.  But he also had a trucking business.  And dad first learned how to drive on a Model A truck.  And so he talked about how he used to do deliveries and all that kind of thing.  And I remember, the story I remember best was he was a youngster, kind of, maybe I think it was like elementary or middle school age.  And he had one of those--I don't know if you remember the Archie, folk who are my age would remember Archie Comic books, and there was a character called Jughead.  And they had a pork pie hat that was cut up to look like a crown.  Well, my dad had one of those and this bully had taken his hat.  And so he didn't wanna go home without his hat and have to report that it had been taken.  And so he hid in the alleyway, and the bully was coming by and he hit upside the head with a half brick and got his hat back.  And then the guy became his best friend.  So I always remembered that story that basically, you know, you need to get a bully's attention.  And when you do, they usually will show their true colors.  And I remember dad's story about hitting that guy upside the head.  And it worked.
Story_ID: 1738
Speaker 1: How much education did your father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] have?
Speaker 2: He graduated from Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] with a degree in biology.  In fact, he taught for a while at Washington High School, among other things.  He spent the majority of his career in the United States Army.  He fought in World War II in Italy with the 92nd Division and which was the only African Americans to fight in the European theater in World War II as they came into Italy and fought in the woods and forest there.  And then later he went to, and fought in the Korean conflict.  He was in intelligence during that particular period of time.  But he was a captain in the service back then which was very unusual.  In fact, my, his first job teaching was down in Butts County, Georgia where my mother was teaching.  And she gave him his first job (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father, after he came from the War is when he went to school?
Speaker 2: No, no, he went to, he graduated, he graduated before he went to--after he got of Morris Brown [College], he went into the service.
Speaker 1: What about your, well, you told me about how his parents had passed away and your Uncle Matt actually takes on that role as parent.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your relationship with your Uncle Matt?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I didn't see Uncle Matt that often, just a few times cause they were way up in, at that time, they were way up in Aliquippa, and we were still here in Atlanta.  And so I didn't go to Aliquippa that often.  So I mostly knew Uncle Matt by the stories that were told, and, but he was quite some kind of a guy.  And especially, I always remembered about how altruistic the--and I guess that was passed down to me because the family believed in trying to, not only take care of themselves, but also to look out for the people in their community.  And that's one of the things I remember most about Uncle Matt is that he was that kind of a person where he shared what he had with the rest of the community, kind of like--it's a phrase for it, but like the parent for the community, kind of, one of those kind of things.  And so I always remembered that.  And, of course, that works on both sides of my family which kind of had a lot to do with how I think and where I'm coming from and what things, you know, the principles that drive me and make me who I am.
Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge of any of your great grandparents?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't have a whole lot about my great grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there anything you wanna talk about your father?
Speaker 2: Well, I really was, you know, I really, when I was a kid I wanted to be just like my father which is not unusual for boys.  But I had a little army uniform exactly like his and had a summer one and I had a winter one too.  And he was, I think one of the highlights of his career was he was the, he was in charge of the Honor Guard for the commanding general in the occupation forces in Frankfurt, Germany at the time.  And this group of, they were African Americans because even though, I guess technically, Truman [U.S. President Harry S. Truman, 1945-1953] had ordered the desegregation of the Army, they still were, they were still segregated to a great extent.  So this was, the Honor Guards were all black guys.  And they were really good.  From what I understood, they could do one command and do drills for forty-five minutes with just one command.  And, but that took a real toll on him because it was really extreme pressure because all of these guys had to be spit shined and everything had to be in place.  And, you know, and this was--and I'll show you, at some point, I've got, I keep my office here, a picture of my father with General Eisenhower [U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953-1961],  and General Tom, I think it was Thomas Handy.  And they were reviewing the troops.  And so he was very proud of that, and so was the family because they got excellent reviews all of the time.  And, of course, that was kind of important to folk who were looking to establish dignity and respect to be able to perform well cause it was--you really had to in order to maintain your own interpersonal dignity.  So it was important not to mess up when you were on display or you were doing something because it, had he failed to perform, had his guys failed to perform, then that would have just been another mark against African American soldiers cause that was a real big deal during World War II and beyond that.  And so it was very important that any time they were being looked at for any particular purpose that they would do well and that kind of stuck with me.  And also, it was important that whatever I do, that I do a good job because if I didn't, not only would it affect me, but it would affect others like me.  I had a boss when I was practicing as a lawyer.  Her name was Marva Brooks.  She was another Harvard lawyer.  And Marva used to say, Dempsey, we haven't been carrying briefcases that long that what one does doesn't still effect what happens to the other.  And so that kind of resonated with what my father had told me about he had to do and the things that he had to deal with when he was quote unquote "on display" so to speak.
Story_ID: 1739
Speaker 1: Did he [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] talk much about the segregation in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: He didn't talk a whole lot about the, yes--well, let me answer your question this way.  He did talk about that.  He didn't talk about the battles, the killing, the wounds and, you know, all of that kind of stuff.  He didn't really talk about that at all.  And plus, he didn't talk about anything to do with any secrets because he was under the War Secrets Act, and he kept quiet until he died.  But he did talk about the racism and things of that nature.  And one of his--I'll never forget this.  He almost had tears in his eyes when he was talking about this.  He was on the Army base, and he said that the German prisoners of war had more privileges than the black soldiers who had fought and shed blood for their country.  And that, that just about drove him up a wall because he had, he had been, he had two Purple Hearts.  He had been wounded twice in battle and decorated.  And so he, that just really stuck in his craw.  And that wasn't the first time I've heard that.  I've heard that from other service men about that, Lieutenant, was it Lieutenant Colonel Dryden was a Tuskegee Airman.  He was one of my church members.  And he talked about the same kind of thing, and so that always, you know, in my mind, I said, my God, you know, somebody going out there risking their life, shedding blood for their country, and then they treat the enemy better--but that was typical of what went on at the time.  And it doesn't make a bit of sense.  But that's what was going on.
Speaker 1: Do you think that he did well in the service and got to the position where he was as captain because of his education?
Speaker 2: I'm sure he became an officer because he had a college degree.  And that was unusual for, in the early '40s [1940s], you know, in the early '40's [1940s], that was very unusual for a black man to have that.  Most of the, a substantial amount of the troops that were in the 92nd didn't have a whole lot of formal education.  And so that was, that was unusual.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about your dad?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a million stories I could tell him about him.  Like he was a real task master, so, you know, it was like he said, look, you're gonna do what I told you or I'll know the reason why.  And I think one of his favorites was, he'd said, and that's not a threat, that's a promise.  If you don't do what I told you, I promise you, I'm a whip your behind (laughter).  And he did.
Story_ID: 1740
Speaker 1: All right, let's talk about your mother.  Tell me her name and where and when she was born?
Speaker 2: Okay, her name was Maenelle.  That's M-A-E-N-E-L-L-E, Dixon, D-I-X-O-N, Dempsey.  And she was born in Noonan, Georgia on November 8, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about any stories she might have shared about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  Let me think about--well, she used to pick peaches when she was a young girl.  And, you know, Georgia's got a bunch of peaches, peach trees all around and everything.  And she talked about--well, most of the stories, she talked about was when she was in, about educating and, in education were the ones that I remember most about and that stuck with me over the years.  She didn't talk a whole lot about what it was like growing up in the South with the, as a young African American woman or any of that kind of stuff.  But she did tell me many stories about the things she did early on.  She was a gene supervisor.  And as I'm sure that you may be familiar with that, but one of her, I think one of the folk that you interviewed was one of her mentees, Dr. Knobby Harris [Dr. Paul "Knobby" Harris].  And they went around the South, mostly women, there were a few men, and they went around the South basically trying to set up school systems, and schools and things for African American children.  And back then, one of the things was that you stayed at people's homes.  So she would, she knew everybody in Georgia.  You know, it was like if she'd talk with somebody and she said, well, oh, you know so and so and so and so.  And they'd yeah.  So she knew everybody from Toccoa, up in North Georgia all the way down to Midway and down through Savannah and those other areas because they actually were there.  And she started out originally in Butts County [Georgia] in a one-room school.  And, in fact, she got, gave my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] his first teaching job as an assistant principal and coach at a local school down there.  But the, that was important to me too because it was, she was a graduate of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  She graduated from Spelman College in 1933.  And back then Spelman was a teachers college.  And so the women that graduated from Spelman were all educators.  Of course, my mother's side of the family were, just about all of my aunts and uncles that I had, you know, substantial contact with and grew up with were educators.  My Uncle William, William Dixon, William L. Dixon was head of the Biology Department at Kentucky State College [Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] for many, many years until he retired in the '60's [1960s].  And he was a 1931 graduate of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  My Aunt Opal Dixon, my mother's youngest sister who graduated in the '40s [1940s] from Spelman.  And she was, this is, this will date me, but back then, they had an academic area called home economics.  And my Aunt Opal was the consultant in Home Economics for the State of Georgia, and so she went around dealing with the schools and working with the home economics teachers.  And then she had a Master's [degree] from NYU [New York University].  And my cousin, Motta who was my, was a little bit older than my mother, so she was my second cousin and my mother's first cousin, Motta Sims, Motta L. Sims, I think it was.  Yeah, but Motta graduated from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the late '20s [1920s], and she got a Masters from NYU as well.  And, of course, my mother got a Rosenwald Fellowship and got her Master's in teacher education at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, California] in '43 [1943].  And so they were all educators.  And so, you know, I grew up in a family where education was paramount cause I always had the philosophy that the true, that the road to freedom was through education.  Of course, now, this next generation is through economic empowerment, but at the time, we were still trying to get educated.  So I grew up, and I tell folk now, a lot of folk don't understand it cause even to this day, a lot of, a lot of African American families, the persons who are graduating are the first graduates in the family.  So I understand how truly blessed I was because I grew up, it never occurred to me growing up that I wasn't gonna go to college and not only that, that I wasn't gonna get some kind of terminal degree.  So I mean it was just understood.  That was just normal in my mind.  And, of course, I, you know, and then as I started seeing, well, these are the first generation of somebody going to college, I said, what?  That seemed unusual to me, and then I, but, you know, now, that I'm older and understand what all was going on.  But at the time, you know, that was, that was what I was supposed to do.  It wasn't no--it wasn't anything about are you gonna stay in school or you're gonna do that kind of stuff.  It was like, where are you gonna go to school?  What degree you're gonna get and those kinds of questions.  And so that was a blessing really, to be in that kind of environment because it wasn't anything about, any issue about motivation or, or those kind of questions.  And, of course, I didn't think about how it was gonna get paid for (laughter) and those kind of things.  But it was, that was a great environment to be in where you were just around educated people.  The neighborhood I lived in, we were all, you know, all types of folk were there from the folk that worked at the garage, the doctors, the manager for the movie theater, my good friend and mentor--mentee, I mean mentor, Alley Pat, Patrick--and he was something else.  But we were all there, and there were so many good examples, you know, this whole thing they talk about role models and everything.  We had role models all over the place.  And so we were able to do that without any problem.
Story_ID: 1741
Speaker 1: What about your grandparents on your mother's side?  Tell me who they were and were they educated as well?
Speaker 2: Okay, no, I don't know how many--I know they didn't go to college, and they was, let's see, mother's, my grandfather was William L. Dixon, Jr.  And he was a master brick mason.  So was my Uncle, Tom Hunter.  That was my--my grandmother was Opal Hunter Dixon.  And so she was part of the Hunter family.  And they're originally from Orangeburg, South Carolina and over in that area.  But Uncle Tom and my grandfather, W. L. Dixon, were master brick masons.  And so they built most of the houses, they had--they built most of the houses in Noonan [Georgia] including they worked on former Governor Ellis Arnold's house.  They built it--at least they did all of the brick work on that.  And I had Uncle Milo Hunter was, started out working as a, he was, he was a, I guess they called it shoe cobbler or something.  But he worked in a shoe shop.  And when the owner decided to retire, he sold the business to my Uncle Milo, and so he actually was the only black person in Noonan to own a business in the main courthouse square area.  And he did more business than the other store there cause they did really good work.  But Uncle Milo was also a member of the Chamber of Commerce which was unheard of for a black man to be.  Now, I don't know how that happened or how it was, but he was in the Chamber of Commerce, and they named a street after my Uncle Milo and my Uncle Tom Hunter.  Both of them have streets named after them in Noonan now.  But they believed, you know, they were part of the generation that wanted to do better for their children than it was for them, and they did fairly well.  My Aunt Beulah, who was Uncle Milo's sister, and she married a fellow named Sims so she was Beulah Hunter Sims, and Aunt Beulah had a little, I guess what the then equivalent of what now, like a little corner store or whatever, and sold candy and other kinds of things.  And she had a big ole, huge chicken coop out in the back.  And I remember seeing her go out there and grab a couple of chickens and (laughter), you know, Aunt Beulah, you didn't mess with Aunt Beulah, but and then we had pecans, they had pecan trees in the back.  And they used to cook, I used to love to go down to Noonan cause Aunt Kate, that was my, another one of the Hunter sisters, married Uncle Bob.  He was a, he worked on the railroad.  He was a conductor on the railroad, but they used to cook on these old pot, pot, cast iron stoves with the, where you put the wood in there, and you'd take a little thing and pull the eyes of 'em off and set the pots down on there and everything and the best chicken you ever wanted to taste cooked right there.  And my favorite thing was when I would, I'd get, if you churn the ice cream, you get to lick the blades and stuff.  And so we'd sit there, churning that ice cream, and with the rock salt and all of that stuff.  And I've never tasted any ice cream any better than what we used to make at Aunt Beulah's house.  So, yeah, but none of them had any formal education to amount to anything, but they were committed.  And so all of my mother's siblings went to Atlanta University Lab School in Atlanta.  They sent 'em there.  And that's why they ended up at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and everything cause they just continued to go through high school there and then went on into--and, you know, a couple of my, Uncle Milo, my mother's, you know, Uncle Milo that I was talking about was the shoe cobbler was my great uncle.  Uncle Milo, my uncle, my mother's brother had, he had just entered Morehouse, and he came down with Mastoid, and back then, you know, it wasn't the way it is now where it's a simple operation and everything.  He died when he was a freshman at Morehouse.  And then my, another one of my uncles got killed in an automobile accident early on.  But they all had gone to Morehouse and Spelman.  And, of course, cousin Motta went to, went to Fisk.  I think she was, she might have been there with, I think she might have been just a little bit ahead or might have just slightly overlapped with Dr. Frazier [Dr. E. Franklin Frazier].  Is that his right name, the brilliant guy who was at Duke, historian.
Speaker 1: Frederick Douglas?
Speaker 2: No. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  E. Franklin Frazier.
Speaker 1: E. Franklin Frazier, yeah.
Speaker 2: E. Franklin Frazier.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm terrible with names.
Speaker 2: All right.  Let's just go ahead and stop here, and we'll pick up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 1742
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Maenelle Dempsey] and father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well, the best I understood was my mother was part, you know, she was down in Statesboro, in Butts County, working in the school system down there.  And she was kind of like, it was the--they didn't call it that at the time, but she was kind of like the black school superintendent, whatever, to whatever extent there was some kind of school system going on.  And so my dad, when he got, he came down there from out Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], I guess, and my mother hired him on his first job.  And so I guess it was, and she gave him more than a job (laughter), and she gave him the rest of her life.  So, but that's how they met.  And I guess it must have been love at first sight or something cause they were together for over fifty years until he passed.
Speaker 1: Where did they live when they first got married?
Speaker 2: Well, I, the earliest I recall was here in Atlanta [Georgia] on Burbank, and that's where I first, that's my first memories of living.  And then for a minute we lived over, next to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus on Lee Street, which was right up the, we lived right, about three or four houses down from Alexander, who was Alex's Barbeque and it was a famous barbeque place for many, many years here in Atlanta.  But we lived right there near the dead end on Lee Street which is now Benjamin Mays Hall is right there where, across the street from where we lived.  And the house that we lived in was, is now a science building.  But I grew up, I was born, when I was born, we were living on Burbank which actually is two blocks down from where I live now cause that's a whole story.  I've never lived more than about a mile and a half from where I was literally born, on a permanent basis.  Of course, I, you know, I went away to school and I lived in different places, but--
Speaker 1: Right.  So tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I think, maybe my earliest memory that I recall, and, you know, and folk always laugh at me cause I remember a lot of stuff from way back when.  And the earliest memory was I was in nursery school.  I was at, I went to Spelman Nursery.  And we were, they had the, when it was raining outside, we went to do our playing downstairs in the basement, and I guess we were coming back from being down there at play.  And we were walking up the steps, and this little girl for, I don't know why.  I don't remember why or whatever, but she was upset with me, and she turned around and raked my face with all ten fingers.  And that's my earliest childhood memory, and then along about that same time, I remember my mother was, you know, she traveled a lot in her work.  And so I used to stay with another family when she'd be out of town.  You know, back then everybody took care of each other.  There wasn't any daycare or none of that kind of stuff.  And so I recall, she had been out of town, and she came by the nursery and so I'm sitting there eating lunch or something.  And this is at two years old, now, so it's a little fuzzy, but I remember she was there.  And I hadn't seen her for a few days or for a week or whatever.  And then she had to leave.  So I alarmed the place.  That's, that was, she used to like that phrase a lot, but I mean I literally alarmed the place because it was like she was leaving and I hadn't even seen her since about a week before that time.  So I, I raised, raised the roof (laughter).  But I remember that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, I guess with my father I remember we spent a year, my mother and I spent a year in Germany when he was assigned to the Honor Guard, and I was three years old.  We spent, I remember I was three when I went and four when I came back.  And the earliest memory I have--I have two that I remember from there, was, I was out in a field with my dad, and we had like a helicopter kind of thing where you pull it and spin it and it flew up in the air, and I had a real good, that was really fun.  And then it was some kind of thing where you pull back on it, and it was a plane that you would shoot, and it would fly.  And I thought that was great.  And so I really had a great time with my dad there.  And then I recall we were traveling to, I think it was somewhere like Holland or something like that in, cause I remember the wooden shoes, but another family--and I forget, I don't remember the name, but it was another family, and I and the other little boy was my age.  And we were running around, you know, running around and, and just running and running and ripping and carrying on. And I slipped going up these steps and landed and hit my chin, and darn near cut my tongue and bit if off almost.  And so it did heal back, but I stuttered for a while after that because my tongue was messed up.  My Aunt Opal got me straight though because she started, she said, well, every time I didn't stutter for a certain period of time, she'd give me a nickel.  Of course, back then, you know, a nickel went a long way, and so it didn't take too long, and I quit stuttering.
Story_ID: 1743
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me, I know you were born in Atlanta, but were you born at Grady [Hospital]?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not a Grady baby.  I was born at a black hospital which was McClendon Hospital.  They might have called it a clinic or something like that.  But the, at that time, a lot of the, Dr. Yancey, Asa Yancey, who's a famous physician here and was head of Grady at one time, early on, but he, back then he and Prentiss Yancey, who was, who delivered me and a number of the Yancey guys have become fine physicians and lawyers.  In fact, Prentiss Yancey, the son became, was the first black to be in a major White law firm back when that was unusual.  And, but anyway a bunch of those doctors got together and created their own hospital and set it up so that blacks could get decent medical care cause you really didn't get it at Grady.  It was like you get whatever--whatever you got was whatever you got.  And so that was, and that is literally around the corner from where I live now, which is another reason why I've, for whatever reason, I've stayed close to home.
Speaker 1: So tell me exactly where the clinic is?  It's on--
Speaker 2: It's gone now, but it used to be on Chickamauga and what then was Hunter Street.  Now, it's M.L. King.  But it was Chickamauga and then it was another street.  It was two, two buildings.  One was, it was Chickamauga at Sharon Street, and, but Chickamauga was right there by MLK [Martin Luther King].  It was one block over, and Sharon was one block over from--
Speaker 1: So was this hospital for the, I wanna say, middle-class people who lived in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was anybody as far as I knew.  But I guess it would typically be middle-class black folk that were there, yeah, so--but I'm not sure cause I don't know what was going on at the time.  I just know that that--but I would suspect that would be a reasonable assumption.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about your siblings?
Speaker 2: I had one brother.  He was adopted in 19--I guess it was about 1953 cause my parents built their, built the home, the family home was built in 1953, and he came over at that time.  I was six, he was five.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: It's Albert Jean Pierre Dempsey.
Speaker 1: And you said he came over, came over from where?
Speaker 2: He was a German brown baby, and so he came, that's when he first came here, and we've been brothers ever since.  So.  But we called him Pierre because there were so many Al's in the family.  He was Albert, and so we had Al, Alford, Sr., and then, you know, I guess my mother was the naming person.  And so she called my father Alford.  I was Al, and then we called my brother Pierre to cut down on the confusion.  And then my, my son is Alford James Dempsey III, and so we call him AJ, which is ironically was what my father's family called him when he was growing up.  He was AJ, and his, I guess nephew, but that was actually his own age--they both went to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] together, but MH and AJ.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did your parents come to adopt a child from Germany?
Speaker 2: My brother was in "Ebony" [Ebony Magazine].  They had a picture of my brother in Ebony.  And I guess they saw that and decided that--I think cause I--my mother was older, relatively speaking for back then.  She was in her thirties when I was delivered.  And so it may very well be that they wanted more children and, but did not wanna try to have another child at the age that my mother was at, at the time.  And so, I don't know.  I never really, I never really asked.  It was like Pierre showed up and it was like, we've been together ever since.  And so this is the first time I actually, I never really thought about that, like why?  It was like, some of that may have to do with the time though because what grown folk did, you didn't ask questions.  You just went along with the program (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you could think about a sound, a sight and smell that would take you back to that time in that neighborhood--you built your house in 1953, your parents did actually.  And tell me about that neighborhood in a sound, a sight or a smell in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, the sound is--it's a couple.  One was, it was near the railroad tracks.  So the train would come through in the middle of the night and then, but it got to the point where you didn't notice it when you were sleeping.  But also the other sound that I remember as a young boy was Mrs. Cohen's whistle.  She had a boy scout whistle, and she, we were right, I lived right next to Moseley Park, literally, and when we moved in in '53 [1953], the park was still segregated.  It was a white park.  I lived next to a white park, and we weren't supposed to go in there.  Of course, my brother and I would sneak over and swing in the swings all the time.  But Ms. Cohen lived right across the street.  The Cohen family was about five brothers.  And so we all would, once we got a little bit older, you know, it was just a few years after we first, in '53 [1953] when they actually desegregated the park and then it became--it turned into a black park at that time cause it was still, you know, we could go in there.  But the white folk left and so they weren't, they weren't there and we were there.  And we'd play out in the park a lot.  And when it was dinnertime, Ms. Cohen would come out on her porch and blow that whistle, and less than five minutes later, all them Cohen, Cohen boys were back up at the house ready for dinner.  And so that was, that was something that stuck with me all these years about Ms. Cohen and that whistle.
Speaker 1: And what about a smell?
Speaker 2: I think it was probably the smell of grass cause that was, we had a--it took an hour to cut my front yard and two and a half hours to cut the back.  And my brother and I cut many a blade of grass over the years.  In fact, he swore up and down he was gonna live in a penthouse and have all artificial flowers he was so tired of them plants and all of that stuff.  But I'd say grass because I played sports and so every, it took a long time even after I stopped playing football, when the Fall would come, it was like a smell in the air of, like the gridiron or whatever.  That was, when I quit playing I had to go, I went through withdrawal (laughter).  When the Fall would come around, it was like, it just didn't feel right I wasn't out there playing anymore, so.
Story_ID: 1744
Speaker 1: What street was this you lived on that was next to Moseley Park?
Speaker 2: It was Moseley Drive.
Speaker 1: Moseley Drive, okay, and--
Speaker 2: Which is now Martin Luther King [Drive].
Speaker 1: And Washington Park was near there as well?
Speaker 2: It was east about half a mile.  So I kind of lived right next to Moseley, but you could get to Washington Park cause Washington Park was right, literally where Washington High School was located, but it was about two blocks north of Washington High School.  But they literally were in the same--if you were going from my house, you walked down Moseley which turned into Hunter Street at Chapel Road, and about a half a mile up was Washington High School.  You turned left on Ollie Street and two blocks over is Washington Park, so.
Speaker 1: If you would, give me a tour of your community, the neighborhood in which you lived from Moseley Drive say, tell me about who lived in the neighborhood, whether there were stores that were--whoever they were owned by?
Speaker 2: Right, cause this basically was a residential area.  Actually, at the time, it was a nice black neighborhood.  It was really a very nice neighborhood cause see, down on the Hunter Street part near, you had T. M. Alexander who was the insurance man.  He graduated with my uncle, Uncle William from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '31 [1931] and also former president of Morehouse, Dr. Glouster, they were all classmates at Morehouse in the Class of '31 [1931].  And then coming back towards, going West on MLK [Martin Luther King Drive], we had the, I guess, what was, Reverend Williams, Sam Williams who was the pastor at Friendship Baptist Church lived right near Chapel Road on MLK.  Then you come on down and James "Alley Pat" Patrick lived right there in the curve coming down.  And then you had, right next door to my parents' house was the, I think it was J.R. Wilson ran a real estate company there, and he was, he lived right next door to us.  Then I skipped over Ms. Ivy who ran Ivy Brothers Funeral Home lived right there next to Dr. Harper who lived right there on MLK. And then Dr. Shorter lived on Hunter as well.  And if you come on up across the street from my parents' house was Dr. Gill, John T. Gill, Jr.  My best friend growing up was, across the street, as a little boy, and we grew up together was a guy named John T. Gill III.  He was one of the first black folk to graduate from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and I'm very proud of what he accomplished.  He graduated Salutatorian.  He got one "B" in four years, and that was in swimming.  And he went on to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] and got his Ph.D. out there.  While he was at Tech [Georgia Tech], he was also the editor of the newspaper.  And this was in 1967 when he graduated, and he went to Berkeley, got his Ph.D. and he's been teaching at Stanford [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California] ever since.  But John was one of them guys, he was the smartest guy I ever knew personally.  I've known many bright people, but as a personal friend, he was off the charts.  He was trying to write stories and get science fiction published when we were like thirteen years old.  And so, you know, my brother went to Georgia Tech later on, and he said, he said, Al, you know that stuff John was talking about back then, said, it was quantum mechanics, said like I had to get to Georgia Tech to be able to figure out what he was talking about.  So he was way ahead of his time.  But then another block up the street, about half a block up the street right across from the middle of the park was the Pasqual (ph.) Brothers.  Now, James, James was a businessman and the other brother, the son who's name was Thad Pasqual, Thaddeus Pasqual, he and I grew up together.  We used to play Pee Wee football together, and Robert Pasqual was the cook.  He was in the kitchen, and the two of them combined, the Pasqual Brothers who eventually became legends here in Atlanta.  But Thad and his family lived right up the street, and then you go a little bit further up and there were other folk like Reverend Fisher lived a block or so off, near where the Marta Station is now, but on Laurel and in that area.  And he was pastor of West Hunter Baptist Church before Abernathy.  This was before Abernathy.  And then I guess around the Adele which was like one block South of my house and then one block over was Gladys Knight's and the Pips' manager, James Woods, Sr.  James Woods, Jr. and I played Pee Wee football together and grew up together along with the Pasqual's and other folk, and the way they got the name Gladys Knight and the Pips was that Mr. Woods, the manager's nickname was Pip.  So it became Gladys Knight and the Pips.  That's how, that's how that name came to be from my understanding.  Now, it could have been James just telling me that, but that's what I understood went down (laughter).  And so, and then around the corner from there was the, over on Moseley Place was one of my favorite musicians was Penniman.  It was, I'm trying to think of his first name, but his stage name was Dr. Feel Good.  And he was an Albino, and that was what Aretha [Franklin] was singing about, talking about Dr. Feel Good, she was talking about Dr. Feel Good here.  And he used to have, his group was called Dr. Feel Good and the Interns.  And they'd all dress up like, with hospital whites, and the bass player was a sister, and she had on a nurse's outfit, but they would get down.  And my favorite song by them was, his song was called, "You Got the Right String Baby, but the Wrong Yo-Yo," (laughter).  And it sounded good too.  The music was great, but he, Piano Red was his, he was called Piano Red.
Story_ID: 1745
Speaker 1: Well, you had exciting people in your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a lot of, it was a lot more.  If I had a few more minutes I'd tell you some--I could think of some more.  Oh, yeah, Marion Jackson lived right up the street, and he was the sports editor for the "Atlanta Daily World" which was the black newspaper here.  And I almost forgot my best, one of my best friends was right around on Mosley Place right down the street was W. A. Scott III, who was the son of W. L. Scott--W. A. Scott, who founded the "Atlanta Daily World".  And at the time, I guess he got assassinated back, way back when.  But the W. A. Scott III was the circulation manager or editor or whatever for the "Atlanta Daily World", but he and his brother Cornelius Scott, C. A. Scott was how he was referred to, ran the "Atlanta Daily World".  And so they were there, and the fourth, William Alexander Scott IV, was my buddy.  And his daughter was Alexis Scott.  And we all grew up together.  And so, in fact, Alexis is the god parent for my children and I was god parent for W. A. the fourth's--we call him Rip, so Rip, I was godfather to his son Alex.  So we were all there together.  And as you--you know, now you're really bringing me back to Mrs. James who was the music teacher Oglethorpe Elementary School and taught private piano lessons to many folk, lived on Moseley Place.  So that Mr. Powell, who was a teacher at Washington High School, he taught just about everybody on the West side of Atlanta how to drive.  He was, one of his things was driver education.  And so everybody went to Mr. Powell.  That was back when they had driver education in school.  And so I took it in summer school.  But now you got me thinking, it's a bunch of people.  And then right in that neighborhood, the sheriff of DeKalb County [Atlanta, Georgia] now, Tom Brown, grew up like right around the corner.  His older brother, his half brother, Milton Woodard, was one of my buddies.  We used to play Pinochle and getting into all kind of mess back in the day and everything.  But they all lived right in that neighborhood too.  It was a lot of folk in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go on and talk about school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now that we know everybody in the neighborhood, what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I went to--
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: --I started off at Oglethorpe Elementary, which was on the Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus.  It's like right there, I forget the side street, but it was right across the street from the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA.  And, but it had been part, originally, it was part of the Atlanta University Lab School, which I ended up where my mother's side of the family had gone to school.  But it was a private school up until I reached the sixth grade.  Then it was taken over by the Atlanta Public School system, and they built a new school, but all the teachers were hired at the new school.  And then they added some other teachers on top of those.  So I actually graduated from Oglethorpe Elementary in, that was about 1960, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about school.  What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was always a very good student, until I had a little period there where I was, and I can talk--we'll talk about that later on.  But that was in the college days.  But I was a, I was always at the top of the class.
Speaker 1: What was your subject?
Speaker 2: It was math and science.  Actually, biology was my real favorite subject cause I was good with my hands.  I could dissect stuff, and, you know, it was really fascinating to me.  And that's why I wanted to be, when I was--from early on, after I decided I, you know, I wasn't gonna be an army guy, and I think it was because of my mother's influence.  She wanted a doctor in the family, so I was, I wanted to be the next "Ben Casey."  So I was gonna, wanted, literally wanted to be a brain surgeon.  And so that was what fashioned what I did in high school and the subjects I took and all that kind of stuff.  But I really did enjoy biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, but early on you wanted to go into the army [United States Army] to be like your dad?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 1746
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What about religion?  What church did your family attend?
Speaker 2: We've been members of the First Congregational Church at 105 Courtland here in Atlanta [Georgia].  And my parents joined when I was eight years old.  And I was confirmed there, and all of my children were christened and confirmed there.  And I guess, I--my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] was the chair of the Deacon Board at one point.  I served on the deacon board for about twenty-some years.  I was chair for a while.  And I've been a trustee a couple of times.  He did as well, and my daughter, Angela, was the younger deacon in the church when she first came on.  So we had generations on the deacon board, and she's a minister now.  So that was our church.  It was, of course, it was the John Wesley Dobbs, the Mayor of Auburn Avenue, his church.  Actually, at one time, Walter White, the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was a member there and many, many, many members, and Andy Young is a member there now.  And several, you know, it has an illustrious history there at the church, but that's our church.  It's part of what now is the United Church of Christ, but it formed back in the middle '50s [1950s].  It was the German Evangelical, the--I'm sorry, the Evangelical German Reform Congregational and Christian Churches came together to form the United Church of Christ.  And so you might, a lot of folk might be familiar with Ben Chavis (ph.) who was back in the Wilmington [Delaware], what was it seven, I can't remember whether it was ten, seven or Chicago [Illinois], six or seven, you know, but anyway, it was the folk in Wilmington when the demonstrations were going on back in the day.  And the church has been very much a part of the forefront in a lot of human rights and civil rights kinds of activities.  In fact, the congregational church goes back to the Amistad was involved, the congregational church was involved in that when it went on back in there, which is another one of those things.  So it's a long history of that in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you belong to any other activities outside of school, like the Boy Scouts or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a member of Troop 99, Albert Tonsel was the scout master.  And that was a great experience.  And he also was in charge of the recreation, at Moseley Park, he was one of the recreation counselors there.  And he was a very talented artist, among other things, an athlete, and another Morehouse graduate.  And these are, you know, those folk back then they worked, a guy named Mr. Saddlewhite and Ms. Batten, and they were wonderful.  I mean they were like other, a second set of parents or another set of parents.  And they coached.  They taught arts and crafts.  I could, you know, I learned how to do basket weaving and, I mean actually we made things that were actually useful, made my--I remember Mr. Tonsel showed me how to make a kite, and we made it from scratch, went out and got the reeds from the little forest out there and made it from scratch, got the string, glued the paper together and tore your, get the old rags and tear the tails and stuff, and I actually won the flight, flying contest back for the Atlanta parks--I forget how old I was.  But I made a box kite cause I wanted to do something different.  Everybody else was making the regular old diamond-shaped kites, and so I made a box kite, and it kept going higher and higher and higher, and I ran out of string.  It would have gone higher if I had had some more strings, but I (laughter) I didn't have enough string.  So, but that was a great experience.  That's how I really got into athletics cause I, you know, ever since I can remember I've been involved in athletics, like it was just natural to me too, like that was just one of those things that, just took for granted.  I just did it.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna stop right here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1747
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started playing sports?
Speaker 2: Let's see, like--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about--
Speaker 2: --in elementary school cause we played little Pee Wee, like Pee Wee sports and everything.  It was, oh, I guess I must have been like fourth or fifth grade or sixth grade, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so in, at Oglethorpe [Elementary School], did you play sports?
Speaker 2: No, it was in the park league cause they didn't have any organized teams in the elementary school system.  But everybody played like at the boys club or I would play for Moseley Park.  We were called the Moseley Park Tadpoles, and that's, basically, that was, it was a pond there.  And there was a, they called it the tadpoles there.  So I learned, another interest in biology cause we could actually see the tadpoles and get some and let 'em grow up.  And they used to make fun of us cause they would laugh and say, ah, yeah, the tadpoles, (unclear) blah, blah, and they would laugh until we got through whopping up on 'em, and then they didn't have anything else to say about it.  So, yeah, a tadpole whopped your behind today, didn't they.
Speaker 1: So what sports did you play?
Speaker 2: I played football, basketball and baseball, and then I ran track too when I was younger.  And I continued all the way through high school playing football, basketball and baseball.  And then at one point in college, I went out and ran track cause I--for the heck of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you graduate from Oglethorpe Elementary School in 1960?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what school do you go to next?
Speaker 2: I went to--back at that time in Atlanta [Georgia], the schools were set up from, elementary was one through seven.  High school was eight through twelve.  So I went to Washington High School in the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: And, well, what do you remember most about Washington High School?  What teachers do you remember, if any, that might have been influential in your thinking of anything and going to college maybe?
Speaker 2: Three come, I guess three or four come to mind.  I remember my English teacher was Mrs. Beavers, and my science teacher, I think his name was A.L. Davis.  I used to remember.  You know, back then you just called everybody by their last name.  But I think it was A.L. Davis, but Mr. Davis was a science teacher.  And Mr. McBride taught social studies, and actually, one semester was supposed to be Georgia history, but he taught civics the whole time.  And so I never really ever took Georgia history, which didn't bother me (laughter) because it was much more interesting learning about the things that Mr. McBride was teaching us about the government and how things operate and everything.  And then my favorite teacher was Ms. Billie Davis.  She had graduated from Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] and she was just extraordinarily gorgeous back then.  And so I had, and I was taking Russian in the eighth grade.  And the reason was I had a choice of either taking Latin from an older-looking teacher.  She was a fine teacher, but, you know, or, taking Russian from the gorgeous Ms. Davis.  And she, I guess she had just about recently graduated from Vassar at the time.  But, so she, you know, we decided, a lot of--several of my buddies and I decided we were taking Russian (laughter).  So, and I remember, you know, I remember one or two words of Russian, but I'll never forget Ms. Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a really, I mean she was a really good teacher too.
Speaker 1: And you finished out your high school years at Washington?
Speaker 2: No, I went, left Washington High School after my eighth grade year, and I went to, up to the North to New Hampshire to a place called New Hampton School.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get there?  How did you decide to go there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was decided for me.  My mother [Maenelle Dempsey], you know, we talked about that earlier.  She was an educator and so schools were still segregated at the time in Georgia, and I guess in most of the United States.  And so she, being from a family that valued education, decided she wanted me to get a better educational opportunity.  And so she went to the library and started looking up secondary schools and started writing letters.  And she got a response back from T. Holmes Moore who was the head master at, throughout the time I was there.  He's the head master emeritus now.  But, and so I, they sent the test down.  I took the test, and I did okay, and the next thing I know. I'm in, I'm ten miles from the geographical center of New Hampshire (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what did you think about that?  How did you feel about being shipped North?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, at first it was kind of unsettling, a traumatic kind of experience because I was, at Washington High I was also a musician.  You know, I played the trumpet and so I was in the band.  And I was moving from the, from the--I don't know what they called it.  It was the second band, I guess, to the first band.  And Washington High was, had one of the best bands in the Southeast, if not around the country.  And so folk in the band, it was on the equivalent of being a football star.  If you were a member of the band, that was big stuff.  And so I was gonna be in the first band.  I was gonna be in the first band, and so it was like, I wanted to be the next Miles Davis.  Of course, I had no chance.  We had a guy, but it was a guy there, Arlen Mitchell, his mom taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. Mitchell.  But Arlen was brilliant on the trumpet.  And he was on Ted Mack's Amateur Hour for 10 weeks in a row.  And they had to finally just put him off cause he could never get put off.  So they just, you know, after, I guess it's like the mercy rule.  After you stay on so long, they just stop you.  But he was brilliant on the trumpet.  He ended up going to Tennessee State in the band, which is another great band--I love bands.  And still to this day, if I hear a band play a fanfare, it sends chills up and down my spine.  It's a, you know, if you've ever been into bands, you know, you know, folk who love bands understand what I'm talking about, especially historic black college and universities bands like FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] and Southern [Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and the Aristocrats Bands and a bunch of other places.  But anyway, so that was, that bothered me cause I really, that was something that was important to me.  I wanted to be in the first band at Washington High School (laughter).  And so I got over that after a while, you know, and so--but I understood at one, at some level, I understood what was going on.  And this was an opportunity for me to get a better education and you did what your parents told you to do back then.  You didn't question it.  You did what you were told.
Story_ID: 1748
Speaker 1: Do you think that it had also to do with, this is now the Civil Rights Movement is going on in '62 [1962] when you go to New Hampton, do you think that had anything to do with it as well?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, not directly with regards to civil rights per se, but it was just the idea that the schools were separate, and they sure weren't equal.  And so the point was to get a better education.  And so that's what, that's what motivated my mother and my father to send me away to school.
Speaker 1: Were they political or active in any of the civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: Not directly.  You know, my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] was in the military so he couldn't, he couldn't get involved in anything like that.  And my mother [Maenelle Dempsey] did not, what you might call march or otherwise do anything in terms of demonstrations or anything else like that.  But she was fighting her own battle in terms of working on educating children and teachers cause she spent the majority of her career teaching teachers how to teach.  And so, but no, neither one of them played any kind of an active role as we would understand folk who were active in the Civil Rights Movement in that nature.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me more about New Hampton.  Who were your classmates there, and do you remember who the president was at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the, they had a, the head master was T. Holmes Moore--
Speaker 1: Okay, you did say that.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah, well, I had several classmates.  I got, in fact, I'm on the board of trustees now at New Hampton.  And we had, I guess when I started out it was about thirty or so of my freshmen, thirty, thirty-five or so in my freshman class, and when we graduated, it was ninety in the senior class.  And so at the time I came to New Hampton, there were two black guys in the school.  I was one and I mentioned earlier, Rip Scott, W.A. Scott IV, was a year ahead of me at New Hampton.  And I guess we might have been the first three black guys to go there cause Jacob Henderson, Jr. graduated the year before I came.  So we didn't overlap at all, but Jake was from Atlanta [Georgia].  He was from, a member of the church.  Rip was from Atlanta.  He was a member of the church, and we all grew up together.  And so you had three, the three that were--the first three black guys at New Hampton were from Atlanta (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how was the transition to going from an all-black school to dealing with white students?
Speaker 2: It was, the biggest transition for me was that the amount of work.  It was very demanding.  You know, every night we were, had homework every night.  And, you know, and, of course, this was a boy's school at the time.  So there were no girls or anything else.  And so all there was to do was to study and play sports.  So when we get through with practice, we'd come back after dinner and I'd study.  But I remember, one of the things I remember that stands out in my mind from, was that we had to write a composition every week.  For four years, I wrote, I had to write a paper, about 500-word composition on, an essay on something.  So we learned to write by writing, and that was, you know, and, of course, we did a lot of--I did a lot of reading.  That was, that was the time when I fell in love with reading.  I had, I think--I don't know how much I had read before that, but when I got to New Hampton, it must have been, you know, I was reading the "Odyssey", the "Iliad", "Catcher in the Rye", all of those, those kinds of things as a freshman in high school.  And we were writing papers on it.  I did, you know, all that Shakespeare and everything.  I remember I had to do a, what was it?  We got a choice between writing a paper--I was so tired of writing papers that, and, you know, I love to talk so we could either do one of Hamlet's soliloquy or do a paper.  So I said, I'll do soliloquy.  And so I remember, I had a good time doing that cause I went to the library and I started listening to some of the records of the Shakespearian actors doing Hamlet and everything, and so I started patterning myself (laughter) after that.  And I got an "A" on, got an "A" on that assignment cause I really got into it.  I was, I think I've been a ham at heart all my life, you know, but, and I liked the language, you know, that Shakespearian language was cool.  You know, "Oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am I" [in Shakespearian accent], you know, and all that old mess.  And I would out (unclear) brief candle and that stuff was cool.  And I also learned that that's where William Faulkner got the name of the book "Sound and Fury", it was from that Hamlet soliloquy about "life is a poor player that struts and frets his life upon the stage and then is heard no more; it's a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury signifying nothing."  And so that's where he got the "Sound and Fury" from.  And so I, you know, I'm the trivia master.  I remember all of those, little stuff and I'm the guy, you know, when we get together for reunions and everything, I tell them all about the stuff that we did that nobody else remembers.  But it was me, you know, it was like the spice of life to me.  It's like the little things that were silly or that we did stick out in my mind and I would remember them because that was the good part.  And so--
Story_ID: 1749
Speaker 1: So did you become a leader at the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I got, I guess my sophomore year I got elected to the Student Council, and then I, my junior year, I became a proctor which was basically like a floor monitor.  You know, I lived in the sophomore dorm my junior year, and then my senior year, I was a proctor in the junior, one of the junior dormitories.  And so I did get to--you know, that was important to me too because it was a prestigious thing to be a proctor cause it meant you were responsible.  And also, on the Student Council it was interesting.  I always thought this was a very interesting thing.  When I was a junior and I got re-elected my sophomore, junior and senior years, but when I was a junior, Rip Scott, W.A. the Fourth was the president of the Student Council.  He's African American.  The secretary was Frank Motley.  He was African American, and the three of us were--it was three of us there at the school.  So you had the three of us and out of 250 students, and we were like one, thirty percent of the student council were African Americans and it was only three of us in the school.  So a hundred percent of the brothers were thirty percent of the Student Council and so I always--it was interesting.  But it actually made sense later on.  As you look, you know, I looked back on it was that the black guys who were in school there were extraordinary students.  They weren't just your average kind of guy.  And so for them to end up in leadership positions was, made total sense cause they were exceptionally talented, and they wouldn't have been there, had they not been there, they wouldn't have--had they not been talented, they wouldn't have been there anyway.  So, but it's always something I used to like to think about.
Speaker 1: Did your parents have to pay for you to go to this school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never knew exactly how much they had to pay, but they had to pay.  And the, I did get a scholarship.  So they did get some financial aid there, but how much they actually paid, I don't know.  But I know it wasn't easy cause I remember years later, they were still paying off loans from college and high school.  But they, you know, but they made that sacrifice because it was part of what they thought was important.  They were investing in their children's future.
Speaker 1: Okay, the same year '63 [1963], you're 16 and you're elected to the Student Council.  This is the year that President Kennedy [U.S. President John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963] was killed.  Do you remember that time at all?
Speaker 2: I sure do.  We were in, we were in student body meeting, and Mr. Moore was talking to, addressing the students.  And we were in the school auditorium.  And I guess my basketball coach, Jerry Splain (ph.), he also--he taught French there, comes into the room.  I remember looking over, and he was distraught.  I mean it was just obvious.  And he interrupted Mr. Moore, and then he--I don't remember his exact words, but it was something like "the president's been killed" or the "the president's dead," "President Kennedy's been shot."  And so we were all stunned.  And I remember later that day, we had a basketball game was scheduled, and we ended up playing the game cause nobody knew, what do you do when the president gets shot?  Do you stop everything?  Do you just go on and do what you're supposed to do?  And we ended up just, they ended up just doing whatever we were supposed to do the rest of that day cause, and everybody was kind of like in shell shock. So, but yeah, I remember it very well.  It's also, Rip's birthday is November 22 [1963], which was the day that Kennedy got shot, and so that's always another way I remember the date was cause my best buddy, Rip, was born on November 22.
Speaker 1: You say that you played basketball while at this school too.  Was this a championship team?
Speaker 2: My senior year we won the Lakes region championship, and then we came in about third in the prep schools.  We were, really, it was an extraordinary achievement for our school because we were not a powerhouse.  We were kind of a little bit, little fish and compared to places like Mount Herman and Deerfield and Exidor and Andover, St. Paul's, we were a lower tier in terms of size and athletic powers.  And so this was a, I was very much proud of the achievement.  We had a very good team, and I was just one--I was a significant part, but we had a team.  It was really a team effort that did this, and we missed getting to the finals of the Prep School championships.  We lost in triple overtime to this much bigger school, but we hung in there till the last minute.  But that was a real high point for me when we won that championship cause it really was important.
Story_ID: 1750
Speaker 1: What else do you wanna tell me about New Hampshire?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, the school--I got a wonderful education.  And I also got treated very well.  It was like they didn't, I didn't get that, the kind of treatment you'd expect in the southern situation or the racism or the, all of that kind of stuff.  People just basically dealt with you on merit.  I was one of the better students.  I think I graduated seventh in my class, but I, it was merit, you know.  Now, I mean it wasn't absolutely perfect cause I think it was one, I remember one guy was from Mississippi.  He had the stars and bars up on his wall, but I didn't hang around him that much and we kind of avoided that kind of stuff.  But there was no overt or even any kind that I really picked up on where people would just treat me--now, the only thing that was unusual though was that I was more of a curiosity than something to be discriminated against, you know, and so--cause I think, as far as I knew, it was only one black person in New Hampshire to my knowledge.  It was a dentist in Concord, New Hampshire.  So it was like, you know, folk would want to feel your hair cause they, you were unusual, you were unique.  They had never seen any black folk up there, and so, which was probably part of the reason why they didn't have a whole lot of racial tensions because, you know, in a lot of the major cities, they would say, well, black folk are taking our jobs and they're trying to take our homes, moving into our neighborhoods, all that kind of stuff.  And so if it wasn't any black folk there, there wasn't any opportunity to have any animosity (laughter) or anything cause--but it was a great experience.  I got treated really, really well.  I got a great education.  You know, if I had to do it all over again, even without any girls around, I'd do it again.  But that was the only downside was that, you know, my socialization was kind of postponed somewhat because, you know, if you go to a coed school, you kind of grow up, like my son was in a coed environment in his high school and he has girls, girls that were friends, and just like he had guys that were buddies.  And it was just kind of a natural thing.  I had to get used to being around women in a normal day-to-day kind of friend, buddy kind of situations cause you know, you get home on vacation, your hormones are raging and you'd wanted to grab hold to the first woman you could find.  Of course, back then, nobody was doing anything anyway.  And so, it was all in your mind, (laughter) but that was the only thing that I think if I, in terms of a well-rounded upbringing, it's, the fact that you have women around in your class with you thinking and talking and just getting that part of the experiential growth, got stunted a little bit.  And I guess, by the time I got to New York, though I made up for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you also, you not only played football, basketball and baseball, is that right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And you received medals for this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was, I was Most Valuable Player my senior year in football, and I played both ways.  I was a cornerback and a wide receiver.  And the year before, I was the last man to make the team, so I was like the most improved.  I went from worse to first in one year.  The only reason I made the varsity my junior year was I could long snap, and, which came back from the old days at Moseley Park when I used to play around snapping the ball.  And I actually was good at it.  And so that's how I made the varsity.  And then the next year, they changed the whole offense and defense and it fit better my talents.  And so I went to that, and then we--so I got the most valuable player trophy in football.  I earned a letter sweater, you have to have three varsity letters or more to get a letter sweater.  And then I started on that championship, Lakes Region championship basketball team, and I also started at centerfield in baseball, which was actually my best sport cause I wanted to be the next Willie Mays.  Of course, you know, it's like you wanna Miles Davis on the trumpet, you wanna be Willie Mays, you know, and so but it was fun.  It was fun.  Athletics, I really enjoyed because I was basically a shy guy, and when I'd get out on that athletic field, it was kind of like I could step into a different persona, and so now, I'm tough and rough and macho and for me, in my normal every-day life, that was not me at all.  You know, I'm mild mannered, polite guy, self effacing and so it gave me an opportunity to step into a different environment and I kind of like gave myself permission to be macho (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you kept up your grades.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I got, when I graduated I got the highest award to a graduating senior which was the Meservey Medal for study, sport and spirit, which meant you had to excel in all aspects of it.  I actually was the cheerleader when I was a freshman for the first couple of years till I mad the varsity football team.  But I did that and so they, I think they remembered that.  I was one of these guys that was rah, rah, with the--you know, this is the school.  I bled green and white.  In fact, actually, I think part of what, one of the things that represented the spirit part of the thing was that when I was on the Student Council in my sophomore year, we didn't have a mascot at the school.  It was like the Big Green.  I said, what is the Big Green?  You know, like you need something that's more animated, you know, and so we ended up having a contest to pick a mascot.  And it came out, the winning name was Husky, and so we became the New Hampton Huskies.  But that was part of something I generated from being on the Student Council.  Of course, years later I ended up getting a Husky.  I had a Husky [dog] (laughter) named Attu (ph.).
Story_ID: 1751
Speaker 1: Okay, so how do you decide what school, what college you're gonna go to?
Speaker 2: Well, I was interested in being pre-med at the time.  I wanted to be a doctor, and so I only applied to three schools.  All of them had excellent pre-med programs, Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont], Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and the folk at Middlebury wanted me to come cause my head master, Mr. Moore, was a Middlebury man.  One of my mentors, Jim Wright, was my coach and my English teacher for three of the four years I was there.  And he was a Middlebury man.  And we had two other teachers that were Middlebury.  Middlebury came down and interviewed me, and, of course, you know, Middlebury, I was a top-flight athlete and at the, if I had gone to Middlebury, I could have started in football, basketball and baseball for Middlebury.  But I, and then I was, I ended up, my guidance counselor, Sumner Holly was his name.  He had done his master's at Columbia and so he told me, he said, son, he said, I think you really ought to go to New York cause you could really benefit from the sophistication you'd gain from being in that environment cause, and what he was really saying was like, you're a country boy from a big country town--cause Atlanta [Georgia] was a country town back then.  I used to go barefoot during the summer.  And so, you know, now we wanna, you know, we're a big--you know, I love Atlanta.  But, you know, we were a big country town back then.  Folk didn't even, in New Hampshire, they didn't even know where Atlanta was, you know, and I guess they didn't study their--because it was the capital of Georgia.  So that's about all they knew.  And so, I ended up going to Columbia cause my guidance counselor told me that going to New York would be great for me.  And he was right.  I learned a lot about life and I did gain a much greater level of sophistication having lived in the city.  And, of course, I wouldn't have met my wife if I hadn't gone to New York.  So (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you go home for the summer.  Let me ask you.  Did you ever have a job?  You used to go home during the summer when you were in New Hampshire, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever have a job?
Speaker 2: I did at one time.  A couple of years I was going to summer school, you know, when I was at home.  In fact, I remember I took typing.  So I learned how to type in summer school.  I took driver education with Mr. Powell, who taught driver education.  And so, then I--one year, it was about four or five of us.  We were all good buddies and everything.  We found this job at, well, I won't call the name of the company, but it was a chemical company.  And so we got a job there, and boy, I learned, I learned about what it was like to work.  If you've ever unloaded a freight car or a tractor trailer, you don't realize how big those things are until you start having to do manual labor taking those things off.  But we lasted about two weeks (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, we're gonna stop here and we'll pick up from there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1752
Speaker 1: Okay, so you prepare and you go to New York in 1965 as a pre-med student.  Okay, so tell me now about your transition from New Hampshire [New Hampton School, New Hampton, New Hampshire] to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I got to Columbia, and I think at the time, I didn't know any better cause it was actually, seemingly almost like, some folk would think it was foolishness, but I played three sports in my freshman year.  I was on freshman football, freshman basketball and freshman baseball team.  And I was pre-med at the same time.  And, of course, back then you couldn't play varsity in your freshman year.  You could, you know, you could play after your sophomore year.  And so everybody had to play freshman.  And so the transition, I'll tell you, the things that were different was that the folk at Columbia didn't give a damn whether we succeeded or failed.  And it was a point in time when they were letting black folk into the school, but they had no real serious commitment to their success, unlike one of my buddies--her name is Valerie Fisher.  She's a doctorate, Ph.D., went to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], and the folk there at Bryn Mawr made a serious commitment.  They 'em in, they let the kids in, the black kids in and they wanted them to do well and to succeed.  Columbia's attitude in my opinion was, okay, we'll let you in and we don't give a damn whether you swim or sink or whatever.  And that was the attitude.  I mean, you know, the folk would, the security guards would follow us around the campus.  They'd go to the student union and they'd make you show your I.D. and then four or five white guys would be walking by while you're standing there showing your I.D., I mean that kind of stuff.  One class I went to, you know, I was taking Russian, and teachers, teacher said, you know, when I first came in for the first day, said, why are you here, like I wasn't supposed to be there.  And then later on, you know, she had somebody translate a sentence and had some remark about you should play football less and study Russian more.  So I dropped the class the next day and went back to French.  But that was the attitude.  I mean they really didn't, they really didn't want us there.  The only good thing, and I will say this, we had Dean Hoisington (ph.), and all of the black students loved him cause he was a financial aid dean.  And he actually cared about the students.  And we affectionately called him the "green dean" (laughter).  But Columbia was that, you know, it was like one of those kind of things.  And so--and then same thing with the athletics.  It was like, I--it just really, it sent me into depression.  I really got depressed because I had forever, you know, I had been on teams where I road the bench cause I wasn't the best guy, you know.  And then there were other times when I started and was a start, you know, was a starter and played, and because I was the best player.  And here I am on a team where I played, I got to play the last two minutes of the season my freshman year in football.  And I was the fastest guy on the team.  And it was two, two guys, two black guys on the team, Chet the Jet Stewart from Detroit [Michigan] and myself.  And, you know, that really messed my head, it was messing with my head dealing with that because, and I guess the funny thing was, I'd get in the game; we're losing fourteen to nothing, and, of course, our quarterback at the time, a guy named Marty Domres, who later went on to play in the NFL [National Football League], he's an equal opportunity quarterback.  He wants to make it to the big time so if you can catch, he's gonna throw it to you.  So as soon as I come in the game, he throws it to me like six or seven times in a row.  We go right down and score.  Now, I'm the last string in, now, okay.  So, and we go right down and score and come back, and the one time he didn't throw it to me, they intercepted.  And so we lost the game.  But that kind of stuff just really kind of, I just didn't know how to deal with it.  You know, cause you usually think it's, in athletics, you know, we're supposed to be good and we're supposed to be able to play and all that kind of stuff.  But they, it was, it was bad.
Speaker 1: Who were your other classmates there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, I started off in, what would have been the Class of '69 [1969], and I had, some of the fellows I can remember, James "Plunky" Branch was from Richmond, Virginia.  And he's since went on to have a successful music career.  He's a saxophonist and has his own and has done very well in that genre.  John Herbert was another guy.  We were all in the band together, and while we--that was one of the things I did when I was at, during the New York days.  And John Herbert went on to graduate from Columbia Med School and became a very successful anesthesiologist.  He's now head of the Anesthesia Department at Howard Medical School [Washington, D.C.].  And Harold Brooks, affectionately known as "Weird Harold" was from St. Louis.  That's why he got the name Weird Harold cause of the Cosby connection.  And but Weird was a physicist.  He graduated with a degree in physics from Columbia and then went on to get his PhD from Columbia, and he studied under this guy that worked on the Manhattan Project, Polycarp Kusch.  And Harold was brilliant.  And, but he would, we called him, one of the reasons we called him Old Weird Harold was cause he would, he'd be up at two or three o'clock in the morning working them physics problems, listening to Cole Trane and Archie Shepp and other folk and working them problems.  And, but he did really well and went on to be a renowned physicist.  And then we had a couple of other, a couple of other folk.  I could go, I mean there's a bunch of 'em I could go on talking about cause--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --everybody that was there was really smart, cause like, the same thing as with, at New Hampshire, the folk weren't there, none of the black folk were mediocre.  They were all exceptional in just about all regards.  And a lot of the guys there were top-flight athletes as well as students.  And they weren't, they weren't just, you know, there was no such thing as a black jock then cause I got in on academics.  They weren't even recruiting me.  They, you know, they looked at me crazy when I walked, when I came out to football practice cause I was skinny kid.  But they thought I was nuts.  So, we all were very good students.
Story_ID: 1753
Speaker 1: So you did very well there, is that right?
Speaker 2: No, not, no, not academically--
Speaker 1: Not academically?
Speaker 2: --because I was, you know, I got into this, kind of I just stopped, stopped giving a damn cause the way folk were treating me, it kind of snowballed.  And I needed to stay in school because the war was going on at the time [Viet Nam] and I won't call the lady's name, but she was head of the draft board here in Atlanta.  And she told all of the guys, all, you know, cause you compare notes when you go down to register, and you'd say, well, what did they say to you and what did they do?  And this lady, and I remember her name, but I'm not gonna call it, told all of us the same thing.  She said, "I see you're going to college.  You better stay there cause if you get out, I'll have you in thirty days."  And so, you know, and the route was you get drafted, you got to Fort Benning [Georgia], and then you got to Nam [Viet Nam].  And I wasn't interested in doing that.  That was one bit of career advice my father gave me.  He was one of these folk that would support you whatever you wanted to do as long as you were doing something honorable.  That was his idea, it was like, you do what you wanna do, son, and just make sure it's something honorable, and you can take care of your family, and I'll support you.  But the one bit of career advice, he said, don't go into the military.  And I didn't ask him at the time cause you just, you know, you just did what your grown folk told you at the time, but I think as I thought about it over the years, I realized what he really--he didn't want me to go into the service because he knew what war was like, and he had been in two different wars, and he didn't want his son to be in harm's way.  And so I managed to, I stayed in school.  And so I never got, I didn't get drafted.  But what I ended up doing was, hardly doing anything in the classroom, but doing enough to stay there, and so--but it was based upon lack of motivation and everything and just being in a untenable situation where I had to be there, but really didn't want to.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any of the student organizations, Students for a Democratic Society or was there a student union or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, there was, I belonged to Students Afro-American Society which was the black organization there, and I also was part of a group of black guys that started a chapter of Omega Psi Phi on Columbia's campus.  So we started Omicron Chapter, which ironically used to be Gammon Theological Seminary in Atlanta, so I always gotta be close to Atlanta so I ended up pledging Omega Psi Phi, Omicron Chapter, which had its roots at Gammon Theological Seminary in Atlanta.  So I was a member of Omega Psi Phi, and we were, I guess we were kind of like viewed as radicals cause all of us were involved in the student takeover of the administration building in '68 [1968] when they had the student uprising and everything.  Everybody in the chapter was there, not because they had to but because they chose to.
Story_ID: 1754
Speaker 1: Talk to me about this date.  They took over the administration building--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1968, most folk who were around at the time are familiar with the student demonstrations that were going on around the country in the late '60s [1960s].  And what happened was, the genesis of this particular, of our activity was the school, Columbia was gonna build their new gym in a public park which is Morningside Park, which was right next to Harlem, and without any regard for the community or whatever.  And so one day there was a protest down at the gym site, and people were, from the community were protesting, standing in front of the bulldozers and everything.  And they got arrested.  And so the students went down, black, White, every, you know, everybody was down there demonstrating and they ended up back at the Sundial, which is right in the middle of Columbia's campus.  It's at, right, literally on 116th Street.  One side of the campus is 116th, the other--I mean one side of the campus is Broadway.  The other side is Amsterdam Avenue.  And 116th Street runs right through the campus.  And so we were on the sundial, right in front of Lowe Library which is the administration building for the university.  Hamilton Hall is the administration building for the college.  So anyway, long story short, somebody said, let's take over the building.  And the next thing you know everybody goes over and takes over Hamilton Hall, and we stayed there a week.  Interesting kind of factual scenario, and I'll give you the short version, but after the first night, the black students asked the White students to leave.  And it was, at the time, I didn't know why.  Later I found out it was for good reason.  The, Mark Rudd, who was a well known White radical.  He was in the Students for A Democratic Society, SDS, was head of the group, was majority White--I think there might have been one or two black folk that we didn't know that were, I think they might have been in grad school or something.  But the undergrads were in Hamilton Hall.  And what happened was, the SDS folk were real radical.  They were in, they ended up, you know, snatching files from the cabinets and burning files and doing kind of vandalism kinds of things.  And they also, they weren't very organized in terms of discipline and things of that nature.  And so the black students said, we need to separate ourselves from these folk cause we wanna focus on our protest.  We don't wanna get involved in all of this kind of stuff, and like a lot of the folk didn't particularly care about us being in the war [Viet Nam] or that Gulf [Oil] was in Angola or that DuPont was making napalm, but, you know, we realized, it wasn't nothing we could do about that.  And so we didn't wanna get our protest about building this gym in the black neighborhood diverted.  The other practical reason was that we knew that there were undercover police officers in with the white folk.  We knew all the black people, so like I've been to your house and visited you when your grandma and all that kind of stuff so I know you're not the "man".  We didn't know what, who the White folk was, and it turns out that Mark Rudd's right-hand man was an undercover police officer.  So that was a good decision to get them out.  So the net affect was we were able to focus on something that Columbia had control over, that was, whether to build that gym or not and not things that they had no control over, and it would just have been an exercise futility.  [coughing] Excuse me.  So we stayed there for seven days, and they ended up negotiating.  Percy Sutton got involved and we were able to negotiate our leaving the building.  We refused to leave, but when they said they were coming in to arrest us, we decided it wasn't worth getting our heads whipped.  So we said, if you come in, we won't resist arrest, but you're gonna have to arrest us for us to leave.  And we were the only ones that didn't get our head whipped there cause, you know, if you've seen the footage of the films and everything, there was tear gas all over the place.  It was chaos and many students got bludgeoned, but there were very few black folk that got hurt cause we had orchestrated how we were gonna leave and much to my relief, we decided it wouldn't further our protest to get our heads whipped.  So we didn't go that route.
Story_ID: 1755
Speaker 1: Well, let me understand.  The two different things, were the white students or the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] students protesting somewhere else?
Speaker 2: Yes, they--
Speaker 1: Did they take over, went to another building?
Speaker 2: --went over, what happened was, we said, go take over--they said, well, we wanna support this protest.  And we said, you can, go get another building.  So they went over to Lowe Library which was the university's administration building.  What was on Walter Cronkite every night on the nightly news was essentially, the SDS folk over there acting a fool, and I just use that in a generic sense, but they were, you know, burning stuff and leaning out the windows and catcalling back between them and the jocks.  You know, it was a bunch of--several of the guys I had played football with were over there, and there's this picture, I won't call the guy's name, but he was a fullback on the football team, pulling back like this, where he punched the, well, we called them like the jocks and the hippies, okay.  And so that's what was on the TV.  And, now, this is not me who's thinking all this.  I was pretty naive politically, but the thinking of the--we had a very good steering committee.  It was Cicero Wilson, Bill Sails was, Bill Sails was in grad school in International Affairs, or whatever they called it at the time, and he and what's his name?  Leon Denmark and also, well, it will come to me in a minute, but since, the other guy--I'm trying to call his name, since became a very, very good lawyer.  He did a lot of commentary during the O.J. [O.J. Simpson] time on MSNBC, Ray Brown.  Ray Brown, Jr., cause his daddy was a very capable attorney in New Jersey, and Ray became an attorney later on and has done a lot of good work over the years.  But they were all very sophisticated politically and were getting information from folk who were politically savvy and everything.  And so this was a very well thought out and well-planned protest.  And it stayed focused.  We had six demands.  We didn't deviate from the demands, and it was the, the basic demand was "don't build the gym in the park", not just don't build the gym, but don't build it without including the public.  What they were gonna do was build the Columbia gym up top on Morningside, and down below they were gonna build a little gym for the community.  And so part of our slogans was "Gym Crowe must go", G-Y-M Crowe must go, cause that's what they were gonna do, was get a little ole Jim Crowe gym down for the community.  And that was their way of trying to buy that out.  And ironically when we come to New York forty years later to celebrate the anniversary, Columbia is still up to the same stuff.  They just acquired about fifteen to seventeen acres going up into Harlem by condemnation.  And, you know, the government's only supposed to be able to do condemnations, not a private institution.  So, I mean it was, but anyway, some things change and nothing changes.  And a lot of folk didn't know, but Columbia was the biggest landlord, slum lord actually, in New York City.  If it wasn't for Central Park, they would have owned more property in New York than the City of New York.
Speaker 1: So when you come out of that building that morning, your people did not get arrested?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did get arrested, but--
Speaker 2: When they came, what they did was--
Speaker 1: --there was no head bashing?
Speaker 2: No, they put us, they walked us out in an orderly fashion.  In fact, they even had a black police captain showed up and we didn't get handcuffed.  We walked out in an orderly fashion and got into, you know, orderly, into the petty wagons.  And I guess that's no longer politically correct, but the police wagons, and they drove on down.  And we didn't go to the tombs.  We went to a precinct.  They were, so many folk were arrested that night that we went to some precinct on the west side, and the next morning we come to court and they had lawyers waiting on us to represent us when we got there.  So, but we did get arrested.  And then the cases were continued, you know, for a number of times, so that basically, what they were, what the idea was, was eventually, they got dismissed.  And so the charges were dropped, but during the period of time for about a year or so, the case was pending so if anybody did any further demonstrating or acted up, they had the criminal prosecution hanging over their heads.  And so, but the thing about it that I'm must proud of was that Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] never built the gym in the park.  Now, Gulf stayed in Angola, and DuPont was still making Napalm and the government was still doing their thing at the Think Tank at Columbia and all of those kind of things were still going on, but they didn't build the gym.
Speaker 1: And you allude to the Think Tank.  I think that was one of the--
Speaker 2: I forget the name, but it was a government--the president at some point in time, Butler, and one of the professors there at Columbia were part of, it was something like IG, something or other.  It was one of those initials deals, and they had--
Speaker 1: IDA.
Speaker 2: IDA, yeah.  And they had, folk from Columbia were helping to think up ways to do war, and that was part of the protest.  They didn't want them doing that anymore either, but like I said, we were not unsympathetic to those particular issues, but understood, from a practical, political perspective that there wasn't any way we could--we had no leverage for Columbia to try to make them do something that they couldn't--there's no way in the world, they're gonna make the government or Gulf or anybody else do anything different.  So we stuck to something we felt like we could achieve.  And low and behold, we actually were able to achieve it.
Story_ID: 1756
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you talked about having a band and some of the guys that were in your band.  What was the name of your band?
Speaker 2: It was called the "Soul Syndicate", and we had a ten-piece band and five singers, and then we had one guy that did all of the electronics kind of stuff in there.  And so, and I sang bass.  I did a lead on a few songs, and I drove the truck (laughter) and was a master at loading equipment.  We got, I was able to get everything in an Econoline van, all of the instruments, all of the speakers and everything else we could fit into that.  And we just could fit in that Econoline van, and so.
Speaker 1: And where did you perform?
Speaker 2: All up and down the, like the college circuit in the Eastern, Northeastern part, like as far up as maybe New Haven at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and down through New Jersey, generally, but we, you know, we also performed at a few nightclubs and stuff as part of our, during our tenure.  But we did pretty good, and in fact, it was one of those kinds of things where, you know, where we, had things gone a little bit differently, we might have been in the business seriously cause we were being groomed to do that.  But, you know, life got in the way, and things like, you know, here you are, when you hit a period where you kind of like have to do freebies to try to get recognition and everything.  And so some of us had summer jobs.  Others didn't.  And when times got tough, you know, you can't pay the rent and whatever, and so then the band kind of fell apart.  The other thing was, you know, these are people who are, you know, Weird Harold ended up with a Ph.D.  We had, Jeff Asher who was one of the trumpet players, became a doctor.  Folk were into computers and other kinds of things.  And so, you know, they had options.  It wasn't like the folk who were, if they didn't make it in the music business, they'd lose out.  And so that's what ended up happening was that it just kind of, as things evolved, it kind of fell apart over time.  You know, and I left.  I went back to Atlanta [Georgia].  I took the midnight Volkswagen to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did you play at the Cheetah?  That was a very popular club during that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the west side of New York.  Yeah, we did.  We played, it was like the fourth of July weekend back in '68 [1968].  And we came, and we played--the week before the Commodores played.  And, of course, back then, they were just a bunch of kids from Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  They hadn't, you know, nobody knew who they were at the time.  But I, when we went there to check out the club and saw 'em there.  And I said, wow, these guys are good, you know.  They were really good, and so, you know, and I went backstage and chatted with 'em and everything.  And we kind of hit it off cause they were from the South and I was from--you know, when you get that far north, Alabama and Tuskegee and Atlanta are not far apart.  So, but we played there, and then we played down at Washington Square in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York], and a couple of other spots.  We were over in New Jersey at some kind of like a Six Flags kind of place, but it wasn't the company Six Flags, but it was one of those kind of amusement park kind of deals.  We played over there.  And, but the majority of where we played were for college mixers and proms, you know.  And so like, and we did pretty good.  We could make, we got about a thousand bucks a night, but that had to be split sixteen ways.  So it was about eighty-six bucks [eighty-six dollars], I think we would make.  But, you know, in 1968, you play a couple of nights, and so a hundred and some odd dollars would go a long way back then.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the other musicians that you met in New York cause the night life was very prevalent, I mean, as far as, did you ever meet Dizzy Gillespie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, some of this, it was back--the majority of that was when I got back to Atlanta.  Now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I did, I did in New--when I was in New York, I had, one of my buddies was from Chicago.  And he grew up in the blues clubs in Chicago [Illinois].  So it was a lot of blues players that he knew personally.  So when they'd come to town, he'd say well, Demp, come on, let's go down and see Muddy Waters, you know.  And so he knew Muddy Waters personally.  You know, and then there was Buddy Guy and Junior Wells, and we'd sit back drinking liquor with 'em on the back stage, and they put on a better show back stage than they did in the thing.  But the majority of the time that I actually met a lot of great musicians was when I had come back to Atlanta and I was in between, I'd say my, in between my two college careers.  And I was a bartender at a local nightclub called the "Bird Cage", restaurant and lounge.  And there were three very popular clubs in the African American community.  Well, everybody, white, blacks and otherwise would come to the clubs cause the music was great, but there were three places that were owned by black folk, and that was the Bird Cage, "Pasqual's Le Carrousel" which was the Pasqual Brothers' nightclub, associated with the restaurant.  And then Donn Clendenon, who was a famous New York Met baseball player, also a graduate of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard High School here in Atlanta, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Those were the three--
Speaker 2: Those were the three clubs, and so I worked at one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's stop here.
Speaker 2: I can go, I can tell you some stories about that when we, when you come back.
Story_ID: 1757
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about the band--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the music, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, when I got back to Atlanta, I was at the Bird Cage, and I was a service bartender.  And so I'd get off at twelve o'clock, and then there would be one more set afterwards and so I'd always get to go out and, of course, being in love with music and, of course, I was also the go-for.  So whatever you had to do, you know, you could--I would go pick up people from the airport.  I'd drive 'em back and forth to the hotels after the show and things of that nature and just generally, "go for" whatever.  And so we had really, really top-flight folk would come through the club.  We had, back Billy Eckstine came, and actually, the only way we were able really to book him was that his niece was getting married in Atlanta, and so while he was here for the wedding, he did an eight-day stay at the club.  And so I went to the airport to pick and he and Mrs. Eckstine up.  I get them down to the hotel, and he says, O, Lord, I forgot my golf clubs.  So he sent me back out to the airport to get the golf clubs, and so I had to bring 'em up to their room.  And so I get up there and he and Mrs. Eckstine invite me--I'm like 21 years old, and they invite me in, and say, sit down, son, here, let me give you a drink. And so I'm sitting here drinking with jazz royalty, and I'm just blown away.  But they were just as nice as they could be.  And no, no, totally unpretentious and just wonderful people, and it turns out, I got to talking to him, my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] was from Aliquippa, Pennsylvania and Mr. Eckstine was from Pittsburgh.  And so we're there at the club the next night, and my father's in there.  And he's listening to the show, and I'm standing there next to him, and I said, Dad, this guy is really great.  He looked at me just as serious as he could be, and he said, you should have heard him thirty years ago (laughter).  So, but anyway, we had folk like Dizzy Gillespie was there, and I was assigned to drive Mr. James Moody, the great saxophonist back and forth to his hotel.  And then I, you know, and then Billy Paul--this was before, "Me and Mrs. Jones", he was out of Philadelphia, and he was a wonderful singer.  The man had a wonderful, wonderful voice, and so he was really a jazz singer.  He wasn't a pop singer, but, you know, when you make money on "Me and Mrs. Jones", folk usually associate that with him.  But he could sing jazz.  So I was, I had an old raggedy Volkswagen and he liked to hang out.  And so when the show was over, he'd get me to take him to the after-hours club every night while he was there.  And then we had Mongo Santa Maria, we had Pharaoh Sanders, we had Gene Ammons.  When I first got married, I was too poor to have a, my wife and I were too poor to have a honeymoon, so we got one night in a hotel downtown, and then I'm back working.  So we were there one night--I got off one night, and my wife was with me, and Gene Ammons was there, and I asked him would he play something, you know, I explained to him we just got married, and would you play something.  He played, he played this, he play "Angel Eyes", and he just put love into the song, and it was just, it was just--I'll never forget that.  It was just wonderful, and I spent years trying to find Gene Ammons' version of "Angel Eyes" and thirty years later I finally found one.  But anyway, it was a great opportunity to meet these folk, and they would be there like for two weeks at a time.  This was back when you, you know, when you didn't have to go to the big venue or whatever.  You could be right there in the jazz club listening to these people.  And they all were really nice folk.  It was amazing and they put up with these youngsters, you know, that--I was just craving talking to 'em and all of those kind of things.  And they all were really nice to me.  And so it was a great time.  I had no responsibility.  It was a good transition from a bad college experience to the next phase of my life.  And by that time, I got, I had been away from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] about a year, and I got married in August of 1970, and I transferred to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in September of 1970.
Story_ID: 1758
Speaker 1: Okay, let's go, let's just go back just a little bit, right before you leave New York, Columbia, what makes you decide to leave, and the other thing is, that's where you meet your wife.  So tell me about how you met your wife, and why you decided to leave Columbia?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I--
Speaker 1: And are you still pre-med (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was, there were about, several guys who were from out of town.  And one of the sisters at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] had invited three or four of us over to her home in Brooklyn [New York] for Thanksgiving dinner since we, you know, we couldn't make it home for the holidays and everything.  And so I'm there, you know, enjoying the family food and everything, and this sister, two of her best friends, one of which was my future, was--became my wife, had come by to just come by to say hello or whatever.  And so I'm sitting there eating, and she comes in with, her friend was named Tina, and they both were just drop-dead gorgeous.  And they come in and she had on these pants, I think they called them culottes at the time.  They were very popular in New York, and they were kind of like, high like a matador kind of thing, but they came up higher.  And I'm eating, and I love to eat, and I stopped about half way up, and my fork was like, and I was smitten.  So then all of a sudden the guys looked around and said, all right, we're having a party.  And so then we went back uptown to--a couple of guys had their own apartments.  And so we had a party.  We stopped off at Barnard and picked up some more sisters and went up and had a party.  And so we get to the apartment, and I'm the guy, I told you I was shy--you probably wouldn't figure that now, but I was.  And so I was the guy that, you know, everybody would grab, grab a girl and I'd get whatever was left over.  And this particular occasion, something happened to me.  I was totally uncharacteristically aggressive, and so I got, I called my boys into the bedroom, and I said, look, you see that woman over there.  I'm gonna talk to her; y'all leave it alone, leave her the hell alone, and if I can't make any time with her, then yawl can talk to her then, but I'm gonna talk to her first.  And they were just totally like, damn, okay (laughter).  And so they let me alone and the rest was history.  So I, but it was something special about my wife that got me from the beginning.  So that was, you know, there is such a thing as love at first sight.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me her name and--
Speaker 2: Her name was Colleen Bozman was her maiden name, B-O-Z-M-A-N Dempsey.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to, she grew up in, she was born and raised in Brooklyn and Erasmus High School, which was a rather famous, one of the more famous, well-known high schools in New York out in Brooklyn.  And then she did some college at, I think it was like a Brooklyn Community or one of the colleges there, but she never finished college.  But she went to work right out of high school, working for an insurance company.  And then she worked at CBS.  But she was a career secretary, and, of course, it was my good luck that I married a secretary cause I sho needed somebody to keep me organized (laughter).  And that was one of the bonuses of being married to Colleen, so.
Speaker 1: All right, so you meet and you marry in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 1759
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about leaving Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  Why do you decide to leave Columbia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I finally got, I finally left New York.  I was, you know, it was like I had been there four years, and I was able to get, I got a high draft number.  So I didn't have to stay in school anymore.  And so I left.  If it hadn't been for the war [Viet Nam] going on, I think I might have, maybe even back in my sophomore year, I might have just left school for a while, and you know, how you discover yourself or whatever you wanna call it.  But I might have left back then, but at the time, it was serious business if you got out of school cause I mean everyone of my friends that, and I could name you seven or eight of them who dropped out of college at one point, within thirty days, the draft lady had 'em, and the next thing you know they were at Fort Benning [Georgia] and they were gone.  And several of 'em didn't come back.
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you came back?
Speaker 2: Oh, I came back home and stayed at home, came back with my parents, and I started working at the club to make a living.  And then I finally decided, you know, during that year--I came back in the Fall of '69 [1969], and I got married in August of '70 [1970].  So in that interim period of time, you know, my wife and I decided that we needed to be together, and so she came on down to Atlanta, and we got married.  And so at that point, my good home training kicked in because, you know, we were raised that the real man takes care of his family.  So now I had some responsibility and fooling around and shucking and jiving wasn't gonna get it any more.  I had to get serious again.  And when I left Columbia, I promised myself if I ever went back to school--and I had intended to go back, but--that I would not go back unless I was gonna be serious about school.  And so I transferred to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was the best thing that ever happened to me besides marrying my wife, was to go to Morehouse.  There at Morehouse, the people and the administration and the teachers cared about whether I succeeded or failed.  They had high expectations.  They believed I could do well, and they wanted to make sure that I did well, including sometimes--I remember Dean Brazil who was a famous administration and teacher at Morehouse, and I don't even know his first name.  But everybody called him Dean Brazil cause he was the dean, but as far as I knew that was his first name (laughter).  But anyway Dean Brazil knew my family, you know, and he talked to me and he said, he said, "Boy, you can do better than what you doing, and you gone do better".  And there were a number of teachers like that, and they understood, you know, cause their mission was to identify and nurture black talent.  That was--and they were serious about it.  And so they were, they'd kick my behind before they let me throw away my potential.  And I needed that.  I needed some of that at the time, but also the other thing was, was that they encouraged you and, cause I had, you know, Columbia had pretty much destroyed my self esteem.  It was like I was just, you know, kind of holding on.  And I gained my confidence back, and so had I not gone to Morehouse, I don't know where I would have been now.  Of course, had I not married my wife, I don't know where I would have been today.  But, so anybody, you know, I'm a, I'm still very much an advocate for HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] because there's still a place and a need for those type schools because all students are different, you know, and some folk need a special touch or a kick in the butt or sometimes a little bit of encouragement and everything.  And all of that came together at Morehouse and then I blossomed.  I came back to be the student that I was when I was--you know, I was a "can't miss" student in high school.  And then I became the same thing once I got to Morehouse.  And so I ended up, you know, I was working for a caterer at the airport, putting food on the airplanes, forty hours a week and going to school full time.  And I got the best grades I ever got cause I graduated with honors at Morehouse.  And I was working forty hours a week and getting as much overtime as I could and so, but I did all of that because I was really motivated and I felt much better about myself.  It was like, son, you're good--you know, you've got talent.  And I started to believe in myself again.  And so I give all the praise to Morehouse for doing that for me.
Story_ID: 1760
Speaker 1: Now, who's the President of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] when you enter?
Speaker 2: Dr. Glouster who was my Uncle William's classmate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, he knew my family, and so my mother's office was at Dean Sage Hall which was on the Atlanta University campus.  And so, you know, this was like several of my--I became an economics major.  It's, actually, I just picked something I could--I needed a degree, and so I was through with being a pre-med.  And so I picked something that seemed like it might be interesting and so I picked economics.  And my first economics professor was E. B. Williams, Dr. E. B. Williams.  And he was the--and all of these Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] connections, he was like the third black man to get a Ph.D. in pure economics from Columbia.  Dean Brazil was the second.  And anyway, Dr. Williams, knew my family.  I grew up, knew--you know, grew up with some of his sons, and everything.  And so he was like, yeah, Dempsey, you know you're supposed, you're supposed to get--you can do this work.  And so I ended up getting A's from Dr. Williams and so it just went on from there and snowballed in a positive direction.  So I'm, you know, I'll tell you.  It was a life-changing experience when I went to Morehouse College.
Speaker 1: So, now, you graduate in 1972?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I was still working at the airport, and I went in and I said, well, hey, you know, I got an economics degree from Morehouse.  I need to quit driving a truck, you know, put me in management.  So, they actually did.  I got promoted to a manager, and they put me in a different kitchen.  I was working the Delta [Airlines] kitchen, and I went over to the United [Airlines] kitchen.  And I worked there.  And the day I graduated from Morehouse, I was over at Forward West building which is out here by the Hightower, actually, it's Hamilton Homes now, but it was the Hightower Marta station.  And Dr. E. Bruce Phillips was my dentist, and Dr. Louis Brown was my physician, and they both were in that same building.  And so I'm sitting there with Dr. Phillips, was the one that talked me into going to Morehouse.  He was, he was a Morehouse man.  And so he, I'm there, you know, after graduation sitting there.  He pulled out some scotch.  We were sitting there having a drink and Dr. Brown comes in.  And so, you know, and Dr. Brown was this, was a real thinker.  And, but he was also a deacon at Friendship Baptist Church and a wonderful physician.  So he starts talking and he says, oh, what you plan to do, Dempsey?  I said, I don't know.  I'm just glad to get out of college.  It's been seven years since I got out of high school, you know.  And so, he said, well, did you ever think about being a lawyer?  I said, no, and being a preacher either.  And so, said, well, you ought to think about that.  You know, lawyers can do things other people can't do.  You can go in and out of jails, you know, and I thought about that cause at the time, if you went down to Fulton County [Georgia] Courthouse, if you was an adult, you ended up going to Reedsville which was the state prison down in South Georgia, and if you were a juvenile you ended going to Alto [Georgia] which was a, you know--the only guy I knew, only black guy I knew that had come in and out of the courthouse back when I was a kid was one of my partners, Stanley Alfred, and he had a part-time janitorial job.  So he could come in and out every day.  But, you know, so I thought about it, and, you know, the only other thing I had thinking about was maybe getting in a Ph.D. program in economics.  And I couldn't get a job in a bank.  They wouldn't hire me.  And then I come to find out later on the reason was, was that my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.], after he got out of the service, he became a deputy director of the Office of Economic Opportunity for the State of Georgia here, and they were on white businesses to hire black folk.  So I guess when Alford J. Dempsey, Jr. shows up, I was on the list, and so I couldn't get a job anywhere.  And so I said, well, I guess I better go on back to, you know, after I get over the shock of finally getting out of college, I'll go to a Ph.D. program.  So, anyway, but Dr. Brown and Dr. Phillips had such an effect on me that I said, well, if they're telling me this, maybe I need to seriously consider it.  So I went on and applied, and I applied to four law schools, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], NYU [New York University] and Georgia [University of Georgia, Athens].  And I got in all of them.  But Columbia didn't want me back, so I got in all of the other three except for Columbia, and, of course, you know, when Harvard said, come, I said, okay.  And so that's how I ended up in law school at Harvard, and then ironically--I didn't know this at the time, but he did, Dr. Brown was hired on the faculty at Harvard in the med school.  And so I didn't know it until I got a bad cold, and I go to the clinic to see a doctor, and who walks in but Dr. Brown, and it just blew me away.  I said, okay, he knew something.
Story_ID: 1761
Speaker 1: What year was this that you go to Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay, by now, you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had, my daughters were born, they were five months old when I graduated from college.  They were--
Speaker 1: From Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  They were Christmas babies.
Speaker 1: And tell me, they were born in '71 [1971]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on Christmas Day, and tell me about your daughters?
Speaker 2: Well, I have twins.  They were (unclear) twins.  One was left handed.  One was right handed.  And one is now a minister.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Angela Dempsey Williams.  She graduated from Spelman and then went on to, Interdenominational Theological Center at Johnson C. Smith Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia] and got her, whatever they call it, Master's of Divinity, I think it is, at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center].  Then she's worked at, she's worked as a youth minister the majority of her career so far, but she's now into teaching.  She's no longer in parish ministry, I guess, in the church, but she's teaching, and currently working on her Ph--working on getting a Ph.D. so she can teach at the university level.  And then my, her sister, Audrey Dempsey Branch, was a track star in college, and she started, she did kind of like I did.  It was interesting.  She went to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and then eventually left Tech and went, and ended up at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University], another HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], and she thrived when she got there, and she graduated Magna Cum Laude from Alabama A and M.  And, but she was still in love with track.  She was a track star, and made it to the quarter finals of the Olympic trials, and was one place too short to get to go to the Olympics.  But anyway, she decided she'd go, she wasn't gonna try to stay in the competition thing.  And she went into coaching.  So she's coached at West Virginia, Kentucky, Clemson [Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina], Georgia Tech, Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], and now she's back at Clemson now.  So she's currently at Clemson, but she's moved into administration now.  So she's working on, working on her master's and wants to continue in the athletic realm but as an athletic director or something of that nature.  So, and then I have three grandchildren.  The minister has two, Carlos Williams, Jr. and Jeanine Williams, and my--the track coach, Audrey, she and her husband, Terrance, have a little girl, and they named her after my late wife [Colleen Dempsey]--and I guess I--we haven't mentioned that, but my wife passed from breast cancer back in 2003.  And so they named--she was born shortly thereafter.  And she, they call her the same nickname, Coco is my wife and they call her Colleen Branch.  And so, and, of course, you know, I'm the proud grand daddy.  They call me Papa.  So (laughter).
Story_ID: 1762
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so you pick up your family and move back to, so that you can go to Harvard?
Speaker 2: Right, we went up to Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Cambridge, okay.  So tell me what happens there, and how your transition into, from being so happy to get out of college, and now, you're in law school.  Tell me about your experience at Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a difficult time because I think the tension I was involved in was like when I was in the library studying, I felt guilty about not spending time with the family.  When I was with the family, I felt guilty about not spending enough time in the library.  And so when I got to Harvard, you know, I was thinking about doing what most folk that go to Harvard, they go there, and they get an education in, you know, one of the finest legal educations in the world.  And then they usually go out into some big firm or clerk for somebody at the Supreme Court or do those kinds of things and deal with commercial litigations and things of that nature.  And so that was my dream at the time, and then I started, reality started setting in.  And by the time I was, I guess my sophomore year, I was about to take final exams, and, you know, when most folk at the sophomore year, 2L is what it's called, the second year of law school, 2L, I didn't have a job.  I'm taking finals, and I don't know how I'm gonna pay my rent next month cause I don't have a job cause none of the firms--and I applied in Boston, New York and Atlanta, nobody offered me a job.  So I'm sitting there trying to figure out how I'm gonna feed my family or whether we're gonna be able to pay the rent.  And that didn't help, trying to take finals under that kind of pressure.  But at that point, it kind of really got to me, and I started feeling down about that whole situation, like, okay, now, I'm starting to understand this ain't, this dream ain't gonna, ain't about to happen, you know.  And so, but thank the Lord, I got a job the next week working for the Public Defender office in, Mass Defenders is what it was called.  And so in the long run that was a good thing because I was in the courtroom every day.  And so I learned a lot about the culture of the court and the way you, what you say, how you do it, all those kind of practical things that, to be a good litigator, you need to know.  And so, and then I, and I finally managed to get out of--I was about to leave at that point Harvard cause I was just totally disillusioned about the dream of being a big-time lawyer and all that kind of stuff.  It was like, oh, I get it--oh, it's like that.  And so I started flashing back to a lot of the other things that I had previously known.  And again, I was kind of naive about a lot of things.  But, you know, you learn as you go along, and so I was gonna leave.  And then I talked with my wife about it, and then we thought about it, and I said, wait a minute.  I got all these law school loans and all that other kind of stuff.  And if I, and I won't have a job.  And I'd better get this degree.  If I'm gonna try to pay this stuff back, I need to finish.  So I stuck it out and graduated, and of course, I had forty-three rejection letters from Boston, New York and Atlanta, forty-three different firms.  Nobody would hire me.  So I got a wife, two children, Harvard law degree, and no job.  And, of course, I didn't even grad--I didn't even go to commencement because it was on June 6.  And that would have meant we'd have to pay another month's rent.  We couldn't afford to pay another month's rent, so I got my degree in the mail, but it looks just as good up on my wall now, whether I was at commencement or not.  But, so I was, you know, I was back in Atlanta [Georgia] and thank God my parents, my parents were carrying us during that summer of '76 [1976].  I was looking for a job, but basically, if you didn't, if you hadn't passed the bar, nobody wants to hire you to do legal work and, except when you, the normal route is you come out of law school, and you get hired by a firm.  And they work, you know, you do research and things like that until you pass the bar, and then they move you on to other things, you know.  And so I was looking for a job, and I went by the, what was it, the Federal Public Defenders Office, and they said, well, we don't have any jobs over here, but he said, but, you know, they're hiring folk at Carter's campaign [U.S. President James Carter, 1977-1981].  So, I mean I'm one of them folk that's like, look, I need a job, and if I can't get a job doing one thing, I need a job cause I work some kind of way to try to support my family.  So I don't care what it was, driving a truck at one point.  And so I ended up in, like I say, the campaign that Carter won in '76 [1976] was, President Carter, I worked, and I did advance in that campaign.  And then when he won the election, I came home, and I opened up the mail, and there was, you have passed the Georgia Bar, and I cried cause it was one of those things where Georgia was famous for failing black folk on the bar exam.  In fact, they actually had a lawsuit, Tyler versus Thickery, they got (unclear), I think it was 1973, or '72 [1972], '73 [1973], forty-three black folk took the Georgia Bar and none of 'em passed, and I'm talking about folk who had gone to Harvard, Columbia, and people that--I could call you a name, and you would know some of them.
Story_ID: 1763
Speaker 1: So you passed the first time that you took it?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Lord.  And I was, that was another big moment in life cause if you didn't pass it the first time, the rate of passing went down, and so--then I was able to, still didn't have a job.  And that was in November and finally, two months later I got hired with the City Attorneys Office in Atlanta hired--this was, Maynard Jackson had told folk that, yawl got to start hiring black folk.  And he was the Mayor at the time.  And so they started hiring black folk, and I happened to show up.  I'll tell you exactly how it happened.  I get a phone call from my mother, said, I was looking at the paper, and they say they're hiring folk down there at the City Attorney's office.  Go down there, boy, and see if you can get a job, you know.  And so, I went down there, and interview them, and they, and the City Attorney at the time said, well, it wasn't anything going on now, but they expected that something might open up in the near future.  And about a week later, I got a call and said, we want to offer you a job.  And so I was down there the next fifteen minutes ready to go.  And I was so grateful, I stayed there fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell me what your job was as the, your duties, as the Assistant City Attorney?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I started out as, I was actually, the title, Assistant City Attorney, there were several assistants.  There was a first Assistant, was kind of like the Deputy City Attorney.  I was one of many assistants.  I started out as an associate and worked my way up over time. And I always joke about it, but it's actually true.  I did a little bit of everything from A to Z, airport to the zoo.  And I represented every department in city government over that fifteen-year period, including the Mayor and the City Council, and I defended police officers in federal court for alleged police brutality.  I condemned property for sewers and streets and roads.  I worked on the contracts that were related to the building of the original Midfield Airport, and I was, at one time, I was the attorney for the what was the Office of Contract Compliance, but technically, they were Maynard Jackson's minority and female business enterprise program was housed in the Office of Contract Compliance.  And so I was the lawyer assigned to that, and so we had to fight all the battles with the contractors who didn't meet the city's requirements and that kind of litigation.  And so I helped to rewrite the city's ordinance when it got struck down, along with a lot of other things.  It was a Supreme Court decision of the United States, "Croson versus the City of Richmond," and it pretty much struck down and restructured what you had to do in order to be able to have a legal minority and female business enterprise program.  And so we had to go out and do certain things and rewrite the City's ordinance.  And so, you know, I worked on that.  And so you name it, I did.  I did personnel.  I did purchasing.  But it was a great experience because then I ended up, you know, kind of the Lord works in mysterious ways, I end up as a judge doing general jurisdiction.  And that's basically everything.  So it kind of dovetailed and as I look back over my career, it looks like the Lord had his hand in where it sent me and how I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna stop here.
Story_ID: 1764
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about the female, black female--what was it?
Speaker 2: Minority and Female Business Enterprise Program.
Speaker 1: Female, okay, right.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: It, really, the genesis of it came about at the time that, you know, when Maynard Jackson [Mayor of Atlanta, Georgia Maynard Jackson, 1974-1982 and 1990-1994] came into office in the early '70s [1970s] [1974].  That's one of the things he, I guess people will most remember about Menard, but there's some other things that were actually more significant, as significant as that.  And so far as the Minority Business--and Female Business Enterprise Program, the genesis of it was back when they were first building the Midfield Airport.  And so, you know, Mayor Jackson said, you know, he wanted minority participation in the building of this multi-million dollar facility out there, and he was gonna have it come hell or high water.  And so there was a business meeting with the Mayor and a lot of movers and shakers in the business community and, including the, kind of Chamber of Commerce types and those kind of folk and a downtown hotel or some club or whatever, country club or something or other, you know, and one of them places.  And so they were having a discussion, and he said--this is paraphrasing, but basically like, we're not building an airport unless we get fifty percent black participation.  After the folk picked themselves up off the floor from having a heart attack, they said, you can't be serious.  He said, yeah, I am serious.  We'll shut down the project if you don't do that.  And so, went back and forth, back and forth, and they finally negotiated down to twenty-five percent participation.  And so that's how the program first got started.  I called it the early days of the Minority Female Business Enterprise Program.  There was no ordinance, there was nothing other than the strong will of Menard Jackson saying it's got to be that way.  And, of course, it was--I call the Mohammed Ali era, cause it was like, there was nothing in writing, and, you know, with the old Mohammed Ali thing about, "Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee, you can't hit what you can't see".  Well, as soon as we enacted an ordinance, you could see it, and that got attacked immediately.  But before the city adopted the ordinance, there wasn't anything to hit, you know, cause the whole program was a moving target.  But anyway, that's how it got started, and it was, it was kind of like--there was a lot of things that Mayor Jackson did.  But one of the things that gets left out because, you know, he's really, really well known for being an advocate of minority and female participation in the business of the--share in the wealth, so to speak.  But what he did that was historic that is little known by most folk was the fact that at the time he came into office, the charter of the City of Atlanta had been rewritten.  And so it used to be, the form of governance was the Board of Aldermen.  And when the charter got rewritten, it became a mayoral form of government.  And Mayor Jackson pushed it to the limits, I mean and not in a negative way, but in basically setting forth a strong mayoral form of government.  He put that imprimatur on it.  So you went from Board of Aldermen to mayoral leadership, and by the time Andrew Young [Mayor of Atlanta, Georgia Andrew Young, 1982-1990] came in as the mayor, he didn't have to fight any of them battles.  He had pushed it, he had pushed the limits so you're gonna be dealing with a strong mayor in the City of Atlanta, whereas someone who may not have been as forceful or dynamic as Mayor Jackson, it may not have been such a dynamic position.  But now the mayor has all kinds of authorities, and we set legal precedents.  We did a lot of different things, but, you know, I guess a lot of folk really don't know that part about what role that Mayor Jackson played.  And so every mayor that's since, come since that time really owes a debt of gratitude to Mayor Jackson for setting it up so the mayor could run the show.
Story_ID: 1765
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, you're back.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, also during this time because you become the assistant, one of the assistant city attorneys.  This is in 1977, is that right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and in 1979, the city goes through tragedy with the missing and murdered children.  Can you talk to me about what you were doing and your role in anything that might have been happening during that time?
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I, I didn't have a direct role in that particular aspect cause it was, you know, it was a police investigation, and the, you know, as a citizen of the community, you know, we, it was--we were all gripped in a, it was kind of like a reign of terror.  And folk were, especially, in the African American community because it was African American young men that were being attacked, it was serious.  I mean people were frightened for their children.  And, but the--I didn't play a direct role.  It was more of a police thing, and the lawyers weren't, were tangentially involved.  I think some of our lawyers in our office that represented the Public Safety Department may have had some role in advising the upper brass about issues that may have come up with the media or other kinds of things of that nature.  But we did not, the Law Department didn't have any real direct role, at least insofar as my participation.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, personally, how did you feel about the situation and how the investigation was being handled?
Speaker 1: Well, I was concerned, like most everyone else in the community, and we were very much concerned.  We had some animal running around attacking our children, but I never lost confidence or faith in the authorities, in the police or anything else because, you know, I felt like they were doing everything they could possibly do to find that person.  And there are times when criminals elude capture, and then once we found out who allegedly committed the crime and everything, they lived about three blocks from my house.  It was in my neighborhood that they were living.  In fact, I had a, one of my first girlfriends in high school was, lived across the street from Wayne Williams' house.  And then my daughter's best friends, the two, my twins, had a childhood buddy from elementary school that lived like four or five houses down from this place.  And it was Penelope, was the name of the street.  And so it's right there by the West View, West Lake Marta station now.  So, yeah, that was, that was a really troublesome time for the whole city, throughout the trial and everything, you know, and so.
Speaker 2: Now, in, how long--you stay with the City of Atlanta for fifteen years?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from '77 [1977] to '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: Okay, well, let's, before we go to '92 [1992] because you told us a lot of the things that you did while you were there, but you also have a son born in 1984.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Tell me about your son.
Speaker 1: Well, he's Alford James Dempsey, III, and well, I guess, you know, it's, kind of normal things like, you know, he was, he came along and we did the usual things, like, you know, I got, I ended up being the little league coach with his team and, you know, as a practical matter, by the time you dropped him off, went home and then came back to pick him up, you might as well stay out there and do some coaching.  So I had those kind of skills, and so I did that, and we--and he was athletically inclined.  Both of my, both my daughters were really great athletes--I know you were asking about my son, but I really ought to, I'm proud of them.  I really need to say, my daughter, Audrey, the track coach, had eleven varsity letters in high school.  She was a track, basketball and cheerleader.  And my other daughter, the minister, was the top athlete.  Her senior year, she beat the boy out for the Athlete of the Year.  She had five varsity letters her senior year.  So my whole family, the girls and my son were all very talented athletes which kind of runs in the family cause my father was an athlete at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] as well as all of them were real good students.  And so, anyway, my son came up and we ended up sending him to Woodward Academy here.  And this idea about getting the best education that was possible still runs in the family.  And, of course, it costs a bunch of money and I was an honest public servant.  My wife was a secretary in the public school system.  So we didn't have a whole lot of money, but my parents were still committed to even the next generation.  And so my dad [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] said, well, I'll pay for his buddy, he called him his buddy.  That was, they were--my son and my father were real tight.  In fact, I got a picture of them over there on the wall, but they called each other "their buddy".  And so granddad helped pay for his buddy's education.  And so my son stayed there for twelve years, and then he went on to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was, he played football, he wrestled for a while.  He also was a track, he did very well in track.  He was a weight, and he was a--unlike me and my daughters, he, we were all slim.  He was a big guy.  He played center in football, and was a weight man in track.  He did the discus and the shot put.  So he's at, he's at Morehouse now, and he started out as a pre-med.  It's kind of like in the family.  I think that's the--[pause]
Speaker 2: Okay, we can stop right here. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we're back.
Story_ID: 1766
Speaker 1: So during those fifteen years, was there, I mean you told us a lot about what you did during those years, but was there anything else that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: It was, really, it was a very interesting time for the City of Atlanta cause we went through the Olympics and that was, cause I worked under Mayor Jackson [Mayor of Atlanta, Georgia, Maynard Jackson] and then worked under Mayor Young [Mayor of Atlanta, Georgia Andrew Young].  And then actually, I was there in Maynard Jackson's third term, when he was Action Jackson (laughter), and then I left during that particular term.  So I was gone before Mayor Campbell came in.  But there were a lot of things going on, and Atlanta made a big leap forward in terms of growth and development.  As Mayor Young was here, he was big on development.  And so it was, a lot of development went on during that period of time, but I kind of, I think if I had a while to reflect on it, I'd probably think of several other things that we did that were, that were significant kinds of things that were going on at the time that I was involved in.  But a lot of that was, that whole litigation was years long with the Minority Female Enterprise Program litigation and I dealt with, I had a, I was involved with personnel and the Civil Service Board.  And so throughout my tenure, that was one of the areas where I got called on all the time.  That was one of my specialties.  And so there were, and I won't call names, but several high-ranking city officials, I was involved in negotiating their departure, is a polite way to put it, where some folk who ran afoul of things along the way, and it's not an easy matter when you have folk in the higher echelon positions cause they've got certain rights and things of that nature.  And so I had a behind-the-scenes role cause a lot of the things we did, you know, that I did.  The lawyers were not out front.  We weren't, we were in the background, and the best role was when I never had to show up.  We would plan and, you know, but I did have a few clients who would do things before, without asking, and then they'd want you to come in and clean it up.  So.
Speaker 1: I see.  So do you go into private practice at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  Well, the way that the situation was set up with the city was that once you reached a certain level, you had to have a right to have a private practice on the side.  And you'd have to give a certain amount of time to the city per week.  And then you were able to do--and I did, I did a lot of small things, you know, not--you know, I did people's wills.  I did some litigation, you know, personal injury kinds of things and like that.  But I didn't do, I didn't have a substantial private practice, but I did do a few things along the way, and I also, I taught at, for a while, at, in the School of Social Work at, it was still Clark, it was still Atlanta University at the time.  And eventually Clark College and Atlanta University merged to become Clark-Atlanta University, but back at this time it was--in fact, the Atlanta University School of Social Work is very famous.  A lot of, a lot of talented social workers, especially African American social workers were, came through the School of Social Work at AU.  So I taught an introductory course in law and social work for a couple of years there.
Speaker 1: Was Thomas Cole-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on just a second. [pause] All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: So at Clark-Atlanta [University], is Thomas Cole the president at this time?
Speaker 1: I don't think he had come in yet cause this was early, back in the early '90s [1990s].  He may, it might have been at the time that they were transitioning, but it's kind of vague in my mind exactly who was where and when.  So.
Story_ID: 1767
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happens in 19--well, when you leave?  When do you become judge, magistrate court judge?
Speaker 2: I got an opportunity, I left the city in April of '92 [1992], and I got appointed by the state court, Fulton County, and the Chief Judge at the time was Judge Charles Carnes (ph.) and Judge Carnes is [cough], they call it the Judge Carnes school for judges.  And many, he has mentored many judges, including myself and there are at least six or seven that are on my bench with me now that came through Judge Carnes.  And he was a, he still is--he's still alive and with us, but he was a very interesting and talented person.  He had been a state legislator prior to coming on the bench.  And he provided the opportunities for a lot of lawyers to get on the other side of the bar, and I'm very grateful for him giving me the opportunity to become a judge.  And so I was at the magistrate level, and I stayed at the magistrate court for three years.  And actually, that was a very important and not insignificant time because I got seasoned as getting used to be on the bench.  And it's different being on the other side.  Also, it provided a real opportunity for dealing with people and kind of an education in terms of life and personalities and everything cause there were two basic aspects of what we did in the magistrate court.  And one, was, we would do probable cause hearings, that is, folk who were charged with, arrested for crimes, we'd have to determine whether or not there was probable cause to send them over or bind them over to go to trial.  And so we did that every day.  And then we also did what is commonly referred to small claims court.  So I got to see a lot of people and I learned a lot about human nature, about the good and the bad and the skunks and the scoundrels and about, things about the trials and tribulations that regular, ordinary average, run-of-the-mill everyday folk would go through and, you know, and learned about, you know, like roofers who weren't right, car folk.  I mean, you know, you name it, we dealt with it, everything from optometrist to oil change folk.  I won't call any names cause the, I won't quote names to protect the guilty (laughter).  But anyway, that was invaluable.  Plus, it provided an opportunity for the bar to get to know me.  And I, from what I understood and, I guess, you know, the truth of the matter was that I did a good job and I was well thought of.  And so that put me in a posture where when opportunities came with regards to higher courts, I was able to move up because of the opportunity that Judge Carnes and the state court judge had given me to come in as a magistrate.  It was, actually, it was some historic connection with that whole thing as well.  At the time in Fulton County there were 12 judges in the Superior Court.  And State Representative Tyrone Brooks, among others in the--since he was the lead, alphabetically, the lead plaintiff--it's called the Brooks litigation, but they did a voting rights challenge to the way judges were elected in the State of Georgia.  And the Brooks litigation went on for several years.  At about that time, I was on the magistrate court, and before, before I got on the magistrate court, Judge Clarence Cooper, who's now a senior judge in Federal district court, but he was the first African American judge elected in a county-wide election here, to the Fulton County Superior Court.  And my father had mentored him in his earlier days.  We're all part of, we're all fraternity brothers, and, but he had known my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.].  My father had had a positive influence on Judge Cooper, and when I came along Judge Cooper returned the favor and was looking out for me and helping me in my growth and development as an attorney.  And also, Isabelle Gates Webster, who was part of the team that desegregated Lockheed back in the day with R. E. Thomas and Donald Hallowell (ph.) and all of those wonderful, talented attorneys who fought the good fight along with Judge Ward and those people, back with the Hermington Homes and Charlene Hunter Gault and all of that.  These are the same people that did all of that, but Ms. Webster was on the team that desegregated Lockheed Aircraft.  And she was in the City Attorney's office.  She was the first city, assistant city attorney while I was there, and she was good friends with my parents.  Her husband was the brother of our next door neighbors, the Wilsons, who ran the real estate company.  And, but anyway, it was, Donald Webster was his name, and he worked for the air, for the Federal Aviation Administration, but anyway was mentoring me as well.  And so both she and Judge Cooper had, and I'm paraphrasing now, but the essence of the conversation was one that I had, I was very familiar with over the years.  It had been repeated many times to many people before me and after me, but the conversation was basically like, there's some opportunities about to come up for blacks in the judiciary, and when they do, we need to be ready.  And this is the way I'm phrasing it, but that was the thought.  That was the essence of the thought was, because when opportunities came available, the idea was you had to get your best and the brightest to come forward to step up and take those opportunities and do well because if you failed, it would be like the naysayers would say, "see, we gave 'em a chance, and they screwed it up.  They couldn't handle it.  See, we told you they weren't smart enough" or they weren't talented enough or they weren't disciplined enough or they weren't whatever.  And so they had that kind of conversation with me.  And they said we need some folk who are qualified, honest and competent and able to do the work.  And so, meantime, Brooks is going on, and so when Brooks finally settled, they settled the case, we had three positions in Fulton County.  So it was twelve actually filled and three spots were open and also one of the judges had retired to go into private practice.  So there were four slots on the Fulton Superior Court at the time that I was aspiring to the bench.  And that Brooks broke the, you know, broke the log jam, and folks started getting appointed.  And Governor Miller, and I still call him Governor Miller, I know he was a senator and everything, but he was my governor.  And I know a lot of folk necessarily criticized him about his latter political career, changing from what he might have done in the earlier days, but I don't care what they say about Zell Miller.  He's still my governor cause what folk don't realize and some of us do, was that he changed the face of the judiciary in Georgia.  And he appointed more women and minorities than just about any of his predecessors combined.  And so now you have tremendously much more diverse judiciary in the State of Georgia because of Zell Miller.  And when I got appointed, he had already been elected.  So it wasn't like he needed some votes or whatever, and so I--that's why I give him credit because it seemed like it was a magnanimous gesture unless he was--the only self motivation cause maybe he was looking to frame his legacy or something like that.  But he didn't have to do it, and so I'll be forever grateful that I got that opportunity.  And then, you know, so I got, I got appointed in '95 [1995], along with two other, two of my other colleagues are still here on the bench with me.  We were, it was a black male, two black females, a Jewish female and one Irish-Catholic from Boston (laughter).
Story_ID: 1768
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go, cause you're talking about being appointed to the Supreme Court, right?
Speaker 2: Superior Court.
Speaker 1: Superior Court, I mean.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go to Superior Court, two things, one, is it true that when you left your job as the assistant attorney that they had to split the job up between seven different attorneys because you had so much responsibility and was able to do it.
Speaker 2: That's what, that's what they did.  They had seven different lawyers.  They split my job up, cause I guess my thing had evolved over the years.  It was like somebody would leave, and, well, give it to Dempsey, you know.  And then it was, give it to Dempsey.  And that's been the same thing here.  On our court here, I call myself, you know, there was this commercial, I forget what the product was, but--some kind of cereal or something.  And they would, the two--three little kids were there and they would all say, well, "give it to Mikey, let him try it".
Speaker 1: Mikey will eat it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm Mikey, so I would, if they, when they left, they'd give it to me.  And that was another one of the things I, when I got through Tax in law school, and I said I never wanna see Tax again in life.  And, you know, the Lord has a way of working with you, and so I ended up having--the guy who was representing the City County Tax Assessor's Office left.  Give it to Dempsey.  So I had (laughter) to do tax.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the other thing is you talked about your father was a mentor for Judge Cooper, and but you said something about fraternity.  Was your father an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  He pledged in Alpha Sigma [Alpha Sigma Chapter, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.] which was Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was your father a member of the Boule?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then mentors.  You talked about Hamilton E. Holmes, and you talked about a number of people, but I know that you knew Hamilton E. Holmes--
Speaker 2: Yes, I Hamp--
Speaker 1: Tell me about him.
Speaker 2: --was, Hamp was my counselor in day camp.  He was, you know, they had the older, the older kids who might have been like late high school or early college would be--and we were like elementary school level.  So they were like the junior counselors and stuff during the, we went to the YMCA, the Butler Street YMCA had day camp.  And it was, you know, we even had our own song.  You know, it was like if you, and if you--anybody that ever was a YMCA day-camper, knew the song.  So if you ever wanna find out if somebody really was in the "Y", you know.  And it was like, I'm--what was it?  [singing] "I'm a YMCA day camper, the finest in the land.  We love to hike, play ball and swim, the life I live is grand.  And if you've seen 'em in action, you'll know, you'll understand.  I'm an YMCA day camper, the finest in the land."  So everybody that ever went through there can sing that song.  And a lot of original Atlantans went to the Butler Street "Y".  That was the day care back then.  You'd come from school, ride the bus down to the "Y" and stay there until it was time for my mother, worked right up on what's now the capital, Capital Hill.  The state judicial building is where--no, I'm sorry, the State legislative office was her office.  Back then it was a much smaller state government.  And so, yeah, but he, Hamp was one of my counselors.  I knew Hamp--all of the Holmes family.  It was Hamp, Emma, Herbert, Gary, Mike and they were one of the prominent Atlanta families, and of course, they will forever be embedded in Atlanta history.  Hamp's daddy, Tuck Holmes, was part of the folk that desegregated the golf courses in Atlanta.  Of course, I go and play at Tuck Holmes golf course often.
Speaker 1: [Coughing] Let's stop right here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1769
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 1995, you're appointed to Fulton County [Georgia] Superior Court?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your first day.
Speaker 2: Well, I came in and I go out and get on the bench, and I'm sitting there, and I'm looking around.  And I'm just looking around and the sheriff comes on over after a little bit and says, he leans over and says, Judge, you got to start the court (laughter).  And so I had, I was sitting there and forgot that I had to start court, you know.  And so, it was a great way (laughter) to start a career.  And so I've never taken myself that seriously ever since (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so explain to me how the court system works.  You're appointed the first time, and then you have to be elected after that?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends.  There's, there's, Superior Court, for example, just like the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court of Georgia are elected positions.  And so you have a term, but you can first come onto the job in several different ways--well, actually, two different ways.  You can be appointed or elected.  If there's a newly created seat, like when the Brooks litigation broke, there were three new elected--three new seats on the bench created by the legislature.  So the governor fills it initially.  If someone dies in office or resigns in office and there's an unexpired term, the governor appoints to that.  You can also run in the regular election and get elected to the position.  Once, whether you're appointed or elected initially, you have to run every four years.  So I got, although I got appointed initially, I ran, I've run every four years since 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay, so talk to me about some of the cases or what you find important cases that you have presided over during this time?
Speaker 2: Well, there's several that are ongoing so I can't, and they actually would be of some interest from a historical and just general interest in the wider community, nationally as well.  But I can't--well, I guess I can mention the case.  I can't talk about it, but I had one case involving a dispute about taxing and fees and everything involving all of the dot coms [.com's] with the Orbit's, Expedia, all of those were in a dispute with the City of Atlanta.  That's still pending so I can't really discuss that, but that has substantial financial implications for that industry, and I'm talking nationwide.  And I'm currently, the case I handled with the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is currently on appeal.  So I can't really do anything other than just mention it.  I've handled that case.  I had several, I've had several death penalty cases in, that actually none of them have ever gone to trial.  The three that I've handled, the defendant ultimately pled guilty to life without parole.  So I've handled several but not had, I've not actually had to go through the difficulties of having to do a death penalty trial which doesn't bother me at all.
Speaker 1: Really? It doesn't bother you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, nah, not having to do that, that's like the saying in the legal community is "death is different".  I mean it's a tremendous pressure on the judge and on the lawyers and everybody.  It's not a pleasant experience to have to go through it.  And so the fact that it just so turns out--I mean I didn't do anything other than just preside over the case and do, and the litigation handled itself.  And so the defendants ended up pleading guilty and the State went along with that.  And, but it didn't bother me that I didn't have to go through the torture of doing a death penalty trial and all of the publicity and all of the other kinds of things that go along with it.  It's a very challenging role to play as a judge.  And so being honest about it, it doesn't bother me at all that I haven't had to do that yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if I do, I'll deal with it.  If I don't, I'll be glad that I--just like I didn't have to do any workers comp when I worked with the City.  I didn't, I don't miss that at all (laughter).  But then I've had, I guess one of the big criminal cases I had was a case where it was a serial rapist who was attacking in the predominantly African American community and was, we, they--he was prosecuted for six cases, although there were numerous others that came up on the DNA.  They got him on a DNA hit when he was in jail for something else, and there were more than ten, in the teens, DNA hits on unsolved cases, and so that's how they got onto him.  But the thing that was most challenging about that case was that we tried it for three or four, almost four weeks and--because he had so many victims.  And at the end of the trial, the jury deadlocked.  And he had filed a speedy trial demand.  And the way the circumstances were, the day, the afternoon that the jury deadlocked and we had to declare a mistrial was the last day we could try him.  So we had to immediately turn around and start striking another jury that day or he would have walked.  So we spent almost six, six weeks in a row trying that case.  And, but then when, the second jury came back and convicted him on all counts.  And that stood up on appeal.  So it's, although technically, there's some legal things that can be done, like habeas corpus and things of that nature, but the case is, the case is substantially complete now.
Story_ID: 1770
Speaker 1: What about during the Olympics, you know, and the bombings, did you have anything to do with any of those cases?
Speaker 2: No, that was, it was federal.
Speaker 1: Federal case, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean everything, but what did you think about the bombing (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, some of the litigation was in the State court here, not in my court and I didn't personally have anything to do with it, but--
Speaker 1: Just give me your thoughts about the whole thing?
Speaker 2: --his name was, Richard Jewel was the guy that was falsely accused of being the bomber, and he sued the, I believe it was the "Atlanta General Constitution", the newspaper and that played out in the state court here. But, you know, it was similar to the, to--my response and reaction were similar to most all good citizens here in this community where we were appalled by what had happened.  And, of course, we were very much concerned because it was, things were going on in other communities over in Alabama and some other places.  And there were a lot of bombings going on and it worried people.  And, of course, we all were, our hearts went out to the families of the people who had suffered injuries and things of that nature.  It was a real tragedy, so--but I didn't have any role to play in that in that particular scenario.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I know you didn't have any--well, let's--well, we'll go forward, but it's just certain cases that happened in Atlanta.  And they might not have happened in your court that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that we could still talk about as well.  But in the World Trade Center [New York, New York], where were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was sitting in my office, and getting ready to go out and take the bench, and I don't remember who it was, but somebody said, turn on the TV.  And we turned it on and watched the, both planes go into the building.  And so that just, I mean that was just, wow, you know, it took, we went--I mean it just blew all of our minds.  We couldn't believe it like most other Americans couldn't believe it either so.  And so we just watched it till we got, you know, you kind of like overdosed on that whole thing, but it was a life-changing experience for most Americans.
Speaker 1: Right, and how so for you?  How did you feel that that was life changing for you, you know, as far as who were the culprits and what was going to happen after that point in America?
Speaker 2: Well, a big thing was it was really frightening because it, it's kind of--maybe a good analogy might be, say, you're living out your life and you're doing fine, and then your house gets burglarized.  So now you're feeling of security has been damaged.  And depending upon how well you recover from it or what happens, you've got some serious trauma and your feeling of safety has been compromised; same thing with this issue.  It's like, hey, these folk came over here and they knocked down the World Trade Center, and they took over airplanes and killed all of these people.  We're not safe.  And so it made me very uncomfortable in the sense that like, well, are we safe?  You know, am I gonna walk out, you know, and, of course, you may recall there were like scares of like, well, are they gonna bomb the, something is gonna set off a bomb at the mall or at the bus station and everything.  And then I remember being privy to meetings where they were discussing security issues and what are we gonna do about, you know, everybody started working on their disaster plan for the court.  And we were involved in all of that.  And so it caused a lot of changes in how things got done at a lot of different levels because the court system was a place that could be identified as a possible target.  It would have been, you know, an attack against the system, you attack the courthouse.  And so, of course, the Feds had to worry about it a little bit more than we might, but still we were a, we were on the radar as a target.  And so we had to go through all of that, they had planning and everything.  But they, the biggest thing, the major impact was just the feeling of loss of security.  You know, this is the United States.  And folk aren't supposed to be able to come over here and do this kind of stuff to us.
Story_ID: 1771
Speaker 1: You have another tragedy or life changing event that happens in 2003 when your wife [Colleen Dempsey] becomes ill.  Did you want to talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: Well, she actually got diagnosed with inflammatory breast cancer in '99 [1999].  Inflammatory breast cancer is the most aggressive form of breast cancer, and she had a clean mammogram in March and October she got diagnosed with a thirteen centimeter tumor.  So that was the beginning of a four-year fight with breast cancer.  And, of course, when you hear the word that you've got cancer, it was like, it knocks you to the floor and, but she, as her good friend, Alexis who helped write the obituary and what she said was that, she never gave up.  She just gave out.  Her body just couldn't take it any longer, but she was fighting all the way.  And she spent a lot of the time supporting other women who were dealing with breast cancer and she'd go to get her chemo or whatever, and she'd be passing on hints about how to deal with things and what you can eat to make you feel, so you don't throw up or minimize the likelihood of you throwing up and have nausea and also, but the big thing about it was that she was fighting, and we had a oncologist.  I love that man.  He, he went the extra mile, and I think if it hadn't been for him, she wouldn't have lived as long as she did.  But he was wonderful.  He was like God's gift to the human race.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Dr.--now, see, as soon as you asked me, my mind went totally blank.  It'll come to me in a minute.  But he, I don't know how he does it cause he was there in the mornings.  He'd come, and go to the hospital in the mornings.  He'd go do his office visits and all of those kind of things.  And the next time we take a break, I'll, it'll--
Speaker 1: Look his name up.
Speaker 2: --it'll come up to me.  But anyway, the other thing significant about my wife's struggle with breast cancer was that she had two goals that she wanted, and she, you know, she was diagnosed with about six months to live.  And she managed to go for four years.  But one of the, two things she wanted, was to see her son graduate from high school and to hold a grandchild because we didn't have, we didn't have--when she got diagnosed we didn't have any grandchildren.  In fact, she went through two weddings while she was dealing with breast cancer.  During those four years, both my daughters got married.  One year, in fact, they took all our money, our 30th anniversary, we didn't get to do anything cause we spent all the money on the wedding for one of my daughters (laughter).  And then the next year we postponed it again cause the other one got married.  But anyway, she, my grandson, my oldest grandchild was a year and a half old when she passed.  So she got to hold her grandchild.  In fact, she was, when we'd go to chemo [chemotherapy], she's changing diapers while she's getting chemo, and doing stuff like that.  In fact, she was so motivated, my daughter was in seminary at the time.  And she was going to take the semester off cause they couldn't afford day care and all that kind of stuff.  And my wife said, no, you gonna finish school and said, we'll take care of Carlos.  And so my wife, through all of that stuff, was taking care of her grandson and babysitting and going to chemo, getting radiation therapy and all those kind of stuff, planned two weddings.  I mean she, this was a really strong woman.  And there were times when she was carrying me on her back, you know, the kind of things you don't talk about but like they say, behind every successful woman is a strong--I mean behind every successful man is a successful woman.  Well, but for my wife being in my life, I wouldn't have amounted to much of nothing I don't think.  She was the rock that I stood on and held me up and, you know, when I knocked down, she'd be there to encourage me and hold my hand and do all of those kind of things that a good spouse will do.  And so anything I've ever accomplished, it's like one of my favorite songs is the old Gladys Knight and the Pips song about, "If anyone should ever write my life story, for whatever reason there might be, you'll be there between every line pain and glory, cause you're the best thing that ever happened to me."  Well, that was my wife.  And so she deserves much of the credit cause there were times when I would have quit, but she kept me going.  So, and I miss her.
Story_ID: 1772
Speaker 1: That's wonderful, that's wonderful, and I'm sure you do miss her a lot.  So you become involved with "Sisters by Choice".
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you how that happened.  The organization "Sisters by Choice" provides education about breast cancer and provides support to women who are suffering with breast cancer and, you know, group therapy and support groups as well as free medical care for them.  And so the pur--they started, one of the things they started doing was putting on a fund-raiser and they'd give away an award they called the "Pink Badge of Courage", and the essence of the, the purpose of the award was to recognize women who, although they were fighting breast cancer themselves, reached out to help others.  And so my wife was the first recipient of the award.  And so I was there to receive the award.  And it kind of just naturally flowed from there, and they eventually--they asked me to join the board.  And so I joined the board cause I was committed to seeing that, you know, no woman should ever have to go through what a woman goes through dealing with breast cancer.  And if I could do anything to keep somebody else from having to go through that, I would.  And so I said, well, I need to do something, and actually, I was also on the board of another local called "Breast Friends".  And they were similar.  They did slightly different things, but they also were--and the executive director for that organization was the second recipient of the Pink Badge of Courage Award.  And that's how I ended up getting involved with their organization cause I presented to them.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Rose Brooks Phillips started Sisters by Choice.  She's one of our HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: A good friend.
Story_ID: 1773
Speaker 1: So now, what happens in your life next?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I was, at that point, I needed to--I had to figure out what I was gonna do with the rest of my life cause I was, you know, I was, I had thirty years experience of, almost thirty-three years experience being Colleen's husband (laughter), and I was good at it.  You know, I was good at that (laughter), being dad and Colleen's husband.  I had that down.  So now, I'm here trying to figure out, you know, what am I gonna do?  What are you gonna do?  You know, we were supposed to finish out our careers and then go travel and enjoy each other.  So now I got to start all over and figure out what to do.  But in the meantime, I was, kind of did a bunch of different things.  I was, you know, I ended up, I had a lot of time.  I spend more time, you know, I might be at work at eight, nine o'clock at night cause I don't have anything to go home to.  So, you know, but, and I don't wanna make it sound so terrible, but basically, that's the truth.  It was like, you know, so I would be working and I got involved in several projects here at the courthouse, and like I was telling you, I was Mikey, so anything knew came up, it was like give it to Dempsey.  So I got involved with the development, we had a project.  It was a state pilot project that was supported by the State of Georgia and the judicial, judiciary and this court where we were trying to find a new way to do domestic cases.  We wanted to have a more humane and therapeutic way of dealing with divorces and other domestic disputes.  And so we developed a whole new approach and we had social service coordinators who would come in and work with, providing services to folk who couldn't really afford it.  We, one of the things we did was we streamlined the process so that we had mediators.  Every time you come to the courthouse, there was a mediator present so we could send folk immediately to mediation rather than schedule them two or three weeks later and then by that time, somebody got in a fight with the, or the girlfriend showed up, and everything blew up.  We could get folk in the room together, work out the resolution and save people time and money because we got it down to where we made it move much quicker.  It was much more efficient.  So they'd have to come in every thirty days, thirty days, sixty days, 120 days and so there were several things that we did to improve the process.  And it became a little more humane.  And so that took several years, and we worked on that, and I was--myself and Judge Cynthia Wright, who's our Chief Judge, current chief judge, she and I were the first two judges to work in the family division.  And that was a very, it was a very challenging to do domestic full time cause we, what we did was we created the pilot project that has since been made permanent.  Now, we have three judges that do just domestic, similar to, you know, other jurisdictions have basically two types of courts.  One where they do everything so you do criminal, civil and domestic.  Other places like New York, and I think in Pennsylvania, they have divisions where you might have a criminal division, a civil division or a domestic division.  And so what we did was we carved out the domestic, set it aside, and, of course, the other thing that was successful about it was that the domestic bar felt like they were the step children of the courthouse because we have these Constitutional mandates that we have to deal with criminal cases within a certain set period of time.  And so the domestic bar was the last to get serviced.  And so when we set aside these judges to do just domestic, they got much more specific attention.  And so the bar, at first was a little hesitant because they didn't really know what to expect.  But once they got into it, they loved it.  And so it's been going successfully ever since.  Then we ended up, the next thing I did was I was working on, we started this, what they called a non-complex docket.  What essentially was going on in this court as many other courts in the country have had, case management problems.  We've got more cases and not enough judges and resources to do them.  So the case backlog started building up.  And that doesn't help anybody cause as the old saying goes, "Justice delayed, is justice denied".  So we have spent, here in Fulton County [Georgia], we spent a lot of time trying to come up with creative solutions cause we haven't had the money.  So you have to get creative to try to do more with what you can.  Of course, coming from the African American community background, I was very familiar with making more with less.  And so I was the first judge to do the non-complex cases.  And what we ended up doing was we had what were called, we called them non-complex felonies, but basically, it was the less serious felonies, like--
Speaker 1: [Coughing] Excuse me.
Speaker 2: --simple possession of drugs or car theft, you know, things of that nature, not the serious rapes, murders and that kind of thing.  And we would finish a case from arrest to disposition in ninety days.  So you had to move it, you know, and it was like--I called it my James Brown court.  You had to "hit it and quit it".  So come on in, let's do what we got to do and it's over with.  So we gave just enough time to, enough time to get what you needed done, but not a whole lot of time for the case to sit around and get moldy and all of that.  And so those kind of cases were close to seventy-five percent of the felonies in the courthouse.  And so what we did, we carved those out and put it in a special docket and left the more serious cases to be spread out among the rest of the judges.  And that's worked well.  And that's worked well, as well.  And so, you know, it's like you come in there and you get arrested.  And you're not gonna be sitting around waiting forever to get your case heard.  And it's been working successfully ever since.  And so that was another one of those things that we did.
Story_ID: 1774
Speaker 1: Let's talk about in 2005, just going back, just to give the year reference, about the Brian Nichols case.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Talk to me about that--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --about what happened and the security as far as the courtrooms and all of that.
Speaker 2: Well, what really transpired was Nichols was on trial for rape.  And I think he had, there was a mistrial or something like.  But anyway, they were starting the trial up again and the judge that was handling it, Judge Barnes, was over in the old courthouse.  And this is dealing with this issue about the security thing.  The newer courthouse where we are now, is set up so that when the prisoners come in, they never get into anywhere other than in a custodial environment.  And they come up to holding cells right outside the courtroom and then they come right into the courtroom.  Judge Barnes was over in the old courthouse.  So the folk who were criminal cases in his court, they would come over--they'd bring 'em in, into the new courthouse, bring 'em upstairs to one of the upper floors, dress 'em out and then walk 'em over to the courtroom over there.  That particular day, Nichols was being handled by one deputy.  And during the course of him getting dressed, he overpowered the deputy, beat her down and, of course, he was a real smart guy.  And he was able to grab the keys, he knew where the keys were and where the, where the weapons was located.  And he opened up and got the weapon, and then he went across the bridge to the old court where he was located.
Speaker 1: Let's stop right here so you can finish this story in its entirety.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1775
Speaker 1: Well, I was talking to you about the Brian [Nichols], let me just fast forward.  I mean the facts of the case are kind of common knowledge, to those who were paying attention, but he ended up killing three people.  And, but the, what--the aftershock or the, what occurred substantially changed the whole idea about security at the courthouse cause then it's been an ongoing thing to beef up security and, you know, and doing the post-mortem about how to, what happened, how did it go wrong, all of those kinds of things.  But it was again, similar to the 9/11 [September 11, 2001] where all of a sudden folk were really, really afraid.  And they were really concerned about whether they were they were really safe at the courthouse.  So that, that took a while to get over that kind of shock.  Of course, it didn't have that great an effect on me cause I was, I felt like, you know, I've been walking the streets of New York and Boston and Atlanta and other places, and I just, I never really, I kept a certain level of awareness all the time, but it really did effect the well being.  You had folk, jurors worried about if they came to the courthouse, were they gonna be okay.  And then the other thing that was, that had a substantial impact on the court and the community was the tremendous amount of resources that the Nichols thing ate up cause it, it caused serious damage to the Public Indigent Defense in Georgia because it drained a bunch of the money that was available.  It also created a negative impression with the legislature and other folks about how, you know, why are they spending all of this much money and stuff on somebody that everybody knows is guilty, dah, dah, datta.  You know, all of that kind of stuff was going on, and so it still had lingering effects with regards to Indigent Defense in Georgia.  It really set it back, and it created a lot of collateral consequences where in other jurisdictions trials, death penalty cases or serious trials were going on.  And the resources weren't there to handle those trials.  And, of course, the Nichols case was an easy scapegoat, but it really was a matter that they weren't funding Indigent Defense enough is what the real truth of the matter was.  But Nichols provided a convenient scapegoat and that was regrettable because we're still reeling from the effect in terms of funding for Indigent Defense and the quality for those how can't afford attorneys.
Story_ID: 1776
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about your life or your job that you would like to talk about that we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess something that's really important to me was I've served on numerous boards and positions, and that was part of when I, take you back to when I was talking about my family.  They've always been kind of public servants or, and the thing I was taught and kind of, was just kind of naturally, became a part of me, where I don't even really think about it, was the idea that you have an obligation to do things for your community to make it a better place.  And it's a duty.  And so similar to, Andy Young calls it, you know, W.E.B. Dubois talked about the talented tenth and all that kind of stuff.  But the biblical admonition about "unto whomsoever much is given, much--of them, shall much be required".  And I've always believed in that and that, and also another one of the adages was like you should reach back as you climb.  So if you move, you have an obligation--not an opportunity but an obligation to look out for folk that come behind you and to try to do that.  And so my father [Alford Dempsey, Sr.] always told me, he said, you know, he, his goal was to make life for his children better than it was for him, and he did that.  He did that, and he did it in big time.  And so I've lived that out myself.  And so I spend an awful lot of time and the little bit of money I got donating it to charitable causes and, you know, everything from the Boy Scouts to working with breast cancer and numerous, you know, arts associations, everything cause that was very important too, is that you, you know, the whole idea about growing up as a middle-class black person, you kind of had to, you know, study some kind of instrument, sing or dance and be a good student and give something back to the community.  And so I could spend hours talking about the different organizations that I've worked with and one of them was Carrie Steel Pitts Homes, which was, actually, it's tied into my church.  Historically, Carrie Steel was a maid at the Atlanta [Georgia] terminal station, the railroad station here.  And she would, sometimes children would be abandoned at the, at the, down there in the railroad station.  And so she started taking care of these abandoned children.  And she'd keep 'em the boxcar during the day, and then take 'em home with her in the evening.  And then she and her husband made a commitment to where they ended up buying a bigger home and started keeping children there.  And fast forward over the years, it became a, got incorporated and became a home for abandoned, neglected, deprived and dependent children, a twenty-four-hour residential home.  And that was some of the most gratifying work that I had did.  I was the chair of the board at one time, but I served on the board for many years.  And that was, when I got introduced to and worked with for a number of years, really another one of these God's gift to the world, her name was Olivette Smith Allison.  And she was the first, she grew up in the home, and she became the first, she went on to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then AU [Atlanta University] School Social Work.  She became the first professional social worker to work at the home.  And she stayed there the rest of her life.  She, I guess she retired, and about a year later or so, she passed.  But she loved children and children loved her, and that was part of what made Carrie Steel special, was that it really was a home.  It wasn't an orphanage.  It was a home.  And children got raised in a home, and it was the next best thing to having a family.  So those are just a few of the things that I've worked with, but that's very important to me.  And, of course, I'm now serving on this board, Families First, which is a support organization that does all kinds of things throughout the--and I'm a legacy cause my mother was on the board back in the '60s [1960s].  And so I was following in her footsteps in doing that.  And, of course, I take pride in following in my parents' footsteps.  They had some big shoes to fill.  And that's, that's the kind of thing that drives me is to make my community a better place so that it, you know, at the end of it all, if they can just say that the world was a little bit better or Atlanta was a little bit better or Fulton County [Georgia] was a little bit better cause Al Dempsey came that way, then it'd all be worth it.
Story_ID: 1777
Speaker 1: So I don't have to ask you the question, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Just that I helped make my community a little bit better, I guess, and since I'm a judge, that one of the goals specifically, in terms of how do you make the community better, was that my goal and objective was--you know, cause I was called to the, to be a judge.  I wasn't, that wasn't my goal, it wasn't my objective.  But like a lot of things, when folk in the community said, Dempsey, you need to do this for us, that's why I got involved in this.  Folk asked me to, said, we need good people to go out and do this right.  And the thing that drives me every day, every day of my life that I come out here is to provide fairness which is the essence of justice, is someone to get a fair trial.  And we didn't always get that in the past.  And so now, regardless of race, creed, color, social origin, sexual preference or any of those kind of things, if you come see Judge Dempsey, you can guarantee to get a fair trial.  Of course, if you're a criminal, that means you're gonna stay in jail because if you get a fair trial, it doesn't get overturned.  So, and I--one of the things I always tell folk, I say, you think you--you know, you're gonna get treated fairly.  Do you see any railroad tracks running through this courtroom?  We don't railroad anybody here.  So, but anyway, that, that's really very important to me.  And that was part, one of the things that I got real feedback when I was a magistrate because, you know, things are over very quickly.  And very few people appealed my decisions when I was in magistrate court.  You know, in Superior Court, it's a lot of stuff going on, but what that said to me--and I think it was the truth, was that folk felt like they were treated, when people are treated fairly, they are more willing to accept the decision that's made than if--the first thing they're gonna do is appeal if they feel like they were treated unfairly.  They wanna go to the next level and fight it, you know.  But if they feel like they've been treated fairly, they can accept the outcome.  And so I have, you know, clearly it's my duty to be fair, but my aspiration is for the people that come before me, win or lose, to leave saying, he treated me fairly.  And that's a higher level than just knowing, cause I mean, I know when folk come through here, I've treated 'em fairly.  But they don't always feel that way, but more times than not, the folk leave, you know, saying, even guys that go to jail, said, you know, well, you treated me fairly.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, a few of those things are gone.  I wanted to play professional sports, but I'm too old now.  And then I, you know, I kind of, I'm a frustrated actor, never did get the, you know, the whole show business thing that was--what was great about that was that, you know, when you're performing, you get an instant feedback.  And so if the crowd, if you, if the folk love you, if they like what you're doing or your performance or whatever, you get immediate feedback and, you know, and I loved that part.  I mean it was good.  It was kind of like a real high when you, when you get the--and I guess that's what drives a lot of actors or performances or whatever, it's the same thing.  But I don't know.  I was thinking maybe some teaching.  I never--people keep telling me I ought to write a book.  And I say, well, if I really was gonna tell a story, I'd have to wait till everybody is dead cause it's a whole lot of stuff that would really be spicy, but I'm not gonna get into that, you know, those kind of things.  But I don't know.  I'm still trying to, I'm still, even, you know, my wife passed in 2003 and so eight years later I'm still trying to figure out what I'm gonna do.  I'm getting near the end of my career, but I plan to work longer.  I'm not about to retire, but I'm thinking about what I might wanna do once I leave the bench.  And I'm still working on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, if you had a word of advice to the future generations, what would it be?
Speaker 2: Get a good education.  Anything else is, everything is possible once you get a good education, and without it I don't know what I would have done.  That was my, my road to success was through education.  Of course, my mama [Maenelle Dempsey] would spank if I didn't, if I said anything else because (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so if there's nothing else, I wanna thank you so much for taking so much time.  I know you're busy, but I'll tell you, it has been a pleasure listening to your story, and I thank you for sharing.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  I enjoyed this.  And I appreciate the opportunity, and I'm really flattered that The HistoryMakers thought I would have something significant to say.  And so it means a lot of me that you asked me to do this.
