Story_ID: 94631
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: The name is Howard Dodson, that's H-O-W-A-R-D, and the last name is D-O-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chester, Pennsylvania on June 1st, 1939.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm director of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, the leading repository on the history and culture of people of African descent worldwide based right here in Harlem, USA.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 16th, I believe, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're actually sitting in the American Negro Theater of the Schomburg Center.  This is a rather historic place in that it was the thea--theatrical space in which people like Harry Belafonte [HM] and Sidney Poitier and Ruby Dee [HM] all started their theatrical careers.  So it's a very significant place and the physical plant here at the Schomburg Center.
Story_ID: 94632
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions, lightweight questions that we always, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh God (laughter), do I have a favorite food?  I, I eat very, very broadly, and I love good food.  So my favorite food is good food. I, having grown up in my mother's kitchen, if I say anything that's not in the soulful--food (unclear), I'll be in deep trouble 'cause she's supposed to be coming to see me, and she'll hear about this--but, all the basic soul food I grew up on that's still very, very (unclear) essential part of my diet.  I, I love Latin food; I love Thai food; I love Chinese food; I love Indian food; I love good food period (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, now do, now do, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I probably am somewhere in the earth tones, and it runs kind of from the, a, a beige to actually to a chocolate brown.  I, I, I kind of run through the earth tones and really do like 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love, I love heat; I love warmth; I love the summer.  Sometimes the summer doesn't like me, because of my allergies, but I love it.  I love the spring and, and, and the fall.  I hate winter.  Me and cold weather don't get along at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been going to Puerto Rico for years, and it's one of my favorite vacation retreat areas.  I have recently discovered Nassau in the Bahamas as a place for vacationing.  Here in the, in the U.S., I have friends in North Carolina I go and spend time with from time to time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: Nothing I can think of right off the bat.
Story_ID: 94633
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, let me ask you about your family origins.  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: Probably just to my, my grandparents on my maternal side.  My grandfather and grandmother lived in a little farming community outside of Danville, Virginia.  The kind of center of the community 'cause it was a farming community was a church called Schockoe Baptist Church.  And my grandfather was the head of the deacon board there and my grandmother was the mother of the church.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell the name of that church again?
Speaker 2: Schockoe, S-C-H-O-K-O-E--[Schockoe]--I believe and, and it's in--I guess technically it's called Schockoe, Virginia.  It's right around the corner from Java, J-A-V-A, Virginia, which is right down the road a piece from Danville (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's near Danville?
Speaker 2: All, all near Danville, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, do you--are there any stories, or songs, or anecdotes associated with your ancestors that you remember that are passed down through the family?
Speaker 2: Just experiences I had with my, my grandparents and when I grew up in Chester, Pennsylvania, we used to go to Virginia every summer.  And my grandparents had a, a tobacco farm, and we would go and spend anywhere from a month to a month and a half on the farm doing basic farm work and living with the family.  And I have one anecdote that's, that's come down the family.  I had an aunt, I guess she was my great aunt, who my mother's sisters and, and my mother herself at that time used to make fun of because she had what they considered to be, or at least the stories about her was that she was very peculiar.  And she had this regular ritual during the day.  At least once or twice a day she would be observed going into the woods and her going in--going through some kind of a ritual and usually in a prayer mode.  And she would speak in a language that no one understood.  And as I listened to them tell the story over and over again and have had the chance to read back through some of the history, it was likely that she probably was Muslim and was probably practicing what remnants of Muslim tradition that she knew.  But they, the family was all Christian and deep Baptist Christian, and certainly didn't recognize any of that as being legitimate or a part of any--no serious religious practice.  That's probably the most poignant one that I recall.
Speaker 1: And she would have been alive around the turn of the century or something?
Speaker 2: She, she would have been alive in the 19th century.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--well, she was born--would have been born in the 19th century and would have been alive in the early part of the 20th century, 'cause the, the story I think was coming from my grandparents to my, my aunts.  They actually did meet here, and at the time she was a bit senior in age I guess.  But, that's, that's probably the, the, the most interesting little tidbit that I've been able to--
Speaker 1: So, there are no stories about what, what, what your family was doing during the 19th century?  Were they, were they slave or free, or is there--
Speaker 2: Don't have any information on that at all, don't have any information on that at all.
Speaker 1: But your grandparents owned property you said?
Speaker 2: They actually owned, owned the farm.  My grandfather actually owned a fairly large spread.  He lost it in '29 [1929] in the crash and went back to sharecropping.  So by the time I was going down to spend time with him, he was basically sharecropping owned by, owned by someone, someone else.  I don't recall whether it was the exact same property or not.  But he would put out a full crop of tobacco every year.  He and one of my mother's brothers actually worked the land.  And we'd, we'd go down and spend time with them.
Story_ID: 94634
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: His name is Howard Dodson, Sr. and same as mine, H-O-W-A-R-D, D-O-D-S-O-N, Sr.
Speaker 1: What was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in the Chatham, Virginia, area down around Shockoe and that area.  He was born on June 21st, 1915, and he'll celebrate his 88th birthday I think this year.  He's still alive, a rather remarkable man.  He, at age 11, somewhere between 11 and 15, was playing baseball.  And they had makeshift field with the bases were like a sack, bag over some rocks.  And he slid in and it busted the, the cap on his knee, the fluid cap on the knee, and was not able to get surgery done on it.  So he, his knee has been stiff since that time, and he walks with a, walks on the tip of the right toe with a bit of a limp.  But he basically took the position that he was, he could do anything that any other man could do.  If you told him he was handicapped, he'd bust you in the lips (laughter).  'Cause he, he worked as a general laborer for well, basically from the time that he was in his twenties until he retired at I believe sixty-five, and worked every kind of a job you could imagine, from building bridges to building college and university campuses, to housing projects, to digging out these tanks, oil tanks, where they, they, they deposit oil, virtually any and every kind. He worked, worked around the, around the clock, around the--one of the really wonderful stories about him that I really relish.  He had several opportunities to be promoted either to the position of shop steward or to union rep or something like that.  And each of the appointments would have meant that he wouldn't have had to work as hard, and he could make more money.  And every time one of these opportunities would come up, he'd turn it down.  And he and I had a confrontation when I was like, like 24, 25.  And I'm, of course, I know everything; I'm the smartest person ever walked on two feet.  And he's been doing all of this dumb stuff for all this time.  And I've--finally we get, we have a head to head.  And I kind of throw this stuff up in his face, that you had all these opportunities to do this and that and do the other, and you kept turning down, you--I, I, I--that's just about the stupidest thing I ever--and he looked at me.  He looked me straight in the eye.  He says, son, construction companies were corrupt, and the unions were corrupt.  And I preferred to work for every dollar that I made to make sure that all of you were able to get a leg up on, on life rather than put all of that in jeopardy for a few extra dollars and basically compromising myself as a human being.  And I, bright, brilliant me, went through the floor (laughter), got down about this big (laughter).  And he's been towering as a, a giant ever since then. But as I've gone back and gotten to really think about him and what he has meant to me in my life, he just absolutely--I was in complete denial, like all sons are, about how much you are like your parents.  I've, most of the good traits that I have, I got from him.  And he, he and my mother, neither of them went beyond eighth grade.  Because in order for them to go to the high school, they would have had to basically take a bus every, about, about four hours each way from the area where they lived to the nearest high school, the nearest black high school.  So they never were able to go beyond that level of schooling, but they were absolutely insistent that all of us, all of my sisters and I, go as high as we could academically, and were prepared to do the work.  And my mother worked as a silk presser in a dry cleaning plant for probably 40, 45 years.
Speaker 1: So, so the area you're describing was, black people didn't have enough people I guess to have a high school close enough?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, again, it's, it's a rural area.  It's a rural area, and there weren't enough people in that specific rural area to have a, a high school at, for that particular, that particular zone.  And so you had to go I think they said something like three or four hours each way to get to and from the, from the, the nearest high school there that black people could attend.
Story_ID: 94635
Speaker 1: Okay, well, since you mentioned your mother, let's talk about your mother.  Give us her full name, and spell it for us, and give us her, her date, and also place of birth.
Speaker 2: Her name is LouBirda, L, capital L-O-U-capital-B-I-R-D-A, and her maiden name is Jones.  My grandfather and grandmother were both Joneses, so she's, I guess, a double Jones.  And she was born April 24th, 1915.  She'll be 88 next Thursday and is equally remarkable as a human being.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us a little about her.  What did she, what did do, and what was she like?
Speaker 2: She and moth--she and my father had known each other in, in Virginia, but they met and became romantically involved with the, when the two of them ended up moving to Chester, Pennsylvania.  He was there first, I believe.  And she had two or three sisters who had moved to the Chester, Pennsylvania, area.  And when she was old enough, she decided she would move, move as well and stay with her, with her sisters, and met my father there, and they, they were married.  She worked most of her life in a dry cleaning plant, in a couple of dry, dry cleaning plants.  And she was what they called a silk presser; basically, she did all the fancy dresses and gowns and all the rest of that other kind of stuff.  We call her the bionic woman now (laughter) because she has had hip, knee, and shoulder replacements.  And this all took places I think when she was in her sixties, early seventies--right shoulder, right knee, left hip.  And all of it is just industrial wear and tear.  The job, you have a, a flat board like this.  You have a set of pedals here that you use to, to, to create steam from the board, and you have a pressing here.  And basically she's standing on the left, left leg all day pumping these pedals and pulling this down and just wore out the three joints--all three replaced, and she's still getting around.  She uses a walker at times because the, the hips get stiff on her from time to time, but nothing wrong with her brain, nothing wrong with her spirit.  Both of them have--these are two of the stubbornest people (laughter)--(unclear)--two, and, and two of the most--stubborn isn't the right word--two of the most willful people that you're likely ever to meet.  They have this, and have had this notion that anything that they could think of that they wanted to do, they could do.  So, my mother's a fantastic cook.  She used to do a lot of sewing and that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 94636
Speaker 1: My father [Howard Dodson, Sr.] has actually--my father had an, had an uncle who I describe as a tinkerer.  He used to gather up car parts from all over the place.  And about every two years he'd have a new project in which he was taking the parts from all of these different cars that he had assembled and was gonna make himself a new car.  And it would be his car.  It would be different from everybody else's car.  And he would taking these parts and putting them together to make, make this car.  His name was Van Terry.  And Van would--Uncle Van is what we called him--would finish a day of regular work and go out into his garage and be out there tinkering around with this, with these tools and stuff.  Well, my father had, had a kind of tinkering, you know, quality about him as well.  And because we didn't have very much money, we ended up basically doing all the, all kinds of repairs and improvements on our house and stuff like that.  He, he sent away and bought this set of books (unclear)--one on plumbing, one on carpentry, one on roofing, on all of these--all this stuff.  And the books were like the, the bible of how you, you know, figure out how to do work.  So he would come home from work and sit down.  He'd say well, Junior, we gotta, we have to redo the, the electrical wiring in that kitchen 'cause them lights aren't working right, and I wanna put some more lights in there.  And give me the book, give me the book.  So I go and get the, the electrical book.  And he'd sit and he'd, he'd read for like two or three days every day when he'd come home from work.  By Saturday he done figured out what was needed.  And we'd go and buy the, buy the parts and spend whatever time was needed in order to do that rewiring or to plaster the roof, or we put the first bathroom, the indoor bathroom in the house that we lived, etc., etc.  So, he had that kind of tinkering thing as well, and always had some kind of side work thing that he was doing.  So we had, had a wood yard, and he'd work the construction jobs.  And when they'd finish pouring concrete or whatever, there was always this wood left over, so he'd have a little truck.  He'd go out and pick up the wood, bring it back, we'd saw it up, and Saturday we'd go around and sell it to people for their fires--always little, little gigs.  I--we did cardboard; we did newspapers; copper wire - you go around the construction sites and look for copper wire.  You burn the rubber off of them, and copper sold at great prices at junkyards at the time.  We'd, we'd have that as a little side hustle too.  So we all, always had some, some kind of way of trying to figure out how to bring in another, another dollar or so.  And all of that kind of instinct orientation, if you will, kind of central part of my makeup, and I, I la--learned how to do all those things, but also learned how to, to value the notion that anything you can think about, anything that you can envision, you can likely figure out how to do.
Speaker 2: Now, how many brothers and sisters did you have?
Speaker 1: I have three sisters, all younger.  I'm the oldest child and the only male.  My oldest sister is one year younger than me, and then it gets kind of weird.  I'm not remembering the exact years, but everybody is now over fifty.  So it's within, within a ten-year, twelve-year-period of time that all four of us were born.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 94637
Speaker 1: Now can you reflect back on, on growing up when you were little?  And give us a sense of what it was, what the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up were.
Speaker 2: We had a, the house I was describing where we put in the first bathroom and all, was a two-story house,  I think just two bedrooms and all the kids had one bedroom, and my mother and father had the other one.  And when we first moved there the bathroom was out the back door.  And it did have running water, but it was out the back door.  And we took, we took tub baths in the kitchen, big kind of aluminum--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --round aluminum tubs--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we had a coal and wood stove that had a, a tank on it that you could heat water, heat water in, and so we'd do the baths there in the kitchen.  The--we had--I had several cousins that lived area, and they would frequently come over.  And we would end up sometimes with (laughter)--Oh God, and I'd sneak sometimes eight or nine people in, in the bed (laughter).  And of course nobody would get any sleep the whole night 'cause everybody had, somebody had a foot in somebody else's mouth the whole time, and everybody was complaining.  I started cooking for the family probably when I was about 12, 11 or 12.  My mother and father both worked.  And we'd get home from school, and usually we'd get home from school around 3, 3:30, and my fa--family wouldn't get home, my mother and father wouldn't get home until sometime after 5:30 or 6.  And so it got to the point where I knew enough about our basic meal thing that I could come in and prepare the, the meal for the day, since I was the oldest.  They weren't gourmet meals by any stretch of the imagination.  We had, had (laughter)--there were times when we'd have a basic bean week (laughter)--go from pinto to (laughter), to lima, to--and then if you were lucky on Sunday, you'd have some fried chicken (laughter).  And Friday would be a fish day, and you could, could have some fried fish on Friday.  Saturday, sometimes we'd have, actually have something they used to call a salt mackerel, which was a salted fish that you could prepare in some very delicious ways.  Spaghetti, of course, was always in the menu ex--on, on the menu--(unclear)--it was preparing those kind, those kind of basic meals, with occasionally some meat.  And--but you did that.  My--we went to all-black grade school and junior high school.  This is in Chester, Pennsylvania.  This is in the North.
Story_ID: 94638
Speaker 1: Now, now what was the name of your high school--I mean your grade school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The grade school was John A. Watts Elementary School, and the junior high was Frederick Douglass Junior High.
Speaker 1: And these are segregated schools in Chester, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Segregated schools in Chester.  They didn't integrate the--until the high school.  They decided they couldn't afford to have, to pay basically for two high schools.  So everybody integrated at the high school level.  But all the junior high schools and all the elementary schools were racially segregated well into the--well, I, I went through, went into high school in '54' [1954], and they were still, still segregated in the, in the, in the (unclear) year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask you about grade school.  How did you like grade school at John Watts?
Speaker 2: You probably recall during the, the good old days that communities would actually decide fairly early on who were the, the children who were supposed to "represent the race."  I don't even know when it started, but by the time I was in elementary school, I had been kind of designated as one of those people who was supposed "represent the race."  And I was usually first or second in all of my classes.  There was a young lady who was my grade school, junior high school, and for a period of time, my high school love, who was also my biggest intellectual competitor (laughter).  And she was either number one or number two, and I was either number one or number two when we went, left grade school and junior high school.  We were both selected as the boy and girl most likely to succeed.
Story_ID: 95071
Speaker 1: In, in grade school, did you have any teachers that served as mentors for you or where there any community people that--
Speaker 2: The--on the teaching side, there were, there were two or three in the elementary school.  But the, the most memorable ones actually were in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the junior high school teachers were especially memorable because they took us under their wing.  And their whole kind of positioning of our learning, those of us who had chosen in academic track, was that they had to prepare us to compete with the white folk when we went to high school.  And so they--it was Ms. Richardson, who was basically my math teacher but also was homeroom teacher--and I was usually in math somewhere between a half a book and at, at--I was usually at least a half a book ahead of the whole rest of the class.  And we--as is--God, I'm blocking her name.  She just died last year.  But she was our English teacher, and she took us through everything, from [William] Shakespeare to you name it, so that you had, you were ready to compete.  And what ended up happening, which was a, a bit of a trauma--traumatic experience for me.  I go from junior high school to, to the high school, and the only subject I have any major difficulty with is math.  And it turns out that I'm a half a book ahead of my peers in, in, in the junior--but I'm also a half a book behind everybody else that's coming from, from the predominantly white schools.  And so I go into what's our plane geometry class, and first report period I got a "D."  I had never seen a "D" in life before.  And I go in to the teacher, I said look, I don't get 'D's, I (laughter), so you gotta, you gotta do something about this (laughter).  I said--he said what, what do you mean?  I said I, I don't, I don't get 'D's.  I mean I, I, I, I, I get 'A's, I, I get 'B's, but I, I don't get 'D's.  I don't get 'D's, and, and so, there's something wrong.  We have to figure out how to fix it.  So, he agreed--this is a Mr.--a dude look like a football coach, but a brilliant mathematician, kind of a stocky dude.  He would come in after school two, three days a week for a personal tutorial with me, and we just went through stuff.  And in about, I think it probably took about two, two and a half months, the light, you know, kind of clicked.  And I was right back into--I basically had caught up.  I caught up, and from that time on, I didn't really need any, any, any special assistance, etc.  And we got to the end of the, the semester, and he said, Mr. Dodson, you've been doing you've A work for the last, you know, two report periods, but your cumulative average is a B+, and that's what you're gonna get.  I'm not gonna give you anything (laughter).  I said well, that's, a B+ is fine, B+ is fine.  But I'm going from the D to the B+, and the, and the D was factored into the grade to keep it at a B+ rather than, than, than be at the, at the A level.  But he was actually a high school teacher who was very, very important to me and--
Story_ID: 95072
Speaker 1: --There was an English teacher, woman by the name of Leah Jordan, Dr. Leah Jordan.  Dr. Jordan actually did have a Ph.D. in English, and she chose to teach in the high school.
Speaker 2: Is this a black woman?
Speaker 1: White woman.
Speaker 2: White woman, okay.
Speaker 1: Flaming red hair (laughter), boun--she, Dr. Jordan must have been about five-ten, five-eleven, and she was a terror.  I mean you would--she never raised her voice or raised the stick, but she had a tongue that could cut you into 3,000 little pieces (laughter).  And she was just one helluva teacher.  We--I, to this day, have a notebook that she dictated that's this thick that is all the rules of, of punctuation, among other things that's in it.  But that's one of the--all of which we had to commit to memory, and it's stuff that you never forget.  For example, when the parts of a compound or compound-complex sentence are extremely long or contain internal punctuation, the coordinating conjunction between the independent clauses preceded by a semicolon and followed by a comma.
Speaker 2: That's, yeah, you've got it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you never forget, you never (unclear), but she would, she would do that kind of stuff.  We read a book every, every two weeks and wrote a, a substantial book report.  And she was a very demanding lady.  She also--I mean our junior high school we had 89 of us that went into a, to a high school on the academic track.  Only nine of us graduated on the academic track.  And she was one of those too who, if you didn't cut it, she wasn't gonna give you anything.  And she would tell students straight up, "this is what I expect you to deliver: you can either do one of two things - you can fail this year and come back and we can get there, or you have to get into another program.  And a significant number of 'em would choose the, the, the easier route out, and so there were nine of us that actually graduated academic.  And we had a--it's something that kids need to be aware of--we had put together a group of I think about six of us who were basically a study group.  And every weekend we have a block of time on Friday and a block of time on Saturday where each of us were, was strong in one area to complement the weakness that someone had in the other.  And we would get together and make sure that all of us were up to snuff in these, in all of these subjects, subjects in bad area.  And our ability to do that really was critical to all of us eventually, you know, being able to succeed academically and to continue to move that, through that system, but a very important learning lesson.  I, I actually used it when I would, did my undergraduate work as well.  Get yourself a team of, you know, two three, four learning partners.  And in best of all possible worlds, make sure that you have complementary strengths, and everyone will be able to excel if you're able to put that, that kind of learning team together.  And we would do that, and we'd have some fun too.  But the, the learning stuff was, was a serious thing for us because those of who, specifically those of us who had been tapped in grade school and junior high school to "represent the race," we could not fail.  Because if we failed individually, we were also failing the race, you know, that so failure was not a, not a part of our consciousness.  It was, just wasn't something we could even entertain doing.
Story_ID: 95073
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned being designated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I do need to--there, there, there's--you asked about community.  I went to, my church was Bethany Baptist Church in Chester, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna ask you.
Speaker 2: And Bethany, in addition to the school, was like really the center (unclear) social life because I sang in the, the junior choir.  We had a men's chorus that we sang in.  We had a Boys Scout troop, a Cub Scout, Boy Scout, and Explorer Scout troop.  I went through all of those.  And the person who put all of that together in both the men's course and the--was a man by the name of James Fulks (ph.), who put together the Cub Scout and Boy Scout and other troops.  And he was the one who play, played piano and directed our men's choir.  And we had a regular schedule of meetings, and rehearsals, and performance dates that basically ran from about Wednesday through Sunday that kept a kind of fully rounded series of experiences.  We would go to camp every summer.  Our scouting troop went to a, actually, an integrated camp, and they always had inter, if you will, troop competitions that we would always win.  We'll, we'll go in by the time (laughter) we had all kinds of, you know, routines that we would, you know, kind of put together.  And we were always head and shoulders above everybody else.  All that I guess starts to sound like I'm a very competitive person, which I guess I am, but I, I, I do most of my competition with myself.  It's like have I done the best that I can?  Have I done the most that I can do?  Is--are there still things that I'm capable of doing that I actually really want to do that I haven't done, and, and how do you I kind of reach for those heights?  And the things that I have done, have I, have I done them to the best of my ability?  Are there ways of improving that which has been done?  And so I'm in, you know, in constant kind of criticism of myself and of the, the work that I do trying to see if there is another plateau that can reach in terms of the, the quality of it--(unclear)--one of those kind of standards of excellence that my, I think came from my parents on the one hand but also came from a lot of those, those teachers that expected you to be the best.
Story_ID: 95074
Speaker 1: Okay, now this designation or this charge to represent the race, did that come from the church primarily or was it just, was it, was it--I mean did those--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was, it was broad and general.  And just to give you an example of how broaden, the, the neighborhood I grew up in was a very, very rough neighborhood.  The truth of the matter is that by the time I was 20, 20, 21, upwards of half of the black men who I'd gone through school with were either dead or in jail.  The community, as I said, was, was I lived right off of 3rd Street, and 3rd Street was the action street, all the bars, all the, all the prostitution, everything else you can imagine.  No one would let me get close to any of that.  If I was seen headed in the direction of any of that, someone would be calling mother and father and making sure that I stayed out of it because I had another mission.  And the same was true in school, etc.  You know, you'd start hanging around with a group of kids and start "getting in trouble."  Teachers would intervene and say that that kind of behavior, that kind of action is maybe all right for them, but it's not right for you.  You have, you have something else you have to do.
Speaker 1: So the community recognized your talent and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and saw you as representing the best of what they wanted to put out.
Speaker 2: I, I have to assume that's, that, that's really what it was.  And I came to a, appreciate it much later.  At, at the time it was going, of course, I was ticked everybody was able to run, hang out, stay out late at night, people could stay out until 10, 11, 12:00 at night. And I had to be in at 9 and, and this and that and the other.  Why, why do I, why can't I, why can't--no, you got something else you gotta do, so.
Story_ID: 95075
Speaker 1: So on the, on the verge of graduation from high school, did you know where you were going to college, and what you were gonna major in?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a, that's a fascinating story.  I knew that I was gonna go to college from the time I was probably in third or fourth grade.  I didn't know what a college was, but someone had planted the seeds in my head that I'm supposed to go to college.  Only two people on both sides of my family had ever gone to college, two of my mother's sisters--not sisters but cousins.  And both of them had died in their sophomore year.
Speaker 1: That's strange.
Speaker 2: Strange.  So by the time I was preparing to go to college, nobody on both sides of my family had ever graduated from college.  We didn't have any money to send me to college.  And so by the time I'm a junior, I've concluded the only way I'm going to be able to, to pay for going to college is to go into the Army.  The G.I. Bill was still around.  And I'd go into the Army, spend the two or three years there, bet the G.I. Bill, and then that would pay for me going to college.  In my senior year, the G.I. Bill, Bill was canceled.  And so my plans for how I was going to pay for going to college went up in smoke with that, and (unclear)--went to hell.  I didn't have a clue as to what a "scholarship" was.  And in my senior year I discovered that there was such a thing as a scholarship.  I applied, got a full tuition scholarship to any school that I decided I wanted to go to; was accepted at three or four schools around the area, 'cause I still had to live home, 'cause I didn't have money to stay on campus and ended up actually choosing to go to West Chester State College [now West Chester University].
Speaker 1: Now what, what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1957, and I entered in '57 [1957]; I graduated in '61 [1961].
Story_ID: 95076
Speaker 1: Now what was it like at--what was West Chester State [College, now West Chester University in West Chester, Pennsylvania] like?
Speaker 2: West Chester State at the time was a very, very small teachers' college.  It had been what they called the Normal School, and it's now a, you know, full-fledged university campus.  But the time I was there, I don't think we had more than about six, seven hundred students on campus.  We had the largest incoming black class of black students in the history of the school.  And this is 1957, so it's three years after "Brown," the, all the desegregation stuff is on.  And West Chester itself is in Pennsylvania, again, but a very, very segregated community. And you couldn't try on clothes downstair--downtown in, in stores.  There were certain stores you couldn't go into at all.  I was telling you earlier that we carried on our--we would get together groups of us who were--none of us were of age to go into a bar.  But we decided we were go and sit-in in the bar (laughter), so it would be a group of black students and white students, males, 18, 19 years old.  And we'd go in and sit down and dare them to throw us out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now this is after the sit-in movement, movement started up (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The sit-in movement actually is--doesn't officially start until 1960, so this is before.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah--
Speaker 2: And, and I don't--we didn't call it sitting in.  I mean we would go into the bar and sit down and expect to be served.  So I guess that's, that's, that's sitting in.  But this kind of activity was not, not unusual for us there in, in West Chester.  And fortunately, there was a group of--the, the white population that was there ran the spectrum.  But there was a group of, I call crazy, liberal white, white dudes, most--mainly athletes, most, all of us, just about all of us who were, all the men who went in that year, in addition to having academic backgrounds, were also athletes of some sort.  I ran track, and two of my roommates, well, we eventually became my roommates, ran track, one played football.  So we were both academically inclined and--(unclear)--and, and the, the other athletes who kind--we, that we hung with were pretty cool dudes.  And so we would just decide we were gonna go down and stir up some mess (laughter).  And then we--then they would, they'd go with us, and we, we go and have some fun.  Well, it wasn't fun actually.  It was going to at least insist that these peoples begin to change some of their, some of their practices and --
Speaker 1: Well, well, what happened when, when you did it?  Did you, did you get arrested or did they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, they, they, they, they, they would serve us, because they (laughter)--among other things, again, there are a bunch of athletes, so some of these dudes are pretty good size, and they didn't wanna start no rumble (laughter) with nobody.
Story_ID: 95077
Speaker 1: And our, our school-West Chester [College, now West Chester University] had a very strong--is a--as a teachers' college, one of its strongest areas was in the sports and recreation area for training teachers.  And we had a national championship soccer team one year.  Our football team was state championship team several years.  And we had track people who were, who qualified for the Olympics and that kind of thing.  The, the winter of the triple jump, which as my event, in I believe the '60 [1960] Olympics was from West Chester; it's either '56 [1956] or '60 [1960], a fellow by the name of Sharp.  But, so we had--it, it was a very, very strong and very compet--oh, they had a very strong swimming team, and so a very, very strong, competitive group of athletes, usually people not recruited by the Ivy League schools or the, the Big Ten, that, that level, tier just below that, principally from the state of Pennsylvania, and just good, good athletes, good folk.  So we ended up spending time there.  We--
Story_ID: 95078
Speaker 1: Our class, the, the, the blacks in the class have gone on to excel beyond the average achievement of virtually all the students in the other, the other group, ev--everything from doing--one, one of my colleagues is a dean at--actually two were deans at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] and former professor at Dartmouth [University in Hanover, New Hampshire].  One is a senior officer in the Department of Education, another has been a principal of a school and superintendent of a school district in Wilmington, Delaware.  These people, you know, learned something and went out and did something.
Speaker 2: Now, was there a particular reason for this, that the black students got together?  Did you form some kind of an organization, or was there some mentor on campus for you?
Speaker 1: Most of us--we all pledged, all the dudes, just about all the dudes, I think one pledged Kappa.  All the rest of us pledged Alpha and--but we got together because, again, most of us were athletes.  We, we, we hung out (laughter), we hung out.  And, and it wasn't, there was no formal club or organization or any--that thing, things of that kind.  And as I, you know, implied with the, with the other athletes, we had clusters of, or groups, of networks of friends that were black and white as well as all-black groups.  A lot of the folk were from the Greater Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, most, the, the ones who--the blacks were from that area.  And we had a whole, there was a whole social network that eventually developed between us and people from that area--
Story_ID: 95079
Speaker 1: The chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha [Fraternity] that we all pledged at was at the University of Pennsylvania, and it was a citywide chapter.  So students from West Chester [College], Villanova [University], LaSalle [University], Penn [University of Pennsylvania], Temple [University], all the schools in the Philadelphia area all pledged at that Phila--that University of Pennsylvania chapter.  And I'm--my particular line, we were on line from like October to April, because we were a very bad line.  We didn't do anything according to the rules.  And the--we put together our line songs and stuff, and all of our line songs were Ray Charles songs as opposed to Danny Boy (laughter).  And we put together our step shows.  Our shows were better than they step shows that ever, had ever been put together.  I mean we, we were just--but we had this incident when they, when they were doing some hazing.  And one of the big brothers, they used to tell you, you know, you, you weren't--you're supposed to be stoned-faced the whole time, and they were always doing all kinds of stuff to get you to laugh.  And so this particular night one of our line brothers started laughing and couldn't stop.  And the big brother says, "I'll wipe that smile off your face."  Well, the way he did that was he was supposed to take your hand out here, smack yourself across the forehead.  So he did that once, and 10 seconds later he was back laughing again.  The big brother walks up to him, said, "I said wipe that smile off your face" and smacked him across the fore, forehead like that.  And he reflexed and knocked him out, just bop [sound effect], (laughter) knocked him out.
Speaker 2: So you all were a rough line then?
Speaker 1: And the big brothers decided that they wanted to rumble because (laughter)--and most of us were street folk, or we had grown up in street communities.  We stumped the big brothers.  I mean we just beat the big brothers, and it was really very bad (laughter), so they kicked off the line (laughter).  But our chapter was, most of them were getting ready to graduate.  And if they didn't take a line over, they basically not have a sufficient number to operate a chapter.  So, after about four months, they summoned us back.  We did--(unclear)--and they finally put us back on line and took us back over (laughter).  But we were, we were a bad line (laughter) they were a very bad line.  But in the context of that, there, there was a, a Penn chapter, a citywide chapter at Penn of the Deltas, and one of the AKAs, and there would be these kind of inter-Greek events and activities that all of us would end up being involved in, in various kinds of ways.  And so a, a network of basically black college students from the Greater Philadelphia Metropolitan area began to develop.  And we end--actually ended up having weekend pool parties and all kinds of other stuff that put a, a certain social edge on it.  I, frankly, ended up kind of, I think, exhausting that part of the experience by the time I was finishing up my master's.  And my decision to go to the Peace Corps was in some respects a, a way of breaking with getting out of that particular, what I considered, rut.  Because we'd gotten into a regular routine of every weekend or every two weekends we'd be at somebody's house for, you know, two or three days of partying and we'd go back to work or back to school.  And that was about the extent of our imagination in terms of what you could do with life in that, in that area.  And a lot of people continued that as a kind of core practice.  I just, I, I couldn't, couldn't stay there, couldn't do that.
Speaker 2: You had this charge too, you know, to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, to, to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to do something--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --to do something.
Story_ID: 95080
Speaker 1: So what did you major in, in undergraduate school?
Speaker 2: I was a, I was a social studies major and an English minor.  At the end of my sophomore year, they tested and gave us a whole battery of tests, and I scored off the charts in math, and all--in social studies and stuff I was not bad.  But based on my "aptitude," I should have been, been in a math or a math related program, at least that was the, the findings.  But in order for me to do that I would have to spend an extra year in school, so I went ahead and finished up the social studies thing and quite frankly wasn't pleased with the quality of education I got at West Chester [College].  It's one of my continuing beefs with the teacher education programs, down to the present day.  They spend a lot of time teaching theory, and method, and practicum, and all the rest of this other kind of stuff, but they don't teach you any content.  And the--in my senior year, around January, people start asking did you get a job yet?  And my consistent answer all the way through was no.  They'd say oh, that's a shame.  I'd say no, it's not, because quite frankly, I didn't feel like I had any--I was prepared to go to teach--I, I didn't have anything to teach anybody yet.  But everybody else was getting their jobs and going off and also planning their, what I consider, intellectual retirement after three years, 'cause they get tenure.  And that would be--they'd buy their house, get married, get tenure, and basically they can coast from that time on, 'cause they're safe and secure in their job.  And that just didn't seem anything like a life to me.
Story_ID: 95081
Speaker 1: Tell us about Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Oh, I graduated from West Chester [College in West Chester, Pennsylvania] in '61 [1961]. And I actually had planned to go in, into graduate school in that fall, but I didn't have enough money to do it.  So I had been working each summer for the two previous years with, with a paint crew for at the college painting dormitories.  And I got a job with this professional house painter.  And I painted houses from basically about June, July until, till January and made enough money so that I could enter into the master's program.  I'd actually applied to Penn and to Villanova, was accepted at both, and my preference had been to go to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] 'cause one of my classmates was actually going.  And he actually did have enough money to go, so he had enrolled in the fall.  Turn out, they didn't have a mid-year admission in the history department at Penn that year.  And so, rather than wait for another full year, I just went on and went to Villanova and was there for, well, from '61 [1961] till I, I finished in, officially in '64 [1964]--well, actually it was '62 [1962] to '64 [1964].  And I hadn't officially graduated from Villanova, didn't officially graduate until I think May or June.  But I entered the Peace Corps in February of '64 [1964], and I completed all my requirements for the degree by January.  The interim story that's important, and it's related to the--well, actually two Villanova stories.  One of them was that in '63 [1963], of course the Cuban Missile Crisis hits.  I had met a young lady when I was a sophomore I guess going into my junior year at West Chester.  And we had a very strong relationship, part of which was that we decided to explore religious option.  She was, had been raised a Presbyterian; I'd been raised a, a Baptist.  Both of us were discontent with, if you will, the foundations of our religious background at that time, and so we went through all the churches.  And part of our whole routine, we went through and experienced the religious pra--worship practices in all of the Christian churches right on through to the Catholic Church.  And by the time I got to Villanova, which was a Catholic school, we were at the point of con--considering conversion to Catholicism.  And I was in class with a bunch of priest, and we would have knock-down-drag-out, theological debates about a little of everything, didn't have anything to do with our class and school stuff.  This was after.  We'd have these knock-down-drag-out debates about the meaning of God, and you know, you name it, we would, we'd be into it.  One of the kind of telling moments occurred in, around the Cuban Missile Crisis.  Now at Villanova University they had three or four, sometimes five, masses a day in the, in the, the chapel at the sanctuary.  And prior to the Cuban Missile Crisis, you were lucky if five people would show up per mass.  The Cuban Missile Crisis hits, and every service is full.  And the people there genuinely believed that the, the end of the world was eminent, and they had to get themselves ready.  Well, I was of the belief that this was not the end.  I just genuinely believed that it all came out of the--'cause I reflected back on this old, I think it's a Baptist hymn, "I Can't Believe He Brought Us This Far To Stay Here."  So, all the struggle that black folk have gone through to get this far, and then he's gonna wipe out the world.  God ain't gon' do that.  So, I concluded that they had a crisis of faith, and I was cool (laughter).  And so I basically kind of walked away from the church thing for probably about 12, 14 years, in any official, formal, you know, kind of religious practice.  And the young lady I was going with, she actually ended up converting to Catholicism.  And she actually went to Peace Corps I think about six months before I did.  She went to the Dominican Republic; she got an assignment there.  I ended up getting an assignment in Ecuador.
Story_ID: 95082
Speaker 1: But the other, other story, Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] story is that I'd finished all my coursework by the summer of '63 [1963] and had started working on my thesis.  And my plan was to finish the thesis in the fall semester, and then I'd be out of that.  August I got a notice to report for the draft like the first week in September.  Now, I had already--in addition to the priest that were in my class, the guy who ran the recruiting office, a black dude at, in Philadelphia for the U.S. Army was in my class.  And he had done a heavy recruiting job--(unclear)--I'd gone through the whole process, taken all the tests, and based on the test scores, he had said basically that I could qualify for any program that I wanted to get into.  And I thought about it for quite a bit and said that's not what I wanna do with my life.  I've actually decided I wanna go into Peace Corps, so I went ahead and did the Peace Corps application, and I'd done that like in February or March of '63' [1963].  By August when this draft thing comes, I've heard nothing from Peace Corps, so I'm starting to panic, aah.  I don't wanna go in the Army, so I contact a friend who was, had been a classmate of, of Franklin Williams, who was the deputy director of Peace Corps, a black dude.  And he told me that he would call Frank and that I should write to Frank and see what Frank could do, so we did that.  The day before I'm supposed to be inducted, we still heard nothing from Peace Corps.  And I'd gone to my dean and gotten a letter from them saying basically that I was gonna be a full-time student in the fall, which I technically was not.  So I go over that day before I'm supposed to be inducted with my letter in my pocket and enter the draft board office.  And the woman who's running the place is in an inner office on the phone.  She's there, she must have been on the phone for like 15 minutes, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I'm nervous as hell, 'cause this is my last--eith--either this works or I'm standing raising my hand the next day.  She comes out of the off--the inner office and walks up and says, can I help you?  I said yes--and I'm reaching into my pocket--my name is Howard Dodson.  And she said Howard Dodson?  I said yes.  She said I just got off the phone talking with you.  That was the Peace Corps calling.  They had canceled your induction (laughter).  And so I put my letter back in my pocket, went through the ceiling, turned around and went out of there as (laugher) fast as I could, and ended up not ultimately having to go into the military and went into the Peace Corps.  And February of '64' [1964] I went into Peace Corps training and probably the most, one of the most important decisions in my life because if I had chosen to do the military thing, I probably would have done the officers' training program would have been a 2nd Louie.  And the Vietnam War cranked up right after that.  And the highest incidents of death was among 2nd Louies shot by the (laughter) the, by the troops.  And I probably would have been one of 'em (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --high casualty right, you know, fragged by their own men.
Speaker 1: Fragged by their own men.  But I probably would have been, I definitely would have, if I'd gone, then I would definitely would have gone in as, as an officer.  And just no telling which way that I would have gone, but I didn't have to confront that and ended up, as an alternative, going and doing the Peace Corps thing.
Story_ID: 95083
Speaker 1: Okay now, I just want to ask you now, you got a master's in United States history and political science?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got a dual degree in history and political science at Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania].  And another one of those I was telling you earlier, about the testing thing.  This was the first time I'd been in a school with students who had come from the Ivy League schools, from Yale, Penn, and all the rest of them.  And of course, competitive me, I wanna see where I stood, and I, I, I did fine, I did fine.  I forget what my ranking was in the class, but it was in the, well in the top 10 percent and probably, I was probably about 9th or 10th in my class, something like that.
Speaker 1: So was your goal at that time to become a professor of history?
Speaker 2: No.  I was still entertaining the notion of being a classroom teacher.  I had not really given any thought to doing doctoral work at all.  But I was still seriously considering the possibility of being a classroom teacher.   And with that particular background, I was, felt a little bit more confident about having some content.  This was all content based.  All of it wasn't education.  It was a straight master's in history and all of it focused in, in history and political science and all of it focused in content.  And I'd, I'd learned stuff, so I said okay, I, I, I can do this.  I, but I, I--that'll come up later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That'll come up later.
Story_ID: 95084
Speaker 1: Tell us about Peace Corps now.  Now, you were assigned to Ecuador, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And Ecuador is right at the--
Speaker 2: Right on the equator.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right on the equator--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the West Coast of, in South America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sits between Columbia and, and Peru.  And I was recruited to fill the request by a group of Basque priests who ran the public school system, or the Catholic school system, in a town called Quevedo.  It's right on the coast, halfway between Quito and Guayaquil, fascinating town.  It was like an old wild west town.
Speaker 1: Can, can you spell the name of that town?
Speaker 2: That's Q-U-E-V-E-D-O, Quevedo.  And people ride around town with six-shooters on.  Machetes were usually carried 'cause it was right in the middle of the banana belt--it was the banana capital of the world they claimed.  Streets were unpaved.  There was electricity about four, four or five hours a night; one telephone into the, into the city; and relatively limited running water.  I, I rigged up something in my apartment so that I would have running water and occasionally hot running water if I wanted it, but basically a kind of frontier town that I was stationed.  And I was recruited there to teach English and to coach the basketball team.  And I did both initially, but the priest has actually been trying to, and a volunteer who had preceded me in the town, had been trying to put together a credit union for a number of years, and the volunteer who had preceded me was in an auto accident, and so he had to go back.  And so they had not really gotten the thing off the ground.  And so they asked me to help them see if they could get this credit union in the town going.  I put together a, a scheme that turned out to be my kind of master plan for organizing credit unions there in Ecuador.  The people in town didn't have a clue as to what a credit union was, even that town or virtually any of the other towns we went to.  But what they did know was who the first, second, or third best band or orchestra was in the country.  So my scheme became a rather simple one.  You get the co-op to sponsor a dance for the whole town; bring in the best band that you can get from the top musical groups; and be sure everybody has a wonderful time.  You control the bar; charge a modest ticket price.  And you do co-op ads during the whole of the event.  So we did that in that town.  And then the--that's a Saturday night.  That Monday, and from Monday through Thursday, you take your jeep, you put a projector on the back of it, and you go to different parts of town, you project your co-op film, and you do your membership drive.  And we made enough money off of the dance to open an office and staff it for six months.  And then with the membership drive, we began to build up the base of, of our revenues.  And then my job became to train members to run and manage the thing, and then we'd go off.  And the National Credit Union Federation got wind of the success of our efforts, recruited me.  They took me to the capital and took me through their training program.
Story_ID: 95085
Speaker 1: And then I was sent out with another volunteer to set up a regional office in a community called Manta, which is M-A-N-T-A, which is a little further.  It's actually right on the Pacific, right north of Guayaquil, the commercial capital.  And from that base, we organized credit unions from, basically from Manta all the way up to Esmeraldas, put together altogether about 15 units.  And as of about three years ago, 12 of 15 were still operating, and that's over a period of 30 years, almost 40 years now.  So it, it was, it was a very, very rewarding kind of experience for two reasons: credit in Ecuador was outlandishly high.  If you bought a refrigerator for $300 dollars cash, that same refrigerator, if you bought it on, over a period of a year, would cost you 7, 8, $900 dollars.  We would lend somebody the $300 dollars to buy outright cash, and they'd pay back on at an interest rate I think it was one and a half percent on the unpaid balance until it was paid off.  Farmers would end up mortgaging half of their crops to store owners to get the seed to plant their crop for the next year.  So rather than do that, they'd borrow the money from us, buy the seeds outright, and own their own crop, etc., etc., etc.  So it was just a really, really wonderful tool, instrument for attacking some of the economic and social inequities that were inherent in this society.
Story_ID: 95086
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what were the people like in Ecuador?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just had, I, I just had a wonderful time.  The, the population of Ecuador is really kind of split.  There was they call the, the country, in, in a matter of 12 to 15 hours you can go from the most tropical of tropical climates to the most frigid of cold climates.  I mean you can go from sun, sun and 90 degree temperatures to subzero temperatures in the mountains in about 10 hours drive.  The mountains--the capital city of Quito sat in a valley that was I think 10,000 square feet--10,000 feet high, with mountains going up around it, there would've been 20,000 square--20--20,000 feet.  And so the country was, geographically its terrain was very diverse.  Most of the Native American population was still in the mountain, living in the mountain chain.  And the coast was principally mixed African, and Native American, and European.  The town that I was actually stationed in, Quevedo, was fascinating in that, in addition to those three mixtures, it also had a very large Chinese population.  And the Chinese actually had come to the area and had bought most of the, the banana plantations and owned a lot of the other property in that area.  So my, my basketball team, my starting center was Chinese, and my starting point guard was Afro-Chinese, and the other three players were about your complexion, mestizo mulatto, some, some variation on, thereon.  There was one dude that I worked with, with the basketball team who was one of the most fascinating dudes that I ever met.  His name was Efrahim (ph.) Lopez.  Efrahim was, had been a very good basketball player.  When he was younger--he had gotten older, put on a lot of weight, so he wasn't, wasn't in shape to play ball anymore, but he, he knew the game, you know.  He had a restaurant in town.  We used hang--and he and I used to hang out.  And he was, I guess Efrahim may have been about four or five years older than me, but we hung out as kind of, kind of peers, and he was my assistant coach.  Efrahim was completely ambidextrous, and he would drive me crazy.  He'd be sitting down drawing plays, and he'd start drawing with his left hand.  He'd switch the pin and continue with his--he'd start writing in a sentence--write, write the first half of his name with his left hand, and then write the second (laughter) with is write and would drive me crazy, 'cause I had ambitions of being ambidextrous at one time in my life (laughter).  There was--this is when, when I was in scouting.  There was a fellow who was our explorer scout.  He was an explorer scout who was our marching drill instructor, and I just thought he was the coolest dude in, in the world.  And there were two features of him that made him cool.  First of all, he was pigeon-toed, and when he marched he--so he was, he marched cool.  And then he was left-handed, and there was a whole thing about how he carried himself, and positioned himself, postured himself left-handed that fascinated me.  And I had got into this conversation with myself.  I looked at my hands.  I said look, these two hands are exactly the same.  Now why is this one can do all this stuff, and this one can't do nothing?  So I started practicing being left-handed (laughter).  And I did everything from played basketball left-handed, to playing baseball left-handed, to actually figuring out how to write left-handed, never got it to a point of, the writing to a point where, you know, I could do it with any great facility.  But I've worked at it 'cause I wanted to be a--and then I meet this dude, and he's completely ambidextrous.  He doesn't even think about it (laughter).  This ticked me off.  But anyway, he was a good dude.
Story_ID: 95087
Speaker 1: I had fun with the basketball stuff.  I didn't tell you about that.  Watched my first game, and the score was something like 155 to 132.  And I checked the clock, the same amount of time; checked the courts, the same size court.  And watching the ballplayers, they weren't that particularly good as offensive ballplayers.  So I said what the hell is going on?  Well, it turned out they had learned the game from their soccer model, and they only played zoned defense.  And it was either 2-1-2 or a 3-2 zone.  And when they'd go down on offense they didn't rotate.  So the guards would be under the boards, and the forwards would be playing guard positions, and any missed shot automatically belonged to the defense because the, the, the forwards won the boards, and had, had the height, and they would get--so they were just running up and down the court--(laughter)--[sound effect].  And so I started coaching my team.  I said well, like, look, we're gonna establish a very simple principle here.  If the opposition can't score, all you have to do is score one point to win the game.  And our goal is to win the game, isn't it?  They said well, yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, rather than us spending a lot of time on offense, we're gonna learn some defense.  And I taught 'em, in addition to the zones, I taught 'em some man to man.  We got some, both some zone full-court presses and some man-to-man presses.  And we got it down.  I had two guys.  The two guys who play my point guards were also ping pong champions, so they had some of the quickest hands in the world.  We had a team come in from the mountains.  And the people in the mountains were deadly, what we call three-point shooters now.  They'd stand around the perimeter and drop in nothing but, nothing but net.  So they come, come on our court, and we, we start off in a zone.  They cross mid-court, pass the ball around the perimeter till one of 'em shoots in a three, bam.  We'd go down, we miss.  They come back across the court, bam, bam.  We look up, we're, we're down like 12-zip.  I call timeout, and we go into a full-court press.  They didn't cross mid-court the whole rest of the first half.  Everything they through in we took (laughter).  And our, the fans in our, on our, in our town were on their feet the whole game, 'cause we--(unclear)--just, just ran over people (laughter).  They damn near didn't score any points the rest of the game.  It was just bad.  But nobody ever scored more than 55 points on my team, and that was the team that was the, that turned out to be the national champion.  And they just had, had, had more, more big folk who were also good.  But we just shut teams down.  And we'd, we'd go to other people's towns, go to other--and just shut, shut people down.  My team won our provincial championship, and so I was the coach of the, basically, provincial all-star team that competed in the national championships.  And we, we ended up fourth in the national championships.
Speaker 2: That was a, that was a good story.
Speaker 1: I had, had fun.
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I had a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 95088
Speaker 1: So, so you went on to become, to work for Peace Corps, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: As administrator.
Speaker 2: I was recruited by the guy who ran our--they had these debriefing sessions at the end of your term.  And he came to, to Ecuador, and he was running the Minority and Special Arts Recruiting Program.  Things--Avatus Stone, he had been an all-American football player I think at Syracuse [University].  Anyway, Avatus asked me to come back and work for him, and not having anything better to do, I said sure.  So I was a recruiting officer for a year with Peace Corps and was principally focused on doing the historically black colleges and recruiting minorities.  And at the end of that first year, I was made the deputy director of all the national recruiting and head of all specialized recruiting, so we did blacks, Native Americans, Hispanics, senior citizens, and labor.  My lead recruiter for the senior citizens was [President] Jimmy Carter's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Miss Lillian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I actually started that senior citizen program, and she was our first recruiter and did a whole major recruitment program in Puerto Rico.  We put together a program to recruit Native Americans to go to Latin America.  And we had some people in from, in from labor who came in.  That's in addition to doing the regular college and university campus recruiting.  I, I, doing my first year, set a record, recruitment record that I don't think anyone has ever touched.  We used to measure the success of a recruiting visit by the number of graduating seniors you were able to get to complete a Peace Corps application--and got 75 percent of the graduating seniors at Swarthmore College to apply.  And nobody's ever come close to that, to the best of my knowledge.  And we--I used the opportunity, though, when I first came back of doing the recruiting--one of the principal reasons why I decided to do it was that it was a good way for me to move around the country and see how the country had changed.  This would have been basically '66' [1966], '67' [1967].  And this was in the middle of the, the riot season and everything else that was going on.  So this was a good way for me to move from coast to coast and both find out what was going on, on the college campus, 'cause the antiwar movement was kind of cranking up at the time, and to kind of catch up with what was going on in the black movement at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95089
Speaker 1: You were talking about when you came back from--
Speaker 2: From Ecuador.
Speaker 1: --the Peace Corps from Ecuador.  The black power movement's cranked up, the riots going on.  Now [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King had not been killed--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but Malcolm X had.
Speaker 2: Malcolm, Malcolm was killed while I was overseas, was killed in '65 [1965], and I was in, I was in Ecuador when he was killed.  But by the time I get back, the, the black power movement is really starting to crank up.  And my question, you know, is how do I know--first of all, know enough about what's going on to re-enter the fray, and so the opportunity to move around, around the country?  'Cause we were assigned to do recruitment ev--all over the country.  We'd do two or three campuses a week and be out sometimes for two or three weeks at a time, then come back to Washington, get our next assignment, go to California, go to Boston [Massachusetts], go to Atlanta [Georgia], Chicago [Illinois].  And so it was a perfect way to move around the country and just figure out what, what the hell was going on.  I was actually running a recruitment visit in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when King was assassinated, and we shut down the booths and all of that stuff, stuff and went back to Washington [D.C.] immediately and was in Washington when Washington burned, was really quite--the Peace Corps office was about five blocks, six blocks from the White House on Connecticut and H.  And I think it's K Street is like about a six-lane street.  By 5:00, all the places, that whole, that whole street was completely clogged, and basically, people had panicked, had abandoned their cars.  Frequently cars are left sitting on the sidewalk with the motors running 'cause they couldn't, the traffic wasn't moving; had abandoned the cars and were walking to Virginia or wherever the hell they were going.  And so the, the street is just full of these abandoned cars (laughter), and smoke is rising above and in the back of the White House.  And, and that, that got to be really crazy.  One of the--I lived on, at 17th and right above our street.  So I walked every day from work, and I was walking after this thing really hit.  They shut down all the government agencies.  And I was walking home, and the streets had started to get deserted 'cause people are just getting out of dodge.  And I was walking up, say walking up town.  On the left-hand side of the street I see this white dude coming down on the right-hand side of the street.  And the tension in the air was so palpable that, you know, people were, everybody was on, really kind of on edge.  So my, mine say basically is that the cross is over here.  I don't have (unclear), but I--and I assume that he was saying the same thing.  We get across from each other, like on opposite sides of the street.  And for a split second the energy ran across and the, the energy saying basically if you cross my path I'll take you out and vice versa.  And you could just feel that energy.  And then I recognized him, and he recognized me.  It was my roommate.  And we, having recognized each other, then went, of course, and did our embrace and all the rest of that.  And then we figured out how to get out of, out of dodge for the night, took a bunch of other friends to a friend's house that lived out on the, on the edge of town.  And then we came back the next morning, and I ended up going over and getting involved in what people would commonly call the--I don't even know what you call it, but trying to get food and clothing and other kinds of supplies and stuff to senior citizens and other, others that were behind the, the war zone.  The government had brought in the National Guard and had basically developed a cordoned off whole zones of the city.
Story_ID: 95090
Speaker 1: And they, they had put together this relief operation down in one of the churches on 14th Street, I think, and we got hooked up with them.  And because I was black, I was recruited to drive the truck, the vehicle with the food and other supplies, to the people who had called for it.  So I'd pull up and we had a big red sign on the side of the truck, "Red Cross," and the truck is full of (unclear); it has a bunch of food in it.  And of course looting and everything else is going on.  Any black, any black person with food and stuff (laughter), the presumption is that he stole it (laughter), so I had all my papers and all the rest of the stuff.  And you pull up and these, basically kids, some 18, 19, 20-year-old kids who are in the National Guard, they're scared to death, and they're armed, and they don't know what the hell they're doing.  And so you go through this routine with them.  They finally give you permission, and you drive through that checkpoint, and you get--till you finally get to people and start getting stuff to them.  And I did that for about, about two or three days.  And in some of the zones there were, there were, there was still gunfire going on and stuff like that, which made it a little dangerous.  But, you know, what the hell?  Go and have some fun.  So that was, that was after the, the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] riot.
Story_ID: 95091
Speaker 1: We eventually-[Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King had been working on the Poor People's Campaign.  Of course the Poor People's Campaign was organized shortly after his death to come back to Washington [D.C.].  And by that time, the whites in the suburbs were clear that black folk were coming to basically blow them away.  And so we organized what was basically a speaker's bureau out of the Peace Corps with the black and whites who were part of Peace Corps, going to Montgomery County and all the rest of these places trying to explain to people what the real purpose of the--what it was going to be and what was going to happen and all the rest of that.  But people had bought up every gun in Washington, D.C., and were convinced that they were going to have to--that if, if they had to, they would basically--these are the whites in the, in the suburbs.  They were, were prepared to defend their city from this hoard of blacks, and poor whites, and Native Americans, and Asians who were planning to come and descend upon their city.  I worked in the press office for the Poor People's Campaign and had one of my most significant discoveries about the media I guess confirmed or presented to me in that context.  I convened the press conference.  I wrote the press release.  The press came.  I answered all the questions that the press had about the release.  I get on a plane about six hours later going to California.  I have stops in Chicago [Illinois], San Francisco [California] before I go down to San Diego [California].  I pick up papers in Chicago, San Francisco, and San Diego.  I don't recognize the story (laughter).  Each of them had re--had taken it and written it for their, for their readers, and the, the thrust of the story had nothing to do with the story that, that, that we, we, we--(unclear)--put out.  But that was my--a, a, a big eye opener for me, that the press does not necessarily do what (laughter), what you ask them to do.  But the Poor People's Campaign thing was also one of those kind of return visits with me and God having these, having these fights, because the, the people had come, had walked from Seattle, Washington, and Texas, and Arizona.  And it was a pure, a, a genuinely multicultural event of poor people, black, white, Asian, Native American, Hispanic, all gathering together around one agenda, which is to eliminate poverty from this country.  This is the richest coun--country in the world.  It rained every day, damn near 24 hours a day, for the whole time that the Poor People's Campaign was going on.  And God, I still don't understand it.  I, I don't understand it, God.  I don't, I--these, these are your people.  What you doing (unclear) (laughter).  No, but it, it was one of those, one of those kind, kind of moments I, I, I don't, I, I still don't understand it.  But people were in there, out there in, in mud up, up to here.  And ultimately, the, the goal of the campaign actually ended up being diverted 'cause the, 'cause (unclear) actually had been to, to come in and camp out and shut down the government until such time as these things--well, it never reached that level.  And because of the rain and the mud, all the rest of that, we weren't able, able to do an adequate job of lobbying all the congressional people and all the rest of that the way we would have been able to do if it had been any, anywhere reasonable, close to reasonable weather.  But that, coupled with the election of [President] Richard Nixon to the presidency, ended that tenure of my employment in government service.
Speaker 2: So when Nixon was elected the Peace Corps didn't end, but it certainly wasn't the same--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't the same, but I, I, I, I left.  I wasn't, I, I couldn't, couldn't work for Mr. Nixon, and leave it at that.
Story_ID: 95092
Speaker 1: So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I retired.  I packed up--I, traveling around the country, I'd, I went especially on college campuses.  People don't realize this: paperback books are a product of the 1960s, for the most part.  Mass produced paperback books are a product of the 1960s.  And traveling around on college campuses, I started seeing these paperback books on black history and culture.  And, and you could get most of 'em secondhand, get 'em at ridiculously low prices, so I started collecting them.  And I had a bunch of boxes of, of books that I hadn't had a chance to read, so I just packed them all up, and we shipped them to Puerto Rico.  And I lived in San Juan for about, about a month, month and a half.  And then a friend of mine who had been a Peace Corps volunteer had a cabin over in, in Mayaguez, was on the other side of the island, up--his cabin was up in the mountains.  And so I went and basically camped out with him and read African American history.  That's how I got started in this field.
Story_ID: 95093
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, what were some of the books that you began to read and really take notice of?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, among the things that were around that everybody was suggesting, I hadn't read "The Autobiography of Malcolm X," by way of example.  There were a number of basic histories, like John O. Franklin's books and Lerone Bennett's "Before the Mayflower" and things of that nature--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --just hadn't had a--
Speaker 1: --Pioneers and Protest--
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--and protest, all of that.  I hadn't read any of it, and that, that's one of the other points I wanna make, that all the way through undergraduate school and through the master's at Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], I'd only taken one course that had anything to do with black folk, and it was a course in African politics.  There were no course offerings dealing with the black experience, all the way through my undergraduate and through my master's program.  And so, in some respects, this interest was a new kind of curiosity for me.  But behind it, quite frankly, was some attempt at doing two things: trying to understand the moment that I was living through, which was the period of the 1960s; and also trying to--looking for some kind of therapeutic treatment for myself personally.  I discovered at the time of Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death that much of my own political and social philosophy was deeply rooted in his.  And both the fact of his death and the nature of his death pushed me into a, another kind of political space, an angry political space that at times had an urge to a vengeful kind of direction.  I found myself identifying more and more with the, the black power movement folk and its whole political traject--trajectory.  And somehow or another, King's nonviolent philosophy, which I had, in fact, genuinely embraced, was called into total question by the nature and fact of his violent death.  And much of my whole, if you will, political practice up to that point in time had been rooted in this notion that it's possible for black people in general, and me, a black person specifically, to engage whites and transform whites into a people who supported, defended the principles that we sought to live on, could live by.  Again, his death called that whole theory into question.  And so, I was doing a lot of the reading was, you know, just trying to figure out, you know, both who I was and where I should go from there.
Story_ID: 95094
Speaker 1: I should, should mention that I had had a, a desire to do, have a foreign service career prior to going into the Peace Corps thing and had, in fact, been offered a position with the USIA.  I was also offered three different positions with Peace Corps, to go back overseas as a Peace Corps rep to run programs there.  And all this was after Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death.  And I ended up not being able to go because I had met people who were expatriates overseas, black and white.  And I knew that if I left at that time, I would never come back to the United States.  And I didn't have the right to do that, given the amount of investments people had put in me.  I had debts still to pay back here, so I didn't have the right to just freely pack up and split and leave the whole thing hanging.  And so that was a, a part of my reason that I said well, I'll take this period of time and go to Puerto Rico and just see if I can figure out how to reconstruct myself on the one hand and rethink my understanding of this whole, this whole world that we're, that, that we're living in.  I was there for the better of the year, came back and decided I hadn't learned, hadn't answered enough questions for myself, so I went out to [University of California] Berkeley.  And they had established a program, The History of Black People and Race Relations, a new PhD program, one of the first focused on black history and culture.  I went out and told the people of my intention to enroll that fall.  They said well, have you applied yet?  I said no.  They said well, applications were due in March or January or something.  I said well, I missed that deadline, but I'm, I'm--my intention is to enroll this fall.  They said well--and they asked what program.  I told 'em.  They said well, get your application stuff together and send it in, and we'll see what we can do.  So I did, and they eventually accepted me in the program.  And I said oh, by the way, I ain't got no money (laughter).  So they put together a scholarship basically that paid full tuition and gave I think it was a $10,000 dollar a year stipend or something like that, which was more than enough to, to live on and work on at that time.  So I went through a full year, in the midst of which I met the lady who would become my wife.  I met her at registration, and we talked for about 20 minutes, at the conclusion of which I told her that she was the woman I was going to marry, and she declared me insane.  That was in October of, I guess October of '69 [1969].  We went out for the first time on December 26th of '69 [1969], and we decided we were gonna get married on January 6th of 1970.  And we were married for 20 wonderful years, and were married a total of twenty-three before we decided that our career paths and other things were going in some different kind of ways and was better that we go our separate ways--but met in the context of that the other thing I'll say about this--
Story_ID: 95095
Speaker 1: We spent the first year--I spent the first year at [University of California] Berkeley, and towards the end of it, two things were happening.  A fellow by name of Andrew Billingsley, who was on the faculty at, at Berkeley at the time, had a year of sabbatical coming up.  And he had invited several of us as graduate students to go with him to spend a year at a place called the Institute of the Black World in Atlanta [Georgia].  And I said to my wife and I said well, we thought we'd like to go.  So I was able to convince the history department that you really couldn't study black history in California 'cause no black folk were out there.  You had to go to the South to study black people, and I had this opportunity to spend a year abroad in the South.  And so, we did that.  And the university funded both me and my wife, and the funded a secretary (laughter), and gave us some money for administrative expenses for the, for the institute.  Andy Billingsley, in the middle of our, you know, preparations to go, got offered the vice, vice presidency at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so he never made it to Atlanta.  He went to Howard University and became its vice president in, in charge of all academic affairs.  We, the group of graduate students went and spent the year at the Institute of the Black World, and it was another major turning point in my life because at--in the context of that, I, I had gone to Berkeley to spend another year continuing my reading.  I didn't have, didn't have an agenda for it outside of this continuing search for clarity about myself and what's going on in the world.  By the time I'd gone through the experience at the Institute of the Black World, I'd come to some realization that a mastery of some of this subject matter could, in fact, serve significant social purpose and that I would want to go ahead and try to develop as much mastery of the content of the field as possible, with an eye towards trying to use a combination of my administrative experience and my knowledge of the content to carry on some kind of educational mission.  I did not have any intentions of going into the classroom and becoming a university professor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 95096
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us what the Institute of the Black World was?  It's a unique institution, and it grew out of I think SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, actually--
Speaker 1: --SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or something--
Speaker 2: The, the institute was originally the research arm of the Martin Luther King Center.  The, the fellow who founded the Institute of the Black World was also the first president of the King Center.  His name is Vincent Harding.
Speaker 1: Dr. Vincent Harding, right.
Speaker 2: And Vincent and a group of, of folk in--on the Atlanta University Center complex had been working on something they called the Du Bois Institute of Advance Studies for years before King's assassination.  And they had kind of created this model of, of a Du Bois Center think tank that would be focused on the black experience, and on research, and studying, and writing, and rewriting that history.  When he was asked to head up the King Center, they set up this research arm, and it was really an extension of the agenda of this Du Bois piece that was already in place.  And many of the folk who were affiliated with the Du Bois came to work at this, in this research institute.  The King family position was that the King Center was a, established to celebrate and commemorate the life and legacy of King, and that--this broader agenda was appropriate for the King Center.  Vincent and the other folk that found the institute basically took the position that King's life didn't make any sense outside of the context of the broader struggle and historical trajectory of African Americans and African peoples globally.  And that became the basis for them eventually deciding to go their separate ways.  And the institute was established as an independent entity in 1970.  And as well, its mission was rather simple in its gathering of basically black intellectuals to try to rethink a combination of the history and the educational experience of black folk in the United States and worldwide and to serve as a, well, a research arm to the black power movement.  In a very real sense, we ended up--everybody who was involved in black political struggle from, from the late '60s [1960s] through the latter part of the 1970s ended up spending some time at the institute.  And it was a very, very broad range of folk.
Story_ID: 95097
Speaker 1: Tell us more about the split.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a group of students who were on the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia] campus who were under the guidance and direction of the one of the staff members at the institute, a fellow by the name of Gerald McWorter, now known as Abdul Alkalimat.  And they decided to (laughter)--the board of trustees of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was meeting, and they decided to take over--well, basically to lock them up for 24, 36 hours (laughter).  And my recollection is that somebody in the [Reverend Martin Luther] King family was there.  But if not someone from the King family, the people who were on the board were really high up muckety mucks in Atlanta, and this was like the last straw.  You, you, you all--I would hear full mini revolution an overthrowing, trying to overthrow institutions, etc.  And so the, the board of trustees of the, of the King Center and the board and staff of the institute basically decided it was better they go their separate ways.  And so, that's how it became the independent black institution that it was, which one, one of the--again, in retrospect, you get caught up in the language of the time and the, the notion of the whole black power notion was that all black institutions should be independent, meaning that they should be self-supporting and that they should not have any obligations to anything or anybody white.  Well, it's, it's ideology that's--get you, actually creates traps for you ultimately.  And we were being funded by the Ford Foundation in our initial incarnation, funded by the Cummins India Foundation, and there were a few others like that.  But people would have knock-down-drag-out debates about whether or not you should take white money 'cause it'll compromise your principles and (laughter) you can't be politically correct and all kinds of crazy stuff.
Story_ID: 95098
Speaker 1: But a lot of--I was saying to you earlier, that virtually anybody who was involved in critical thinking about the black experience in any way, shape, or form ended up coming to the Institute [of the Black World] at one time or another.  And it was a broad range of folk.  I mean the black foundation executives, when they decided they were going to organize, they came and spent like two or three days at the institute consulting with staff and other folk there, trying to figure out how they can structure themselves to function both on behalf of the, their own career interests while serving interests and needs of the broader black community in the earliest meetings, planning meetings for the Congressional Black Caucus took place.  Charles Diggs came there with a fellow by the name of Ofield Dukes [HM] and spent several days kind of thinking through what the Congressional Black Caucus might look like as an organized entity within the congressional body, and what kind of agendas it might set and that kind of thing.  Louis Farrakhan [HM], when he split with Wallace D. Mohammed--well, before he actually went through, the split came, spent several days with us.  And he had a number of major concerns.  One of them was that he could not support the direction that Wallace was taking the Nation of Islam and which was a more traditional Islamic one and, and really breaking with most of the economic principles that had undergirded the Nation during his father's tenure.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--was hardcore Nationalist principles about owning your own--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --(unclear)-
Speaker 1: And so Farrakhan, a) could not continue to follow but didn't want to create any major split in the movement.  And part of the reason why they definitely didn't want any big split was because Farrakhan's kids were married to Wallace Dean's kids.  (Laughter) He just begin (laughter)--(unclear).  And so, we kind spend a lot of time with him kind of talking through a lot of that stuff.  But when Stokely Carmichael first announced his Pan-Africanism philosophy, he came and delivered a speech at the institute that kind of laid out this, his new Pan-Africanist vision.  We beat him up--Stokely, that stuff don't make no sense; it don't make no sense to you (laughter).  But what was, what was wonderful about the institute and--is that it had a reputation for being a place where one could come and exchange ideas and where all ideas, if you were generally committed to the struggle of black people for freedom and human dignity, all ideas had value.  In other words, you--we would, we would have debates with you about the ideas without personalizing, without attacking you, and people felt comfortable from the broad spectrum of the political world coming--excuse me--and having those kinds of, kinds of conversations.  There was some important, you know, bodies of work came out of the institute.  Steven Henderson did a major book on, on poetry and the, the kind of--(unclear)--and, and the evolution of kind of African American, a language systems and, and its, its relationship to poetry.  And people like Joyce Ladner [HM] did her, one of the first major books on black, the history of black women, which was--(unclear).  Vincent, of course, did his various books on the history of black struggle.  We did a special edition on, of a Harvard education review called "Education in Block--Black Struggle: Notes from the Colonized World," which was a major piece.  We did several--some of our earliest work was on the evolution development of black studies.  And we convened the first meeting of black studies directors to try to collectivize our knowledge and consciousness about issues involving shaping black studies programs around the country.  And we convened the first major national assessment of black studies curriculum across the nation.
Story_ID: 95099
Speaker 1: So it was a, a, a, a fascinating little place, no budget.  After about a year, year and a half, according to the FBI records, they intervened in our funding streams and started cutting off the money from various foundation sources, beginning with the Ford Foundation, and, and others.  But we managed to do what I think is a lot, a lot of very serious and critical work.  We reached a point where we could not financially support a core of fellows, which is, was the founding ideal of it.  And so, each of those fellows ended up taking university positions or other kinds of academic positions, each of which has gone on to make major, major contributions to scholarship and to social and political thought and action.  So it, it had a, a certainly an impact well beyond its, its size, and its budget, and its, its personnel resources.  And it's something that's still sorely needed in the United States.  There is, we called it our black think tank and black folk getting together to try to think through ways of addressing the problems confronting specifically black people in the United States but black people worldwide.  And when you think about it, we, we are operated out of two, actually we had, at one time we had three little houses, but we were basically operating out of two little houses on the corner of Chestnut and Beckwith Street, right across from the Atlanta University Library now.  I think there may have been 15 rooms in the two houses, maybe 20 or 25 in the three houses.  But we had the audacity to call ourselves the Institute of the Black World, no, no, no modesty in this at all.  And ov--over the long run I think we did make, in fact, end up making some rather important contributions.
Story_ID: 95100
Speaker 1: There was important work in people who would attend their--(unclear)--they, they felt at home to discuss the kinds of ideas you were just describing from all different (unclear) perspectives, the hardcore nationals, Pan-Africanists.  I mean it's truest in any and all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Any and all streams.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Any and all streams.
Speaker 1: --and discovered (unclear) everybody show up.
Speaker 2: We were, we were--in the mid-seventies [1970s], you may recall that a big split occurred between the Nationalists and the Marxists and was fascinating 'cause we were talking about Walter Rodney earlier.  Walter was claimed by both camps.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so Walter shows up, and the Nationalists are trying to get Walter to say--to embrace their position.  And the Marxists are trying to get Walter to embrace their position.  And Walter has his own position that's a synthesis of the two (laughter).  And so he's going around speaking and finding himself thrust into the middle of these debates, which were taking place all across the country.  You remember the African Liberation Support Committee split and Baraka split.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when, when that--
Speaker 1: Daniels and Baraka on opposite sides.  Akia (ph.) and Abdul Alkalimat on opposite sides.
Speaker 2: Korengo (ph.), who's over there sittin' and, and it's still in third camp.  And so all of this stuff is, is going on in the middle of this.  But the institute was more, was one of the few places where you could get the competing the sides, the, the antagonistic sides together to talk in a sane, and rational, and responsible way about the commonalities and differences in their position.  And that, that was really I think probably its, its greatest strength.  And that's been one of the things that I've tried to do here, is make sure that there is no such thing as if, if it's dealing with the black experience, it has a place in the discourse of this particular institution, be it right-wing Republican or left-wing Communist or whatever.  If its agenda is to try to contribute to our knowledge and insight on the black experience, then it has a right to have a voice in our, in our programming and our activities.
Story_ID: 95101
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were executive director of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Of the Institute [of the Black World], yes.  I started off as--the year I spent there as a, basically as a graduate student.  They--I, I finished a year, and I went back to [University of California] Berkeley and did a year of coursework.  And I came back and then ran a summer institute, which is I think the one that you were talking about.  I ran a summer institute in '72 [1972], I guess it was--no, maybe in '74 [1974].  And then I decided to take the position they offered up as program director--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --and I did that for a year or a year or two and then became the executive director and continued in that role officially until '79 [1979], and when I went to the National Endowment for the Humanities.  And I spent about three years at the National Endowment for the Humanities working for Joseph Duffy and the, the colored peoples of the world, who are of the United States at least.
Speaker 1: Now, now did IBW [Institute of the Black World] just run out of money, you know, basically in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: We actually didn't close IBW down until '83 [1983], '84 [1984], when I, when I moved here and took the position here at the [Schomburg] Center.  We finally decided to go ahead and, and close it down.  Did we run out of money?  We never had any money, but we, yes, we did eventually reach a point where we just were not able to sustain.  We'd--I had, actually, when I took the position at the center, I was in the middle of a project that was going to be one of the last, turned out to be one of the last projects of the institute, which was a documentary television series called "The Other American Revolution," based on a book that Vincent had written, Vincent Harding had written.  And we had gone through the NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities] process to--and had gotten I think three scripts completed, applied for production money, and basically all the panels and everybody else recommended funding.  The then chairman of the endowment nixed it, Ms. [Lynne] Cheney of Vice President Cheney's wife.
Speaker 1: She was chairman of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She was chairman of the dowment--of the endowment, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: So she nixed it.  And I had to make a decision before they made their decisions, whether or not I was going to take the job with the Schomburg Center or whether I was going to do, continue to do the film project.  And I made the decision to do the, the Schomburg piece. And so the, pra--the film project went, went on hold.  But--(unclear)--the other thing that's kind of interesting, we were applying to do that project at the same time that Blackside [Film & Media] was starting its--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --starting its program series.
Speaker 1: Henry Hampton--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Henry Hampton.
Speaker 1: --"Eyes on the Prize."
Speaker 2: And as it turned out, Vincent [Harding] became one of the principal advisors on the "Eyes on the Prize" series.  After our series, it basically decided not to go--we decided not to go forward with that.  But the institute basically did--we did shut it down.  Its records are here, and are processed, and are available for, for research.  And it's, it's, it's an incredibly interesting body of stuff about a whole lot of stuff, especially things taking place from basically the late '60s [1960s] through the early '80s [1980s].  That's, that's a lot of, you know, facets of black life that are captured in the records of that little two-house, two-building (laughter) facility.
Story_ID: 95102
Speaker 1: Now who would you--surrounded with all this, all, all these talented black minds, I mean, who would you consider your primary influences in those days?  I know Dr. [Vincent] Harding (unclear) was one, but--
Speaker 2: Well, Vincent was one, and they, he and John Henrik Clarke, had put together a, a documentary television series for CBS.  It was a hundred and I think a hundred and two programs.  And everybody that knew anything about black history and culture or was known to be an authority on any facet of it actually did lecture in that series, black and white.  And it aired at weird times in the morning, like, you know, five or six o'clock in the morning on CBS television nationally.  And that was one of the incentives for me kind of getting into this black history stuff too, 'cause I started watching the series and said this, this, this is, this is interesting.
Speaker 1: Now this series is news to me.  Is it, is it still, is it available anywhere?
Speaker 2: We have a, a full set of it here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on film, and it is as comprehensive a video record, film record of black thought on black history, and black culture, and black politics, as a kind of snapshot of that period, the most comprehensive thing you could probably find.  And we have a full set of it here at the, at the center on film.  This was, this was pre-videotaped.  I think it's on 16 millimeter.  But that was an aside.  You were asking about something else, and I kind of went off.
Story_ID: 95103
Speaker 1: Asking about your influences, who had--
Speaker 2: Oh, influences.  I had a formal, my formal academic training at [University of California] Berkeley.  I studied with Kenneth Stamp, Lawrence Levine, Larry Ludwick (ph.), John Ralph Willis, who was at Princeton as an Africanist-Islamicist, and Nathan Huggins.  They were like my principal faculty people at, at Berkeley.  And--
Speaker 1: That's an impressive group.
Speaker 2: No bad, not bad--at the institute of the Black World.  And Vincent Harding [HM], Lerone Bennett, Jr. [HM], Walter Rodney, St. Clair Drake, C. L. R. James (laughter), George Beckford from the University of the West Indies--G. Beck was a brilliant economics and had the capacity to take really, really complex, complex global issues of global political economy, make them ac--accessible to a grade school or high school student.  I mean he was just brilliant, brilliant, brilliant.  I could probably learn as much economics and, from him as anybody else--Kamau Braithwaite, who's down at NYU [New York University] now, Robert Hill [HM], and Bill Strickland are all--and Steve Henderson, Sterling Stuckey, all, all, all, all of these folk are the IBW [Institute of the Black World] intellectuals, not bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't know that anybody else has ever had the opportunity to have that kind of (unclear) blend of resources, in terms of developing your intellectual, your base and background.  And the institute folk were, frankly, more influential over the long run because what I was learning from them was scholarship with a purpose, with a political and social purpose, political and social agenda-- an intellectual agenda?  Yes, but one connected to some notions about a political and social development and, and political and social movement.
Story_ID: 95104
Speaker 1: What I learned in the, the context of the [University of California] Berkeley experience was some of the more formal aspects of, of, of the discipline and of the field and certainly access to a lot of source materials and that kind of thing.  One of the things about my [University of California] Berkeley experience, again, which I guess I'm just an unreconstructed maverick, I'm, I'm enrolled in the history department at Berkeley.  And I took as many courses in sociology, anthropology, and political science as I did in history.  And the people in the history department were constantly on my case--why are you over there studying with this one or that one or the other?  Well, as it turned out, there were people in sociology, in political science, in anthropology, and in some of the other fields who were working on the same problems as the people in history, and they didn't even know that each other existed.  I introduced them each other, said you know, you're working on this piece of this, and you're working--y'all need to talk.  Because the campus was so--as, as most of your--(unclear)--campuses are, so departmentalized the people don't even know who their, if you will, compatriots might be in other, other fields, other disciplines.  I was not rooted--I went there with a series of questions about the black experience.  I wasn't, I didn't go there to become a historian, if you follow what I'm saying.  And so I went looking for perspectives, and information, knowledge that could inform my understanding of the black experience, irrespective of what department it was in.  I'll give you one of the examples: the scholarship on slavery during the period of time that I was studying had this notion that black folk were childlike and that they were totally depended and childlike, etc., etc., and their--the masters were all, etc., etc., etc.  Well, I decided I wanted to take a course in children and childhood, and what, what is the nature of children and childhood, and how do you understand the behavior of children.  And so there was a course in socialization, and the professor who did it was a part of something they called the symbolic interactionist school that looked at development in the context of--well, begin, begins with the understanding that human beings are among the most social of animals of the animal species and that their learning patterns are, social learning patterns as opposed to individual, and that you can study children's behavior, what you call their play activity and all the rest of this, you can study that as learning behavior.  And so I, I, I took the course and came away with a, a couple of things: Number one, if you know anything about children and you know anything about childhood, in an adult world, children are very powerful; that, in fact, adults end up organizing their lives around the lives of children; and if, if, if a child decides it's gonna disrupt this event or do that, it's a power little sucker (laughter).  So, the assumptions about children being powerless, is, is, is the first fallacy in applying this kind of terminology to, the slave population.  And if children are not powerless, why should you assume that someone who's enslaved is powerless?  And so the question becomes, how do you understand their behavior and basically probe the ways in which they both mobile power and utilize power in their lives?  In many respects, what's come out of the, the book on Jubilee has come out of some that thinking, that you're, you're not--they're, they're in a condition of enslavement.  They're not slaves.  And as human beings who are in a condition of enslavement, they are capable, like any other human beings, of understanding and analyzing their world and their identifying resources that can help them pursue their agendas, and then they go about the process of pursuing those.  Well, if my history professors had, had their druthers, I never would have developed that insight, because I never would have been allowed to--I never would have taken a course in early childhood socialization.
Story_ID: 95105
Speaker 1: But I would do that, I, I had stuff--I did courses in, in political science that were looking at the ways in which colonial powers operated, colonial societies outside of Africa, how did European colonial societies function in, in Asia, in Latin America?  What were its, its structures of political organization?  And what were their resources agendas?  You know, look at their whole thing, and look at that--look in the African, African-American experience from a comparative spec--perspective vis-a-vis the way that these same people functioned in, in other parts of the world.  And so I, I end up with, with putting a bigger head around the thing and come away from it with a, a much deeper I, I think, or I hope a much more profound understanding of the ways in which our exploitation, oppression, all the rest of that has been organized.  And so I, I, I, I structured my own curriculum and, and, and course--we actually had situations where this friend of mine, she and I we'd get together, and we'd decide what we were gonna study this, this, this coming semester.  And we put together the, the stuff that we wanted to read, and then we'd go find the professor that we wanted (laughter) to.  And we'd basically do an independent study with them.  And the professors there--we've selected the stuff we wanna read; we've got the questions we wanna ask.  And the professor is there to basically lead the discussion, and give us a grade if, if, if, if one was required.  And so I, I spent a lot of time in the course of years at Berkeley kind of crafting these, again, learning experiences for me that answered questions that I had about the, the nature of the black experience, domestically and internationally, in the ways in which we have evolved, and again, keeping in mind that, at that time, there are no--black studies programs have not been organized yet, okay, there, there, or they're just in a, a state of formation.  But there's nothing on a graduate level outside of this program that I am in.  So this is all, you know, you kind of make it up as you go.  And I, I was fortunate enough to have the kind of resources available to me to make it possible to make up some really good stuff, and I learned a lot of stuff.
Story_ID: 95106
Speaker 1: Sir, tell us how you came to Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture].
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting and there's a long and a short version.  I'll try to do something in between the two.  I had spent, after spending about seven or eight years at the Institute of the Black World, I went to the National Endowment for the Humanities ostensibly to do a consulting job.  The then chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, Jo, Joseph Duffy, called me and asked me to work on this thing because they had received a pool of 50, I think about 50, 55 applications from historically black colleges for their fellowships program, and none of them had been awarded a fellowship.  And Duffy wanted to know why, wanted to know if it was something in their--in the ways in which the guidelines were set up that were discriminatory, whether there were other kinds of issues, etc., etc.  And so I technically was supposed to be going to work with him every two or three times a month from Atlanta, go to Washington [D.C.], attend this meeting, check this out, and produce this [Georgia], this report.  As it turned out, the day--I, I went to, to the first national council meeting where these applications were in fact being acknowledged as, as not having been passed.  And a major debate broke out in the national council among several members who were, you know, there and the, and the whites who were there.  There were whites there who basically said, and this is paraphrased, but this is the gist of it, that the schools are inferior, the people are inferior, so why do you expect to get good applications?  Well, Samuel DuBois Cook was on the council, who was the pres--the head of one of the black--historically black colleges, and Sam went off.  And the whole issue just blew up in the council.  And so instead of having a consulting gig, I actually ended up with a, a, a, a job.  And I ended up actually moving to, to Washington and working there in the chairman's office for the better part of about three years, during which time I accomplished about three things: Number one, we did actually finish the study.  And what turned out to be the problem that the--the assumption among many of the council people was that all the applicants from the historically black colleges were black.  Well, they weren't, they were a little of everything from, they were African, they were Asian, they were European, and white American.  So that was the one; two, the presumed that all of the folk had, they had graduate degrees, had gotten them from historically black colleges.  Well, only a couple of the black colleges gave graduate, offered graduate degrees, and most of them had degrees, any advance degree they had were from mainstream institutions and/or European institutions like Oxford (laughter) and a few other little play--little places like that.  And so the, all the assumptions that were kind of guiding peoples, you know, thinking about this were all off.  What turned out to be the case was that the schools had only had experience with what we called entitlement programs.  And in entitlement programs the agency that's funding the, the project or the activity specifies what it is that they want, and then you write an application to tell how you're gonna deliver that, that product.  Well, the endowment is a seller's market.  They don't tell you what they want.  They ask you to tell them what you want to do.  And if you haven't formulated a very clear statement of what your, what the intellectual goal was of the project is and what methods you're going to use to try to basically conduct this research, this study, your application isn't competitive.  And that turned out to be the case with the vast majority of those 50 or 55 that did not get funded.  So I ended up putting together what--a series what I called grantsmanship workshops, which I took all over the country, starting with the historically black colleges and actually ended up with Native American, and some Asian, and the Hispanic community; Puerto Rico actually did a series in Puerto Rico.  And the purpose of it was basically to teach people how to understand the guidelines for the various NEH programs and to prepare the application.  We use an inductive method, set it up so that the actual program officers brought actual applications that had been submitted to the endowment, and gave them to the people who were parti--participating in our workshops.  And they had to read the applications based on the criteria that we had set and then determine whether or not they should be funded.  And that inductive process we used to teach them both about the fellowship program, the research program, the education program.  And so by the time they're gone through one of our workshops they knew basically the NEH method and, and ways of approaching this stuff.  And I still have folk who went through those workshops who are still getting grants from NEH because of that, because of that experience.  Any event, that lasted about three years.  I finished up with Duffy.
Story_ID: 95107
Speaker 1: [Joseph] Duffy's term ends. Bill Bennett comes in as the new chairman of the endowment [National Endowment for the Humanities] and his chairmanship actually overlaps with the last six months of my contract.  And so Bennett--we had, had set up the cycle of workshops for the Hispanic community, and he came in and initially said he wanted to shut the whole thing down.  I said well, you know, this, these have been requested by legislative people in these districts.  And you probably don't wanna do that because they are expecting their constituents to have the same opportunities to learn about this as some of the other constituents of that.  So he said okay, well, go ahead and do the rest of those in the United States, but shut down that Puerto Rico thing because I'm not gonna have any boondoggle in the beginning of my administration.  I said well, you know, the same principle applies to Puerto Rico.  He said well, ain't no colleges in Puerto Rico.  Well (laughter), there are only about 120 or so.  Any event, we were able to finally convince him that we should go forward with the whole series, and so we did.  And I completed that like in June of '80--I guess it was in June of '83' [1983]--'82' [1982]--and went back to Atlanta [Georgia].  My then wife was teaching at Atlanta University.  She got a call in July out of the blue asking her to come up and interview for a job at Union Theological Seminary.  She's a sociologist.  One of her fields was sociology of religion.  They were looking for a dean of students, and they were specifically looking for a woman, and they were specifically looking for a black woman if they could find one.  So, they asked her to come up for this interview.  And we hadn't been to New York in a while, so said why don't we go up for a weekend?  So we came up with no intention really of taking the thing seriously, 'cause we weren't really looking to move to New York.  So we come up and she goes through the interview.  And because she wasn't, you know, emotionally invested in getting the job, she interviewed very, very ca--cavalierly, you know.  They loved her.  So we go back to Atlanta and we're back on Monday.  We get a call on Tuesday saying they want her, wanna come up for a second interview.  And I said well, this stuff is getting serious, so (unclear), so we get a list--I get my list of, of nine non-negotiable demands (laughter): I will not move to New York unless this, that and the other.  So we put this, put this all forward, and we came back up and she went through the interview, the second interview.  And we put all of the demands out, and they met all of them.  And I had finished my tenure at the endowment.  I hadn't decided what I was going to do next, so it really didn't matter where I lived that, you know, next year.  And I had decided though that I was going to take, you know, the better part of a year off.  And this was going to be the first year my son was going into school.  So, basically, it turned out a situation, to be a situation where she could come--she actually did want to consider going into university administration, so she get a chance to get feet wet.  But again, she was coming--we were coming for a period of at most three years.
Story_ID: 95108
Speaker 1: In the second year, the position at the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture] opened.  And they ran a national search, had a huge committee; they had a committee of about twenty people who were on the search committee.  They went through all of the applicants and didn't find who they were looking for so they reopened the search.  In December, on the last day of the second search, in response to an inquiry from a couple of friends of mine about whether or not I had applied in that--whether I had read the job description, I, I had not, I'd done neither 'cause I thought they were looking for a librarian.  I'm a historian.  They said well, if you read the description it sounds just like you.  So I got a copy of it and did read it, and it did sound just like me.  So I wrote an application and submitted it on the last day of the second search.  And that was December.  In like February, I get a call from someone down at 42nd Street of the New York Public Library.  They're working on an exhibition at the 42nd Street library on censorship, and they want to have a satellite exhibition at the Schomburg Center.  And they're asking whether or not I would consider serving as a consultant to the staff to put together this exhibition on censorship related exhibition at the Schomburg Center.  I said I don't know whether this is related to the--'cause I've heard nothing from the application.  I don't know whether this is a part of the kind of backdoor review part.  I don't have a clue, but I assume that I probably better take it (laughter) and do it, just to keep my, you know, kind of cover my bases.  So I, I took the consultancy, the contract and came up and started working with the staff to put together this, this exhibition.  And we eventually ended up titling it "Censorship in Black America."
Story_ID: 95109
Speaker 1: And I was not working full time during this whole year but had a couple of little gigs I call them.  One of them was something that was a kind of service thing.  I was doing the--there was a group at the National Council of Churches called the Theology in the Americas Project, which had been organized by a Chilean priest by the name of Sergio Torres, who had been one of the victim of the Pinochet regime, liberation theologians who had been driven out of Chile.  And so he had come to the States and to the National Council of Churches, seeking to foster, promote a kind of anti-imperialist perspective in American theologian discourse.  And so he came and set up this project called Theology in the Americas Project and drew folk--his initial were all theologians.  But they have their founding conference in Detroit [Michigan], and liberation theology method requires that you ground with the people.  Well, in Detroit the people were the black folk (laughter).  And so they end up with that first conference with the black population having a much stronger voice in what was going on there, black laypeople as opposed to theolo--theologians.  And the black theologians who were there ended up--and people like James Cohen, etc., ended up being much more empowered in that setting than would have been the case had it been a traditional kind of theological setting.  And so they decided to organize something, the Theology in the Americas Project decided to organize itself by ethnic and affinity groups, and as a Black Theology Project, and Hispanic Project, and Asian Project, there was a Labor Project, a Women's Project, etc.  The Black Theology Project turned out to be one of the strongest.  And when I first became involved with it in the middle of the 1970s, I was still in Atlanta [Georgia] working at the Institute of the Black World.  By the time I came up here, Cornel West had been running it for about, about two years.  He was in, finishing up his work and had started teaching at Union.  When I arrived he was ready to kind of step down, and I had time to, you know, devoted some--I was working as the director of the, of the Theology in the Americas Project--or Black Theology Project.  And my other gig was working on, for the Council of Interracial Books for Children, doing a study of American History textbooks, something I hadn't done since I graduated, you know, and did my doctoral work in history.  And they had published a book called "Racism and Sexism in American History Textbooks" during the 1970s, and they wanted to do an updated version of it and so they hired me and another friend of mine to conduct this study of the new versions of textbooks that had come out in the 19, early 1980s.  And so I had--those, those were my, my two kind of gigs, my (unclear) kind of extracurricular projects.
Story_ID: 95110
Speaker 1: The black theology, the major Black Theology Project activity that I find myself enmeshed in as I'm going through this process with the New York Public Library and the Schomburg Center directorship is a, a theological dialogue in Cuba between black theologians and Cuban Christians in Cuba.  And this dialogue turned out to be really the front, the umbrella that--well, the, the project invited Jesse Jackson [HM] to be the keynote speaker.  And he as keynote speaker, he as keynote speaker used the time that he was there to negotiate the release of several other Cuban prisoners that were there.  But we--I had, had responsibility for organizing this piece at the same time that I'm working on a June deadline to try to finish this damn exhibit (laughter).  And so, for someone who's not working, (laughter) I'm not, not really not working these, these little gigs, but I'm under this tremendous pressure.  'Cause what had ended up happening with the exhibit, we kind of worked out a concept of it, and I turned it over to the staff.  And I go back to check it out, and the staff basically isn't doing anything of consequence on it.  And so, I conclude that if I don't go ahead and do the exhibit, then it's not gonna be done in time.  And that may, you know, be a negative, you know, comment on me becoming director of the center.  So I'm committed to finishing the, the exhibit.  I'm working on this book (laughter) on, study of history textbooks, and I'm organizing this theology dialogue in Cuba with Jesse and about, I guess about twenty of the members of the group.  The Black Theology Project had about 120, 130 ministers, and theologians, and laypeople, cross-denominations, cross-religions actually, 'cause they were Muslims involved in it from time to time.  Catholic and all the Protestant churches, all-black churches and predominantly white churches with black membership, etc., all in this one kind of dialogical framework.  But any event, I'm juggling these three balls (laughter), trying, trying to figure out how we get all this stuff done.  Somehow or another I managed to get it done.  We take the group down to Cuba.  We have a very successful trip.  One of the consequences of it was Jesse had lectured at--he was supposed to be the keynote speaker at, at this Methodist church.  And his presentation was scheduled for the afternoon, I think for 12 or 1.  In the morning he was supposed to speak at the university.  Well, he went over to speak at the university and Fidel went with him to the university.  And after the university speech, Jesse says to Fidel: come on, let's go to church.  And he brings Fidel to the Methodist church.  Well, he was--they were all late, and people had been sitting there for about an hour waiting for them.  When they finally arrived, I'm sitting down at the front of the church, and people outside, you start hearing this low roar, Fidel, Fidel, Fidel, Fidel.  By the time the--Jesse has him in the middle of the church aisle, walking down the aisle, everybody's on their hand--on, on--everybody's standing and clapping, and people are breaking out into tears, etc., and, and just, just chanting, Fidel, Fidel.  It's the first time Fidel had been in a church since the revolution.  Jesse takes him to the pulpit, sits him under the cross.  He actually stands and gives an opening statement at the, at, at the podium.  And the religion had been basically--well, basically Catholic religion had been suppressed in Cuba because the Catholic Church had been among the major opponents of the Cuban Revolution.  And so, people who were Christians did not have very much space in which to practice their religion.  The, the net result of that visit was that Fidel established a Ministry of Religion--a minister of religion.  Those who were practicing were given much, much more license to practice.  He actually published a book.  There was a Brazilian theologian who carried on, sustained interviews with Fidel, and in turn resulted in a book called "Fidel and Religion" in which he kind of outlined his views on religion and--there was a general loosening of opportunities for Christian practice and religious practice in Cuba as a direct result of that, of, of that visit.
Story_ID: 95111
Speaker 1: And the exhibit, the exhibit did get done.  We opened in June, in time for them to finally announce that I'd been appointed (laughter) director of the Schomburg Center, and that announcement took place in June.  I took office officially on September 19th, I think, of 1984 and have been here, been here ever since.
Speaker 2: Now, now tell us, for the purpose of this, I mean, this being an historical document, who was Arthur Schomburg and, and why the Schomburg Center?  How did it get started?
Speaker 1: Schomburg was a Puerto Rican of African descent who migrated to the United States in the latter part of the 19th century.  He was initially involved in the Puerto Rican and Cuban independence movement against colonial Spain and was a compatriot of people like Jose Marti and others who were based in New York but were supporting these revolutionary movements in Cuba and Puerto Rico.  When what we call the Spanish/American War ended and many of Schomburg's compatriots agreed to basically come under the umbrella of the United States in a new kind of neocolonial relationship, Schomburg broke with them and began to commit himself more fully to his interest in African American, African Diaspora in history.  He had studied the history of various peoples in Cuba--in Puerto Rico--while he was there as a, as a teenager.  And in one class he was said to have asked the teacher what about--we've heard about Spanish, and French, and English history, what about black history.  And the teacher said black people have no history.  This was a fairly widespread prevailing notion idea in the latter part of the 19th century.  And indeed, by the beginning of the 20th century, all people of African descent, except those in Ethiopia, Liberia, and Haiti were living under some form of European colonial domination.  And the ideological justification for that, in part, was that blacks had no history, it had no culture, therefore, should be ruled by people who did have history and who did have culture.  And so Schomburg basically was committed to trying to destroy this myth.  And he started collecting what I consider a kind of evidentiary base of what I also refer to is a kind of legal brief to document the fact that black people had a history throughout the history of humankind and that they had culture.  And his collection by 1920s--by 1926 had grown to a collection of over 10,000 items - photographs, books, manuscripts, artwork, any medium of communication that captured and preserved some aspect of the history and heritage of people of African descent worldwide he collected and preserved.  That collection became the foundation of today's Schomburg Center, and it has grown to be a collection of more than 5 million items now and is arguably certainly the most comprehensive public research library in the world devoted to, exclusively to, documenting and interpreting black history and culture.
Speaker 2: Okay, 5 million items.  That's--
Speaker 1: It's more and we don't, we don't know how many more, but it's much, much more.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, we've been using the 5 million number for probably about eight, nine years, and I know we've brought in at least another million or so items (laughter) in the last ten years.  So, it's a substantial, substantial collection of books, photographs, artwork from Africa, and the Africa Diaspora, and United States of course, film, videotape, sound recording--
Speaker 2: Now Schomburg himself presided over this for a short period of time in the 1930s--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He was curator when the collection was acquired in 1926.  He took off for about three or four years and ended up going down to Fisk.  Charles Johnson was a friend of his, and he went down to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]--was invited to Fisk--to set up the African-American Collection at Fisk.  He came back in '32 [1932] and assumed the position of curator and was in that curatorial role until his death in 1938.  So it was a relatively short period of time that he was actually in the curatorial role in the Center, or what, what was then the 135th Street branch library.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 95112
Speaker 1: And there's a biography [of Arthur Schomburg], I think I should mention on tape, by Elinor Des Verney Sinnette.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that was--
Speaker 2: And it's, it's still in print, and it's still a very, very useful biography and done--she initially did it as a dissertation.  We were able to work with her to get it updated.  And we actually published it without Wayne State University Press and worked with her to get that, because no one else had done anything quite as exten--as extensive.  And it's still a, a, a very, very solid piece of work that anyone interested in his really fascinating life.  This is, this is an extraordinary man, needs to, you know, touch base with that document because he, he had so many dimensions and was--I don't know where he got all the energy.  He was married to three African-American women at different times.  All three of them were Southern African-American women, and all three of them were named Elizabeth (laughter), which is--I, I have no explanation for why he made those choices, but that's just an objective fact.  He, he found time to write articles for newspapers to lecture broadly around the country, to--he served as a president of the American Negro Academy for several years.  He was actually an advisor on [Marcus] Garvey's--used to write for Garvey's newspaper from time to time.  He consulted with everybody, every scholar who was doing work.  People ranging from [W.E.B.]Du Bois to [Carter] Woodson would consult with him on bibliographic issues.
Speaker 1: And, and he often was incited--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Often was incited--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and he actually did have a, a falling out with Woodson because he, 'cause Woodson did not at least acknowledge the contribution he had made to a couple of the books that he had done--but an extraordinary man.  And again, he was not rich.  His full-time job until he retired after selling the collection to the library was as head of the mailroom at Banker's Trust Bank, and so in, in, in economic terms, a very, you know, modest--made a very modest living but was committed fully to carrying out this mission of telling the truth about the black experience.  And he was involved very intimately with the Harman Foundation and doing that annual series of exhibitions of work by African-American artists.  He, himself, was a patron to several artists whose--would fall on hard economic times, and he'd be sending them checks to try to get them through.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Claude McKay was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Claude McKay was a--very, very dependent on Mr. Schomburg for a lot of the background for--of a lot of the work that he did.  He had very, very close ties with most of the major figures of the Harlem Renaissance, so fascinating, fascinating man.
Story_ID: 95113
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I was asking you off camera who some of the directors were, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, [Arthur] Schomburg was the curator of the Schomburg Collection, which was in the Division of Negro History Literature and Prints.  The head of the branch library at the time was a woman by the name of Ernestine Rose, a rather fascinating lady.  She was the one who realized that the branch was not positioned to service the majority black population that was here.  And so she asked Mr. Schomburg to head up this committee of leading citizens to recommend a strategy for serving the community better.  And their recommendation was that they establish something called the Division of Negro History Literature in Prints.  The group actually met in December of '24' [1924], and the division was established in May of '25 [1925].  And then Mr. Schomburg's personal collection was acquired by the library in May of '26 [1926].  But Ms. Rose was really a very, very fine library, who had worked with some of the European ethnic communities in other parts of the city, and brought that kind of sensitivity to her work here in Harlem, and was actually a major player in shaping the, the strategies and approaches to serving the African-American community that would--out of which the Schomburg Center would eventually evolve.  Mr. Schomburg, after his passing, fellow by the name of Lawrence D. Reddick.  And he presided over the, the then Schomburg Collection from about 1940 until--I'm trying to remember whether it was '46' [1946] or '48 [1948].  He had--very, very interesting man--a Ph.D. from the University of Chicago, very fine historian also, very fine librarian, who had a notion that the library should, in fact, be a proactive practice, involved in not just delivering books but also communicating with the public and providing opportunities for the public to study, learn about their, both their historical condition and their contemporary reality.  And so he put together a variety of those kinds of programs.  The library, a New York Public Library was kind of ambivalent about the appropriateness of that.  This was the, the time when the American Negro Theater was also in the basement auditorium of the Schomburg Center, and it outgrew the capacity of the New York Public Library to, to house it.  And so--but for during the period of the, the war years, 1940s, Mr. Reddick was--had a very vibrant programming agenda here, here at the, at the Schomburg, at, at once then the Schomburg Collection, and was very, very much involved in making the place--putting the place on the map as a national institution.  He ended up leaving.  There was an interim period when a woman by the name of Dorothy William served.  And she was eventually succeeded after something less than a year I believe by Jean Blackwell Hudson who was here for the better part of thirty-eight years.  She was succeeded by a gentleman by the name of Wendell Ray, who I think spent two years, and I was the person who succeeded him.
Story_ID: 95114
Speaker 1: Okay, when, when you got here you inherited a building project, made a building project, right?
Speaker 2: Well, the--when I arrived we had moved into the, this red brick building, which is our (unclear) call our main headquarters.  In the original building where the Schomburg Center had started was, in fact, standing vacant, and funds had been permitted by the city to renovate the building.  But when I arrived the plans were to create an art museum there.  We have a really extraordinary art collection, and people felt that it was a good opportunity to showcase that collection in some different kinds of ways.  I traced back the history of the evolution of this idea, and it's actually emerged during the 1960s.  And at that time, the Studio Museum had not been established.  And so as I looked at it, it didn't make sense to me to create another African American art museum ten blocks from the Studio Museum.  But more importantly, the red brick building had been constructed primarily as an environment for managing the general research and reference collections and the manuscripts, archives, and rare books collections.  We had collections of photographs and prints.  We had collections of artwork, and we had film, videotape, and sound recording that didn't have the proper home for the management of those collections.  And so rather than constructing a new art museum, I did an assessment of what our space needs were for our then existing programs, and determined we should commit a significant part of the space to organizing those divisions.  They did not exist as divisions at, at the time.  They were--not even sure what they're--how they're referred to, but I determined that we should, in fact, have five divisions in the center.  I think they actually used the term section.  It was a general research and reference section in the manuscripts, archives, and rare books section.  And I upgraded the whole thing to the status of divisions and added the three divisions: Division of Photographs and Prints, Division of Art and Artifacts, and the Division of Moving Image and Recorded Sound, and found in the, the renovated and new construction space, new facilities for each of those.
Story_ID: 95115
Speaker 1: One of the problems that I faced though which could not find a solution in the original building was the problem of an auditorium space.  We had been doing public programs in the, in the library dating back to [Arthur] Schomburg's time.  And with the construction of the new red brick building, the only places that we could do public programs were in the reading rooms, which meant that you couldn't do any public programs except after the library closed.  And the library was open three days a week until 8:00, which meant you were down to three days a week when you could possibly do something for six on.  And the--even with that, the program, the audiences for programs that I've grown the capacities of the rooms, you could get about 150, 200 people in those reading rooms.  You got over that you simply couldn't accommodate them.  When the red brick building was constructed, there was actually an outdoor amphitheater constructed at the rear of the building between the two, between the county (unclear) and the red brick, and it never really quite worked.  It had a block of concrete set in the middle of it that was defined as the stage and was a solid block of concrete.  And then there were these crossties kind of in a grated way so that you were supposed to sit on the crossties and check it out.  And it had been used during the summers, but as soon as the summer was over basically it was a useless space.  And so my proposal was that we basically throw that amphitheater away and build a covered space on that lot that--and the, the original conception of it was quite simple 'cause the  budgetary situation didn't allow us to think too expansively.  We were gonna have a flat floor with a raised stage, and a flat floor so that you could put flat chairs and, and a raised stage.  And that was basically going to be it; that was about all our budget would allow.  Well, we started looking for some additional funding, 'cause even with that, we were beyond the initial $3 million dollars that the city--$3.4 million dollars that the city had committed for renovating the original building.  And so we looked for some alternative sources and ended up stumbling upon Joseph E. Seagram and Son.  Seagram coughed up a million bucks and had the--were told that they would have a naming opportunity of the space for their million dollar gift.  Seagram's actually wanted to put the Seagram name on the space.  I prevailed upon them, I suggested to 'em that that would not be appropriate.  And they said well, well, why, why?  Well, you know, our children will be coming here for programs.  They'll be programs of churches and religious groups, etc., and it just isn't appropriate to have the "Seagram" name on the space in that way.  And we ended up settling on naming it the Langston Hughes Auditorium, made possible by Joseph and Sea--Joseph E. Seagram and Son.  And they were able to agree to that in principle and--rather the, the, the, the, the good news was that Seagram's, in addition to sending their million dollars, also sent in their interior designer.  And their position was they had to make sure that the space that had their name on it measured up to their standards.  Well, that was a license for me (laughter) because I said yes, we, we, we--I would like that.
Story_ID: 95116
Speaker 1: And we kind of went from this flat floor with a raised stage to ultimately developing this full-fledged theater space that now has 340 seats, full lighting sound system, fly loft, and provide--gives us the ability to produce virtually every kind of program you can imagine, dance, theater, film, screenings, musical concerts, lectures forums, the whole gamut.  And we not only were able to get their kind of support in building the physical infrastructure of the place, but the aesthetic, you know, character of the place is reflective of their input as well.  And we're going--let's see, it opened in April of, April of 1991 I believe, so it's going on 12 years old.  It's 12 years old this month.  And right now it looks like it's, you know, at most a year, year and a half old, because we've been able to maintain it and, and--but it goes back to the quality of the initial design and, and structure of it, that one of the best theater spaces in the, in the city in terms of its acoustics, and no bad seats because there are no bad sightlines anywhere in the space, and it's a very intimate space.  Artists who come to perform there, establish a rapport with the audience almost immediately.  And virtually every audi--artists that's come and performed there once to a live audience has wanted to come back again and again.  So we were able to do the auditorium.  We put the Moving Image and Recorded Sound Division on the top floor of the original building.  We put the Art and Artifacts Division on the second floor of that original building.  We put in a exhibit hall which we had not had previously on the main floor, as well as a gift shop, renovated the, all the American Negro Theater space, which only seats about 75 or 80 people, but it's still the multiuse space or us.  And we, at the time, put the Photographs and Prints Division in the, the basement area below the theater.  We've subsequently moved it to the third floor of the red brick building.  But I was able to, in terms of rethinking the renovation and expansion program that I inherited when I came in, was able to address many of our both space needs and programmatic needs that had gone largely un, unaddressed prior to that time.
Story_ID: 95117
Speaker 1: Okay, now there have been--well, this--quite a few highlights to, you know, your activity since you've been here.  I mean I, I don't know where to start, but there, you know, the, the slave burial ground, the acquisition of the Malcolm X papers.  I mean there, there are some other things.  You wanna give us maybe four, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --some--
Speaker 2: That, that's very, very difficult because I like--we--I went back and we started working on a draft of a 15-year report several years ago, and I got tired (laughter), and, and frankly, at one level, amazed at the, the range of things that we had in fact accomplished in a relatively short period of time.  I'd say the things that I'm most pleased with and impressed with, probably three or four: one, collections have more than doubled in the course that basically the 19 years or so that I've been here we've acquired major collections of individuals and organizations that run the gamut from Ralph Bunch and John Henrik Clarke to Lorraine Hansberry and the recently acquired Malcolm X Collection, just huge major collections of materials on significant figures and organizations and movements in the African and African Diaspora and world.  Some of those collection stories are in, in and of themselves kind of, kind of wonderful.  I have two that I'll share with you: one, there is a building here on Sugar Hill called 409 Edgecombe.  And during the thirties [1930s] and forties [1940s] it was one of the premier residences of the black elite in Harlem, and everybody stayed there.  The boys stayed there.  Everybody stayed there.  Well, the building decided to go, go co-op.  And among the things they were doing in preparation for this was to clear out what they called the Trunk Room.  Well, a friend of mine lived in the building, and the management people had put up a notice that all the trunks had to be cleared out by such and such a date, and that after that date they were all gonna be thrown in the dumpster.  She calls and says the, the deadline is up, you know, like tomorrow, and there are still a bunch of trunks down there, and some interesting names on are on them, and you might want to take a look at them.  Well, we went up and negotiated with the management and got permission to basically do two, two, two things: to delay the, you know, the arrival of the dumpster for a day while we had a chance to take a look at what was there.  And in exchange for us paying for the dumpster and any costs associated with eventually moving all the stuff out, we would have permission to secure the contents of whatever was there that we decide was historically significant.  Well, it turned out there was a little of everything in the trunks.  Aaron Douglas's correspondence with his wife, such a huge body of correspondence that been left in the trunk.  There were World War I uniforms that were left in the trunks.  There was a manuscript of Walter White's I believe of a novel that he had written, unpublished, that was in the trunks, and it just went on and on and on, huge cache of stuff that we were able to rescue and preserve and currently make available to the public.
Story_ID: 95118
Speaker 1: The second story is equally fascinating one.  One of the leading figures in the negritude movement during the thirties [1930s] was a fellow by the name of Leon Damas, Guyanese intellectual who was studying in France and met [Leopold Sedar] Senghor and a number of other folk, and they kind of fashioned this concept of negritude.  Well, Damas eventually ended up at Howard University and was living in Washington, D.C., and after a rather long tenure there, decided he would--he was working on a project on the black Brazilian experience.  And so he decided to go to Brazil and spend some time there doing research.  Prior to leaving, he put all of his stuff in storage, and he goes down to, to Brazil and eventually dies in Brazil.  His wife, turns out was a friend of a friend of mine who lived in Brazil, Abdias do Nascimento and his wife.  And they started getting these notices about the stuff that was in storage.  And the final one that came said basically that the warehouse was shutting down, and they had about four or five days to clear all the stuff out of the warehouse otherwise it was gonna be trashed.  The friend suggested that she call me from, from Rio [de Janeiro].  She called and explained what the situation was.  I said to her that if they will basically donate the collection to the center, we would pay for the arrearages in storage, in storage fees, and we'll provide for the transportation, physical transportation.  They agreed to that, and the Leon Damas Collection ends up here at the Schomburg Center.  There are a few thousand other stories like that of material that was at risk in various kinds of ways that we've been able through a variety of strategies to preserve and make available to the public.  And that's probably one of the most exciting things about this job, that we do have those successes.  One of the most painful things about the job is that we're also aware of how many times things do, in fact, get lost or destroyed, and we're not able to ensure their preservation.  But we're, we're pleased with what we've been able to achieve thus far.  So, that's the, the building of the collections is one of the, the, the things I think I'm, I'm proudest of--
Story_ID: 95119
Speaker 1: The second is that we've had tremendous amount of suc--success with our education and cultural programming and over and above the annual things, the 30, 40, 50 programs, sometimes 75 or 100 that we do each year.  In our space here we've had some rather significant if you will signature events that we've produced in other larger venues.  We did a tribute to Paul Robeson when Paul, when Robeson still was considered someone persona non grata in the United States.  We did a major tribute down at the Shubert Theater that brought together a huge cast to celebrate the life and times of this, you know, truly remarkable human being.  We did similar kinds of tribute programs for Lorraine Hansberry, and I think there were two or three others.  We did an 80th birthday tribute to Ella Fitzgerald at Carnegie Hall.  And we were actually--she was not able to attend 'cause she was, was not very well at all by that time.  But we were able to get a film of that program to her prior to her eventual passing, and it was a spectacular program.  The Duke Ellington Orchestra was on the bill, was hosted by Harry Belafonte [HM] and, and Maya Angelou [HM] and, and (unclear) everyone from Nancy Wilson [HM] to--I'm not even sure now, but a little of everybody appeared on the program.  It was a wonderful, absolutely wonderful concert, which we were able to do.  So we've been able to do some of those kinds of things.  The most recent one was the production of "Nativity, a Life Story," which we did here in our 340-seat auditorium for about three years.  And we took it to Riverside Church two years ago and sold out of Riverside Church before we even started advertising.  And so we decided to take it to a larger venue, a place up Broadway on 175th, 178th and Broadway called the United Palace.  It's Reverend Ike's church, but it's also the largest--third largest performance venue in the city, with over 3500 seats.  And last December we sold out three shows in two days, a Friday night, a Saturday matinee, and a Sunday--a Saturday evening.  And people came from as far away as Connecticut, and Baltimore [Maryland], and Washington [D.C.] by the busloads to come to this show.  So we've been able to, you know, constantly upgrade the quality and scope of our programming, the same with our exhibitions, which are, you know, been going very well.
Story_ID: 95120
Speaker 1: And I'd say finally, the two scholars programs that I'm especially proud of, one is our Scholar and Residence Program, which is now in its 17th year, provides opportunities for individuals who are doing major works of scholarship on black history and culture to come and spend six months to a year in residence here, using the collections here to produce new works of scholarship, and of which 90 people have been through that program with funding from the center.  It used to be a $15,000 dollar stipend for six months and 30,000 for a year.  It's now 25 for six months and 50 for a year.  And people have been doing--turning out some very, very fine, fine work.  So that's been sustained.  And two years ago--like I said, it's a year ago now we launched a New York Life Schomburg Center Junior Scholars Program, which is a Saturday school for young people in the 11 to 17-year range this year.  Last year we did a hundred students.  This year we have a hundred and fifty.  And they're getting core curriculum in African American African Diaspora in history.  Every Saturday they come for a distinguished lecturer, presenter.  And they also spend time with blacks who have successful in entrepreneurial and intellectual careers that require entrepreneurial and intellectual skills.  And they just did a session yesterday, actually, with Rush Communications, went down to Russell Simmons' business and got kind of taken through that.  They were last Saturday or Saturday a week ago with the chairman of the board of Moody's, Clifford Alexander, and in conversation with him about just a variety of issues.  So they--and I, I've, I've seen them, you know, in both elevate their expectations of themselves and affirm a principle that we are committed to, which is promoting excellence among young folk, which, you know, there is a very serious kind of almost countercultural trend among black young people to not pursue academic excellence because somehow or another that's perceived as being, becoming white.  Well, this is a peer group of folk who are all bright, and who, in some respects, create a kind of countercultural group that affirms the principle in academic excellence, and are able to go back to their schools each week and pursue that and come back knowing that we nurtured in this environment with, with us.  I don't know, there, there are few hundred other things that are equally exciting to me.  I mean, I mean I've, I consciously do an exhibit about once every year or two for the sole purpose of being able to rummage through the collections.  And every--I never fail to stumble upon just something quite remarkable.  And that's one of the wonderful things about this place, that there's still so much here that has not been "fully appreciated and discovered."
Story_ID: 95296
Speaker 1: I, I periodically, every year, year and a half, two years actually work on curating an exhibition for the express purpose of giving me an excuse to go through the collections and look at stuff and some different--I never cease to be amazed at the stuff that we turn up.  We were working on a show on--called "Africana Age."  It's on the global black experience in the 20th century.  And I'm rummaging through collection looking for things that might be appropriate for that show.  And I stumbled upon a sheet of stamps from the 1936 Olympics, commemorative stamps.  And this particular sheet, all the African American track and field athletes like Jesse Owens, etc., had all signed the sheet.  Guess who else's signature was on it?
Speaker 2: Who? [Adolf] Hitler (unclear).  And I looked and--(unclear)--(unclear)--I was going like oh my god (laughter), you believe this!  But it, it, it--any, on any given day you can go into the collections and turn up something that's absolutely, absolutely amazing.  And the, the, the--it's amazing because, I mean one of the things, the underappreciated things, is the extraordinary character of the African-American experience, not just in the United States, but you know, the African-American experience I the United States, but the, the black experience globally it's just the--some of the stuff you can't make up.  No amount of fiction can begin to match, you know, the lived experiences, the lived day-to-day experiences of, of people of African descent, both the ordinary people and--well, actually there aren't too many ordinary people in the African-American community.  All of them are extraordinary.  And then you have the extra-extraordinary (laughter) people.  But to, to even--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --cope with this stuff in the United States, specifically, it takes something more than ordinary people to, to, to just deal with it.
Speaker 1: You're right, you never know who you're talking to in situations on the street, just regular (unclear)--Matthew Hensley used to sit in the park over here I think and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --nobody knew he was, had been to the North Pole.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  And just a lot of folk who they do what they do, and they leave their footprints.  Our responsibility is to make sure those footprints are not lost and that those who choose a similar path can go down those paths that they've already, you know, traversed, learn from their mistakes, and learn from their triumphs.  I'm, I'm not particularly partisan to the idea that you have to convince people, and especially young people, that a person is a "hero" to be worthy of having their life studied.  You learn more from people by--you learn more about human existence by studying people's flaws, and at times their failures, than you learn from studying their successes.  Successes come out, out, out of a particular context.  And if you don't have the right context, success can't happen frequently.  But with the kinds of way in which people basically engage life and struggle with life and its, in all of its ramifications, and succeed some time and fail at other times, that's the real stuff of human existence, and that's what people need to have access to and, and creating these pristine heroes who have never erred, never had a flaw, have always been perfect does us ultimately a, a great disservice I think.
Story_ID: 95297
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about one, I guess, heroic episode in your life, and at least it was, it certainly seemed to be so by many, was the acquisition the Malcolm X Papers, where you took the initiative and did some things, some extraordinary things.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was sitting in the office one day, and I get a phone call from a friend of mine, colleague, named Abdul Alkalimat, some will know him as Gerarld McWorter.  Abdul calls and he says, have you been on the Internet today?  I said no.  He said well, you have been on the eBay site?  I said no.  He said well, turn on your computer.  I turned it on.  He says they got all this Malcolm stuff up here, and it, it, it looks like it's real.  Let me, let me get you to the site.  So we--he helps me to get to the site, and we, we're sitting there looking at it jointly.  And the closer we look, the closer I'm convinced that it's real stuff, and it's been posted on the eBay site for auction, to be scheduled to be auctioned I believe in March of last year.  It had been organized into a series of lots, and bids were being taken on each of the lots.  So, basically, I think there may have been 30 or 40 lots.  I don't remember the exact number.  But each lot was to be bid individually.  And basically, the collection was to be scattered to the four winds.  Well, the collection had ended up on eBay because one of the daughters of Malcolm X had moved out of the family house and had taken all of the stuff that was in the house with her to Florida, had put it in storage, and for whatever reason had not paid the storage bill.  And failure to pay the storage bill results in basically the storage house having the right to claim the contents of the storage bin.  So the storage house claimed the contents and then put it up for auction, because all they were interested in was getting back their lost rents.  A fellow basically buys the lot for some ridiculously low amount of money and apparently then discovers what it is that he has.  They, they actually--he actually was selling stuff at flea markets around, in Florida for a period of time.  And--but he eventually decided to take it out to California to Butterfields, and Butterfields was the one to put it up on, at auction.
Speaker 1: But some of it got away.
Speaker 2: Some of it did get away.  We don't know how much.  We don't, don't really have a clue.  But the bulk of the stuff it appears ended up in this, in, in this auction site.  Well, the family actually had not, did not realize that this stuff had been removed from the house.  The other daughters didn't realize it'd been removed from the house.  And when they found out, they were devastated.  And basically, they committed themselves to retrieving the family legacy, the family--the papers belonged to the family.  They did not belong to any of the--to either of the daughters, so neither of, the one who moved it didn't have the right to do it without the permission of the others 'cause it was all part of the family estate.  And they initiated a series of legal actions to: a) prevent the sale, and then eventually to negotiate the return of the collection to the, to the family.  There were a lot of colleges and universities and others who were approaching Butterfields with, with bids to purchase the whole thing.  And the family position basically was that the family legacy was not for sale.  And so they were able to get the collection back.  And I'd had a very strong working relationship with Sister Betty Shabazz on some of the Malcolm X memorial sites, the Audubon Ballroom and some of the other projects, and we had known each other for, for many years, and had also come to know at least two of the daughters and was familiar with, with, you know, several of the others.  And basically, the daughters took the position that once the family retrieved the family property they wanted the collection to be deposited at the Schomburg Center.
Story_ID: 95298
Speaker 1: And so we worked with them and their lawyers all the way through this process to ensure that the collection was returned to the family and then the family entered into an agreement with us to protect and preserve the collection for a period of 75 years.  And that's the situation we're operating under now.  We are currently in the midst of completing the inventory of the collection.  It will be processed immediately after that.  And it's our hope that we'll be able to open it to the public by July of 2004.  We will do a major exhibition based on the collection and some of the other resources that we have here at the center on Malcolm X in May of 2004, in conjunction with his, with his birthday.  And--but it's then one of, certainly one of the highlights of, of my tenure here, because (unclear) it was such a long that took the better part of--the negotiations went on until, well, from March until January.  So it was a fairly sustained period of negotiations and work, but it all, all ultimately is paid off.  And the good news is it, it, that it's, that it's protected one, one of the--I've recounted several other stories where things were left in stories and things were rescued.  It's one of the greatest threats to our preservation activities, is that people put stuff in storage.  They don't tell anybody where they put it.  They don't leave keys.  They don't tell people what's in it.  And if anything happens to them, there is no way of claiming it, and--
Speaker 2: And eventually something will happen to them.
Speaker 1: And event--I mean what, what would have happened if the person who basically bid at auc--auction on the, the contents of this storage locker?  What would have happened if there'd been no bid was is the storage house would have basically said that it had--was not able to recoup its lost rents, and the stuff would have been thrown in the trash.  And it happens every day.  And so there is a need, certainly within the African-American community, to be much more vigilant about what it is that's being store, be it personal or organizational, if it has something to do with the African-American experience.  What's being store by whom, and is does anyone else know what's there and what's, what its significance is so that it could be protected in the event something happens to you.  And it's just a message we need to get out to churches, to schools, to organizations.  Organizations do the same thing.  They put their--they clear out their file cabinets, and they put the contents of the file cabinets in some boxes in storage somewhere.  There's a change in leadership, and nobody knows that it's in the storage, and it's gone, gone forever.  So it's, it's, it's one of the great banes of existence, in hope that there's some way that people will learn from the Malcolm X experience and some of the others how important it is to preserve the records of our, our own history and our heritage.
Story_ID: 95299
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play a role in the African, you know, the burial ground activity?
Speaker 2: Oh God, when the burial ground was discovered, or rediscovered I guess is the term, Mayor David Dinkins [HM] was in office.  And he asked me to head up a mayor's committee on the burial ground to advise him on actions that he should take.  I was in the midst of doing that when the General Services Administration determined that the only way for it to take community advice and input on the handling of the burial ground was if there were, in fact, established something they call a federal steering committee.  And so a federal steering committee was established, and I ended up being made chairman of it.  Our specific mandate was to put together a report that would outline the various phases, facets of memorialization activities when a historic site such as the burial ground is disrupted by a construction project.  There is a whole mitigation process that they have to go through, and among them, as it turned out, were these memorialization activities.  We completed our report on time, submitted it to GSA, and it has functioned in some respects as a guide to the memorialization activities, but it's taken forever to get them implemented.  There were a series of memorial art projects.  Those have, in fact, I think just all, just about all of them have been completed.  There's a, a memorial monument that's supposed to go on the ground while they select the five finalists for that, but the actual construction, the final--the, the winning entry hasn't been selected yet, and that's still to be completed.  There was to be an interpretive center in the, the building.  The interpretive center, there was a competition for the contract to do that.  A, a group won the contract, but it can't complete its work until the research work is completed at Howard University, and that's in process right now.  So when that's completed, then the interpretive center piece can be done.  I--there was to propose that there be a memorial, an African burial ground museum.  GSA decided not to engage that at all, but it's something that the burial president and others in the city are seriously interested in trying to, to advance.  I was recently contacted by GSA to basically produce the reinterment ceremony that's to bring the 400 plus remains that were in, at Howard University, then the subject of this major study to bring them back and reinter them in the burial ground site.  And the Schomburg Center will likely be the producer of that series of events, about four days of events beginning in Washington, D.C., and coming up through the major urban centers in each of the states between here and Washington, and culminating in a reinterment tribute and commemorative ceremony to take place in Foley Square on Saturday, October 4th.  And we're just beginning to do the planning preparation for that.  So, have I been in the burial ground?  Yes (laughter).  Am I still in the burial ground?  Probably (laughter).  Am I going to be buried by the burial ground (laughter), in the burial ground?  I don't know.  There are times, times when I wonder (laughter), because we just had so many difficulties trying to move this what seem are, are to me very simple things along keep getting caught in all kinds of bureaucracy and craziness that does not do either justice or honor to the site or to the, the people who are interred there.  And I have, as a, a matter of practice, I stay out of this.  If--I only have X amount of time on this earth, and I choose to use my time productively.  And nine times out of ten, if I see something, a, a mess developing around something, I walk away and find something that's more productive that I can do.  I've stayed with this because of the sense of responsibility that I have to the ancestors who are buried there.  And but for the fact that it's ultimately them and their legacy that I have this commitment to, I wouldn't be doing--I would've walked away from the burial ground years ago.  But I don't have the right to do that because they didn't walk away from us.  They didn't.  They left us a very important foundation on which to build.  And we have a right and obligation to protect, defend, and honor their legacy.  And so I stay in there trying to do that.
Story_ID: 95300
Speaker 1: This is a question we always ask: Sir, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community to, today?
Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns.  My concerns are probably three-fold.  The first one is that this is the first, well, really basically since the 1970s, it's the first time that black folk have been--living in the United States, have not had a clearly defined, shared political agenda.  Every previous generation has divergences on, you know, in terms of method and that kind of thing, but basically shared political agenda that the vast majority of African-American people bought into.  Clearly, in slavery the agenda is to get out of slavery.  In the early stages of what we call the Civil Rights Movement, which actually starts with the free black population during the, the period of slavery, the agenda is very clear to basically secure the rights that all Americans enjoy, the freedom, and justice, and human dignity.  What was in fact a, a minority agenda during the period of slavery, becomes the majority agenda for black folk in the post-slavery period and right on down through the modern Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s.  That is our core agenda.  And again, there are all kinds of variations on, on the theme, but to secure these rights kind of at, at the center of it.  After the 1970s, well, the Civil Rights Movement, in, in my judgment, its success rested on what we were against, less than what we were for.  And we were against racial segregation in the United States as a, a kind of ultimate violation of the human rights and dignity of all black folk.  And so we united around a movement to dismantle those structures of racial segregation.  But once they are down, what is it that we want?  What is, what is our vision of a healthy, sane, humane future for ourselves and for American society?  And if we don't have a vision, not only for ourselves, but for the society as a whole, then we're simply kind of pawns; we're playing in somebody else's game.  And so, if I have a concern, it's that we first of all muster the courage to assume that we have the right to define the direction of the whole society, 'cause other people have been defining it for us, and it has not served our best interest.  And if we're not prepared to take the responsibility ourselves, others will continue to define it for us, and we'll continue to be on the short end of the stick.  So, that's, that's my first concern, how, how do we begin to build within ourselves a genuine belief that we have the right, we have the authority to provide moral, ethical, political, and social leadership, not only for the black community, but for the society as a whole.  And if we don't believe we have the right to do that, you know, then we, we're, we're, we're, we're jiving, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're not serious at all.  If we believe that we have the right to do that, then the second task is to prepare ourselves for that kind of leadership role.  I mean you can't go out here (Laughter), you know, copying your, your, your moral and ethical thing and not know, not, not only not know where you're going, but not even know how to understand the world that you're in so you can even conceptualize changing it.  It's a combination of vision, knowledge, and preparedness that I find, in my judgment, lacking as a collective piece for, for us as a people.
Story_ID: 95301
Speaker 1: We have some very, very, very bright folk.  We probably have the most--no, it's not even a question of probably.  We have the most educated African-American community in the history of the African-American community.  We have the most economically empowered African-American community in the history of the African-American community.  The question is what are we doing with it?  The, our forebears who came here with nothing, not even ownership of themselves, figured out in the midst of slavery how to both transform themselves into a new people and envision a different kind of world for themselves and for the society.  'Cause they were about, you know, undermining the whole institution of slavery, so that's envisioning a different America from the one that America had put, had put in place--in the midst of slavery with no college education, no (laughter)--they figured out how to do all that.  What the hell are we doing with, with all that we have?  And a friend of mine--not even a friend, a mentor, C. L. R. James used to say that if it's a problem, it has a solution; if it has no solution, it's not a problem, it's something else (laughter).  We got a bunch of problems here that have solutions.  Are we preparing ourselves to solve them in order to both advance our own human development and ultimately to advance the human development of all of human kind?  We have the fortune or misfortune of living in the midst of the most powerful nation in the world, the most powerful nation in the history of the world.  What do we choose to do with that power?  What does the nation choose to do with that power?  Do we have the moral right to give some direction to the use of that power?  And how do we organize and mobilize ourselves in order to do that, if we believe we do?  I think the greatest threat that we face is we are becoming more American than we ever imagined we could.  But we're becoming the Americans that the society has been creating over and over again, rather than fashioning our own concept of America based on our own understanding of it and its history.  We are simply kind of embracing that which the society says, rather than positioning ourselves as a critical opposition to the path the society has, has chosen to go down.  And you can't struggle with something that you don't disagree with.  So developing a, a critical consciousness that's based and rooted in our particular history, in our particular position in this society is crucial to our ability to even know what we struggle, what we are for, and what we're against--big time challenges I think facing, facing us as we move into the future.  But as I said, it's still just a problem, and it's a problem that has a solution.  We should have the capacity to solve it.
Story_ID: 94695
Speaker 1: Sir, at this stage, and you're still fairly young, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I'd say are my two kids.  I've a beautiful daughter who's very bright and is still kind of finding her way.  But her sense of self and being like her brother's, as much as they tried to fight it, very much rooted in the kind of social consciousness and kind of political vision that both their mother and I embody.  And so they in some respects will be building on, taking what I've been able to impart and building on that.  And both are in, in media related things that are finding ways of grabbing a whole of that incredible tool and placing it at the service of, of our people in some different, some new and exciting ways.  So my daughter and my son, Elise (ph.) and David, I'd say are my most important legacies.  I'd say that this, this institution, which is (unclear) begun to gain the kind of national and international recognition and stature that it deserves is at least in part or a product of the--my tenure here.  And as long as it survives, thrives, and serves, I'll continue to consider that a part of my, my legacy; I think probably, finally, that I would hope there's something in my own life, in the way that I've chosen to lead it, to live it, to be it, there are some things in it that will serve others beyond my family, beyond even my friends and associates, that the things that I've come to know in these almost 64 years that I'll find ways of passing that knowledge on to, to others, that they might learn from my and our, my individual and our collective lived experiences and continue to fight for the quality of life and well-being that our ancestors started more than 400 years ago.
Story_ID: 94696
Speaker 1: Sir, this is slightly different, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: More than anything else, that I would be known as an African-American human being of--I hope people recognize, realize that I'm a person of many dimensions.  I resent being pigeon-holed.  I think one of the great tragedies, certainly of this society, but I think it's pretty widespread now, keep trying to reduce the human being to almost a single commodity, you know, that you are a doctor, or you are a college professor, or you are a businessman, or you are this, that, the other.  I used to fight with my, a lot of my nationalists friends, or, and, and my political friends generally, 'cause one group wanted me to declare myself a Communist, and the other wanted to declare myself a Marxist, and another wants me to declare myself a Nationalist.  Well, those are things that I do.  I do teach from time to time.  I do practice history from time to time.  I do, I am a reasonably good administrator, and I do that from time to time.  But I also parent, and I love, and I, I cook, and I love good food, and I love wonderful music, and I, all that is me, all of that is me.  I'm, I'm no, not, no one of those things, no one of those beings.  I'm all of those beings, and I hope to be more as I continue to grow and mature.  They say we only use about 25 percent of our brain on average.  Well, I wanna use more than that, and I hope I have been using more than that.  I don't know that I have, but that's an aspiration that I have.  And in using it, I--the more I use it, the more capacity I have to discover more aspects and dimensions of myself that are part of me but have not yet made them, themselves, if you will, manifest.  All that is to say that I'm committed to living life to the fullest and encouraging every other human being to not be imprisoned by any single concept or notion that they have of themselves, or that society has of them, or that any one individual has of them.  Dig deep inside self, discover the multiple dimensions of self, and live the multiple dimensions of your life as a human being.  We only have a little bit of time here.  That's all life is, is a little bit of time.  And the questions is what do you do with the time that you're given?  And I just would hope that people will know that I have been seeking to be a person who lived as much of the life that was given to them as possible.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
