Story_ID: 531650
Speaker 1: Good afternoon, sir.  Thank you for participating with The HistoryMakers.  My name is Shawn Wilson.  I will be the interviewer and behind me, you've met Neculai Burghelea, is the videographer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we will have you state your name, your complete name.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your birth name and spell it out for us.
Speaker 2: Herbert Daniel Daughtry [HistoryMaker Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry].  Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T and Daniel, D-A-N-I-E-L, Daughtry, D as in David, A-U-G-H-T-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 19th, 2006.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is The House of the Lord Church, where all roads lead to, 415 Atlantic Avenue in Boerum Hill [Brooklyn, New York] as it is called.  It is also in the area of the downtown Brooklyn [New York] area.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a minister of this church.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: January 13th, 1931.
Speaker 1: Capricorn.
Speaker 2: That's right, yep.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia.  Yeah, Savannah, Georgia.
Story_ID: 531651
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with the five questions that I talked about.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food, Reverend Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry]?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food?  I've been a vegetarian for about twenty years, so I think spinach might be, oddly enough.  My favorite food is spinach and beans.
Speaker 1: Well, what are you doing about--you know that we're in that spinach crises at the moment.  They're asking people not to eat spinach.
Speaker 2: Suffering (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's a good question, about around this time, the fall of the year; the, the autumn when the leaves begin to fall and the color begin to bedeck the countryside.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And, lastly, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying.  That's, that's a good question.  What is my favorite saying?  What is my favorite saying?  People have told me I have a favorite saying, too.  "I'm still ahead of the posse." (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 531652
Speaker 1: So as I explained, we'll start with your family tree.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And to keep it separate and to keep some chron- chronological order to it, we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, your mother's full name, your mother's place of birth, date of birth.
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Emmie, Emmie Cheatham [Emmie Cheatham Williams].  Of course, she became Daughtry.  She was born in Rocky Ford; that's in Georgia.  The exact date, I must confess, I don't have it in my fingertips.  She--I remember my grandmother and grandfather on--my maternal, her mother and father, their, their date of birth and their place of birth I don't know.
Speaker 1: What were their names?  Your grandmother's name.
Speaker 2: Henrietta, Henrietta Cheatham [ph.] and Clair Cheatham [ph.], the names of my grandmother and grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know them? Your grand--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.  I lived with them in Savannah, Georgia, which is where I was born and spent the early years back and forward between Savannah and Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now, you said your date of birth was 1931.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So your mother's would have been at least 1910? She's about--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or did she have you when she was young?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'm the fourth boy, so she would be around--I think around 1900.  As I remember, my, my father [Alonzo Daughtry] is about 1896, so you would figure she'd be around the same age.
Speaker 1: So, her parents were born then in the mid-1800s--
Speaker 2: I would--
Speaker 1: Or the late 1800s.
Speaker 2: I would think so, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know of anybody in the family on your mother's side that had been born into slavery?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Any stories ever trickle down about people, legends in the family of people who were involved with as abolitionists during, during or, you know, right after slavery (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--no, not on my--on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 531653
Speaker 1: What was your mother's [Emmie Cheatham Williams] childhood like?  Has she ever said to you what her childhood was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She grew up in, in, in the South around Rocky Ford [Georgia].  She went to boarding school, I can't remember where.  But she grew up in the church, Methodist, very strict church background.
Speaker 1: Was it African Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.)]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just Methodist.
Speaker 2: Just Methodist.  And, and so that was about it as far as her childhood.  There's nothing outstanding about her childhood as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Did she grow up on a farm?  What did her parents [Henrietta Cheatham (ph.) and Clair Cheatham (ph.)] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was farm.
Speaker 1: Were they sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: They, they--it seemed as though they owned the farm.  My grandfather, I remember his being a farmer and having land in Savannah [Georgia] even, and doing a lot of farming work.  And, and then I remember the farm on my father's [Alonzo Daughtry] side, and I guess we'll get to that, but I remember in Cameron, Georgia, there was a large farm that we used to go to as kids.  So that would be about the best I can recollect of her early years.
Speaker 1: Now that they own the farm, do you know how they were able to purchase the land?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Did the land stay in the family?  Is it still in the family?
Speaker 2: It's not in the family anymore as far as I know, no.
Speaker 1: So your mother then, what is--let's talk about her life.  So, as a child, she grew up on a farm.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was she able to go to school?
Speaker 2: It seemed she went to boarding school, can't recall (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where--you said--
Speaker 2: --which boarding school.
Speaker 1: --boarding school but where, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they sent her off to boarding school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that that would be considered a kind of--kind of prestigious thing that they kids' parents, those who could send their kids to a boarding school or--and it may not have been all that far away, but it was a, a, a school at that time.  Going to school at that time would have been quite significant in a--in a structured school setting.
Speaker 1: How many siblings came--do you--did your mother have?
Speaker 2: My mother--six all--no, six all total.  There were five boys and one girl.
Speaker 1: She was the only girl?
Speaker 2: She--oh, I'm sorry.  I got--answered the question wrong.  She had siblings--as I can remember, she was the oldest and then there was one aunt, one brother, two as I can remember--well, three.  One was killed or died in Florida.  His name was--what was his name?  I think Clair [ph.].  I never saw him, just heard talk about him and that his daughter had come to live with us in Savannah, named Alberta [ph.].  And then it would be her sister and her, her, her baby brother were the two that I remember.
Speaker 1: So your grandparents on your, your--your maternal grandparents only had three children.
Speaker 2: That's--living as far as I can--
Speaker 1: Living, okay.
Speaker 2: --remember.
Speaker 1: Which is small because back at the time, a lot of African American families had a lot of children.
Speaker 2: You're right.  And I think--I think there were deaths in the family and I know of one, as I said, I--because my uncle, which would be her brother, was a kind of big time gambler in Florida so I was told by my oldest brother who went to live with him and influenced him significantly in terms of the lifestyle.  They had a lot of money and, and somehow he died mysteriously in what they call a car accident.  My oldest brother, Lonnie [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.], always was suspicious that it was more than--or something else beside just an accident.
Speaker 1: So your mother returned from boarding school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did she do with herself?
Speaker 2: She was a--she was an all, all-purpose kind of person.  She could do almost anything, but primarily seamstress.  You know, she knew how to sew and sewed a lot of our clothes and, and worked in, in a cleaners, sewing. But that seemed to have been her, her--she was very proficient.
Story_ID: 531654
Speaker 1: What lessons do you remember her [Daughtry's mother, Emmie Cheatham Williams] teaching you about life?
Speaker 2: The, the ab- the ability to--or to, to--either innate- innately or develop the ability to do a whole lot of different things, to function on different levels, but to able to pursue a particular objective with focus, right?  In a--in addition to that, she had the abil- she had people skills.  You know, she knew how to relate to people everywhere, whether it was where she worked or the people around her, they--I don't remember neighbors or church members having tensions with her, right, so there was a--there was the ability to, to, to get along with people which would be another lesson that I observed from her.  And I guess the capacity to--how shall I put it?  The capacity to absorb adversities.  You know, she, she went through quite a lot in her life and but never, never lost her cordiality, you know, her, her being nice (laughter) to people, I guess you would say, even when she was hurting, you know.  She, she didn't take it out on other people.  And so that, that would be another lesson, the, the, the capacity to absorb the devastating blows of life and, and keep on stepping.
Story_ID: 531655
Speaker 1: As a child, did you witness what you saw as a struggle for her in life or was it something as a kid you were oblivious to what she was going through?
Speaker 2: As, as I--as I kind of grew up some--see, my parents [Emmie Cheatham Williams and Alonzo Daughtry] separated; I never knew why and, and so all I remember in my earliest years is bouncing back and forward between Savannah, Georgia, and Augusta.  And to sort if I--to spill over to the father's side just for a moment--
Speaker 1: Well, we'll talk--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's go ahead (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I don't wanna get--
Speaker 1: --and talk about your father.
Speaker 2: --too, too far out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --away from that, but it, it--when my father decided to leave the family tradition, Father Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace], Bishop Grace sent him to Augusta, Georgia, about 1927, right, and so my mother went with him.  This created family tension because my [paternal] grandfather [William Van Daughtry] had been a minister and very prestigious guy and had sort of paved the way for his children, but for whatever reason, my dad followed Bishop Grace and was sent to Augusta, Georgia.  In Augusta, Georgia, where, where my earliest recollections were, somewhere my mother and father separated, and she came back to Savannah, right, and so I can remember going back and forward, Savannah, Augusta, and then it, it was like she was like alone.  She was, you know, 'cause my dad wasn't there, and for whatever reason, there was tension with my mom-in-law [sic. Daughtry's maternal grandmother, Henrietta Cheatham (ph.)].  She was a--she was a--she was a tiger, about a 5'2" tiger, (laughter) you know, and so the--so during those years, you know, I just discerned that something wasn't, wasn't what it ought to be, and then she moved northward.
Story_ID: 531656
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I'm assuming you spoke about the ministry that comes from your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yep, that's right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your father's name is?
Speaker 2: Alonzo Austin Daughtry and then--
Speaker 1: His date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date--about 1896.
Speaker 1: And his place of birth?
Speaker 2: Rocky Ford [Georgia], yeah, Rocky Ford, Georgia.  And--
Speaker 1: Let's just pause for a moment until the phone--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we'll pick it--and go back.  Okay, they got it already.  Continue--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: About Rocky Ford, he was born.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--that's where they were--they were born.  And, and he was the son of Reverend William Van Daughtry which would be my great-grandfather [sic. grandfather], and he was the presiding minister of the Methodist church in, in Savannah, Georgia, around what they--Screven's County [sic. Screven County, Georgia].  He, he pastored Asbury Methodist Church [Asbury Memorial United Methodist Church, Savannah, Georgia].  In fact, I was in Savannah some years ago and they still had his name recorded.  One of his contributions was that he helped to liquidate the mortgage of the church down there and so I said at least I hope my legacy will be equally as impressive.  I hope I can liquidate a mortgage (laughter) around here.  Still accumulating mortgages.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But that was William Van Daughtry.  And his father was--we called him Uncle Rob [Robert Daughtry].  I never met Uncle Rob but there's this history that he started out, too, in the slave days in and around Rocky Ford.  My--now, the farthest I can go is, is with my grandma, great-grandma who we had tracked from Carolina to Georgia because we wondered how did we get to Georgia?  So we were able to find grandma, Rob, Uncle Rob's mother and coming out of Carolina, and we, we kind of thought that maybe during the uprising there, you know, the Nat Turner uprising and all the trouble that was created around that situation, as W.E.B. Du Bois after that rebellion, they rolled, you know, so much legislation and opposing or opposed to religious gatherings, assemblages, et cetera.  So, but Uncle Rob was the preacher and then his son, Willian Van Daughtry, who is--the record becomes a little clearer now.  And then my father, Alonzo Daughtry, followed his footsteps.  The thing that I always was a--we wondered about in the family and, and I'm--I still don't have the answer, why did he leave the family tradition?  We were, I'm told, the, the, the middle class.  We were--in fact, my oldest brother used to tell me and, and quite interesting enough that when we would go to church, the, the members would separate us from the other children and they would--you know, they would say you can't sit, to them.  You're, you're Daughtry family. So the middle class--you know, they had that kind of class structure that these children were put on the side.  Isn't that interesting?  And, and so we were in that class because, again, my grandfather was the presiding minister, well known, prestigious, so now you would think that if my father were going to be a minister, he would surely follow that tradition.  But instead, for reasons that are still unclear to me, he became a follower of Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace].
Story_ID: 531657
Speaker 1: And who was Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bishop--you might better know him as "Sweet Daddy" Grace [Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace].  Okay, but he was Bishop Grace at that time, and for whatever it was, it attracted my father [Alonzo Daughtry].  Some people said, well, it was he--you know, the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer For All People] has this music, the beat, then the young people--and in the Methodist tradition, it was a staved, kind of stone-like tradition.  But whatever the reasons, he followed Bishop Grace and it didn't--it didn't sit well with the family and I think it was part of what generated the tension with my mom-in-law [sic. maternal grandmother, Henrietta Cheatham (ph.)].  You're now gonna take her daughter [Emmie Cheatham Williams] down on the sawdust trail and gonna reject this prestigious setting.  And then Bishop Grace sent him to Augusta, Georgia.  He became a minister and Bishop Grace sent him to Augusta, Georgia.  And because Bishop Grace had been run out of Augusta, he was keeping people up too long, white folks didn't like that, you know, so they kind of got him out of Augusta and he sent my dad back.  So my dad took a few little members that were in Augusta at the time and built the House of Prayer.  And then in time, my dad and Bishop Grace fell out because my dad was the first one to see that the Bishop was becoming Sweet Daddy and, and they had this confrontation in Augusta, Georgia, about 1928.  And my oldest brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] who was at the meeting when the confrontation took place told us that they had to crawl out on their hands and knees because the people who supported Bishop Grace wanted to fight because my dad was saying, you know, you can't worship anybody on earth.  You know, Jesus Christ is to be worshiped and Jesus only, and to try to confer these divine prerogatives on a human being is idolatry.  You know, Bishop Grace is not to be worshiped, and that generated an uproar.  And so my brothers, they crawled out--and then my dad started this church [The House of the Lord Church] in 19--it was incorporated in 1930 in Augusta, Georgia, and the church down there is still there; that's where he's buried, in the church yard. Grew and expanded so he began to travel to other cities.  And one of the cities to which he traveled was here in New York [New York], Brooklyn [New York].  And one of the things that happened, as you probably know, is that--what--the great migration period during the war years, people were leaving the South, particularly coming northward and starting these storefront churches because they couldn't afford regular church buildings.  So they started these storefronts and, and, and obviously, their whole lifestyle, their worship style required that their minister, spiritual leader, would be present.  Because when they'd get here, they started to obviously try to group together, and so the ministers would follow, and my dad was one of those who followed in 1941 and started this church on Fulton Street here in, in Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 531658
Speaker 1: Now, what had happened, you know, between my mom [Emmie Cheatham Williams] and dad [Alonzo Daughtry] I, I don't know, but it, it, it was very painful growing up and--in a--in a kind of broken home and it was hard to reconcile my dad as being the bishop of the church [The House of the Lord Church] and believing as he was teaching that when you get married, you know, one man, one woman, you know, the old church tradition, you stay together.  And what happened, I don't know.  They, they--and each one went the separate, his/her separate ways and remarried which was further confusing (laughter), you know?
Speaker 2: How many siblings do you have with your mother?  How many siblings came out of the union, their marriage?
Speaker 1: Out of their marriage.
Speaker 2: Their marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Five, five boys.  Quite frankly, one is quest--well, maybe I ought to leave that--take that off, scratch.  But five, five boys and then one girl.  And the girl was, was from another marriage, but there were five of us boys.  I, I, I, I was--let's see, Lonnie [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.], the--my oldest--
Speaker 2: Can you give it to me in the order that they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --happened, including yourself?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Alonzo Austin Daughtry, Jr., my oldest brother, he's deceased.  My next brother William Emmett Daughtry [William Daughtry] named after my grand--maternal grandfather [sic. paternal grandfather, William Van Daughtry], he's deceased.  Robert Nathaniel Daughtry [Robert Daughtry], Robert named after my great--[paternal] great-grandfather, Uncle Rob [Robert Daughtry]--or great-grandfather, Uncle Rob, he's deceased.  And then myself, I'm the fourth.  And then Jacob [Jacob Daughtry].  Jacob is the baby.  He's alive.  He's in Atlanta, Georgia.  And then my baby, my sister, Miriam [ph.], who was born to my mother's second marriage.  And my mother married three times.  In fact, she married my dad and then she married again, he died, and then she married again, and the person she married, interesting enough, was the person that they all grew up together.  His name was Williams, Mr. William.  Mr. William, my dad, and my mother grew up together as children, so he lost out to my dad in the earlier years and then here it is fifty-some years later, he finally, you know, landed my mom (laughter), you know, so it's quite, quite an interesting development.  But, yeah, those are some of the family, family background.
Story_ID: 531659
Speaker 1: What about legends?  What about stories?  There has to be stories.  You said, you know, that they had run your, I think it was grandfather out of Augusta [Georgia] because he was--you know, the white folks said he was keeping the people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace].
Speaker 1: Bishop--okay.
Speaker 2: Bishop Grace had gone and started a church [United House of Prayer for All People] in, in Augusta, but he was--for as--the rumor is, he was keeping people up so late or whatever, whatever, and so the preachers got together.  That sound to me like an excuse.  They were--because his reputation, that is Bishop Grace's reputation was growing, and the possibility that he was going to start, start drawing on, you know, some of the parishioners of other churches.  So I think that they found a reason to get him out of Augusta, but then he sent my dad [Alonzo Daughtry] there.  And now the, the, the earliest years, Uncle, Uncle Rob [Daughtry's paternal great-grandfather, Robert Daughtry] and, and that, that crowd, the stories were that they were a part of the, the field preachers.  You know, they, they were part of the rebellious preachers during those days.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about those stories, kind of recreate what that era was like?  Field preachers, meaning they were preaching to the people in the fields chopping cotton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--that is using Malcolm's [Malcolm X], you know, classification of the, the, the, the field Negro slave and the house slave.  The house slaves were better taken care of.  Of course, they got the old clothes and so their lot was somewhat better than those out in the field, meaning they worked hard in the scorching sun.  And it was from that crowd which, which usually the rebellions would come.  And so there were preachers who urged slaves to be docile, to obey the master; it was biblical to do so.  But there were others who sought opportunities to either engage in the Underground Railroad or in, in more violent insurrections, but who fought, who found ways to fight the system.  And so our family, we, we like to think came out of that, that tradition of, of preachers who were always looking for ways to fight the system to advance the cause.  And so Uncle Rob, I'm told, was one of those kinds of persons and, and going back, it--according to the rumor that we came out of Virginia--I meant Virginia not Carolina when I mentioned--Virginia, Virginia, during the Nat Turner uprising, during that period, and that one of the reasons that we were so, too--we ended up in Georgia was because of the suspicion of in some way being a part of that ferment, that permeated that area in that time, and so slaves began to be sent in different directions to--obviously, by dividing 'em up, as in the case with Denmark Vesey in Charleston [South Carolina].  What was that, 1812 [sic.], I think it was.  It was that while they--the slave masters were able to quell the uprising because of informants, but they knew that it was widespread.  And the Hempstead Street Methodist Church [ph.] was banned at that time.  So when these up--rebellions would place, these uprisings would take place, the, the, the, the word was out.  And so the slave masters would--one of the ways is to divide up everybody.  And so one of the reasons that we ended up in Georgia, the family did, is because of that suspicion that members were a part of that.
Story_ID: 531660
Speaker 1: Do you have any early memories of those days in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for me, yeah.  I think about them a lot.  The--my first, first time at school was in Savannah [Georgia].  But one of the things I, I remember from my earliest years and I often wonder how did I even come to make--to engage in the kind of analysis that which I did.  I lived in Savannah, Georgia, on West 44th Street and Florance, Florance Street, Florance going--Florance going--Florance going, what is that, east-west and 44th going north-south, right on the corner.  And, and going--looking what would be southward on west 44th was the black part of town, you know.  We sat--our house sat right on the corner.  And, and as a little fella, and I used to go back to try to figure how old I was, and I, I know I was under eight because my baby brother [Jacob Daughtry] was born, I'm eight years older and he was not born at the time, and he was born in Savannah, and I would look at the neighborhood going south--no, going north, and the houses were dilapidated like shanty.  The street was unpaved, garbage strewn, and, and, and fields and, and empty lots.  And then I'd stand I'd look north--southward, yeah, southward going toward Florida, you know, 'cause we used to take Victory Drive on the street that I was born going to Florida, so I would look southward, and there, the street was paved.  White folks lived in that part of town, that part of the street.  And the street would be paved and the houses were, were white--and, and, and the lawns were immaculate, the grass was cut.  And about halfway up the block was a park with the hanging trees, moss in the trees and benches for people to sit, and the grass was always cut, the flowers would be blooming.  And, and we couldn't cross that park during the night.  Sometimes, they didn't want you to cross it during the day.  Now, this is a half a block from where we lived, right, on Florence and West 44th Street.  And I would--I would look at that and I'd watch, you know, I'd, I'd study the difference in ways--in my young mind why was this so?
Story_ID: 531661
Speaker 1: You noticed as a child looking at one end, looking at the other.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Pick it up there.
Speaker 2: And, and wondering why the difference was so stark.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you ask anyone?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I just kept it to, to myself and wondered.  And, and in fact the first job I had was a white family had moved across the street from where we lived and I remember helping him all day, and he gave me two dollars that the guy had--you know, he had--I had earned for my--for my day's labor.  But, yeah, that always, always stayed with me.  Now, many years later--well, even today, I, I--one of the things that I do in the mornings now where I live is fairly decent neighborhood, you know, trees and, and grass, and, and when I come out of my house, I, I look down the street at the sidewalk and as far to the end of the corner, and when I do that, it always bring to mind my looking at--up at the white part of town when I was growing up in Savannah [Georgia], and it generates a lot of thanksgiving and raises a lot of questions for me.  You know, how far have we come, you know--you know.  But in any event, many years later, 198--'84 [1984] during Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] campaign, Jesse and I were great friends.  I, I think the world of him.  I always thought he was bigger than life (laughter), that guy.  He is somebody special, man, and of course I knew all the stories, so I--I'm no--I'm no--I'm not--I'm not naive, but I just think he's an incredible human being.  But anyway, in, in fact, they did--he came here in 1983 to ask me to gather all the black leaders in New York [New York] because he was trying to make a decision whether or not to run, and we did.  We met right here in, in this church [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York], downstairs, upstairs, and I remember his saying--I guess I'm way ahead.  I remember his saying, you know, "Now, if I wanna run, if, if, if you all are--if you don't want me to--if you don't--I'm--I don't wanna say--I don't wanna hear run, Jesse, run to become see Jesse run, so I need three things.  I need some money, I need the masses, and I need the machinery."  But anyway, we set out on this journey.  We traveled a lot during that time.  I thought it was one of the most exciting times of my life.  And I think that the impact that, that he made, we made because around him, there gravitated some of the most dedicated, brilliant brothers and sisters that we've been able to produce.  But I think the impact that we've made will not--can't be fully assessed until we get further way down the road of history.  But anyway, we--in the South, when we hit the South, and I remember we came out of New Hampshire, did pretty well all things being considered, said, man, we gotta do well in New Hampshire because, you know, we got a lot of mentality.  A lot of folks got this mentality, they need white validation, so if we could do well in New Hampshire, then it'll send a message for Super Tuesday in the South that we must be somebody 'cause white folks voted for us (laughter) you know.  So, anyway, I said, listen--you know, and I grew up in Savannah, so I think I wanna go back to Savannah, and I did.  I went and campaigned in Savannah.  By then, my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] had remarried and lived the next street over, 45th [Street], 46th, two blocks over 46th Street.  And so the night before the election, before the voting, I stayed with her.  And it was difficult trying to divorce a dream from reality.  It was--it was hard to believe that here I was back here in 1984 where I grew up with all of the segregation and all that that meant, and, and, and knowing what that neighborhood was like, and here I was down here now, campaigning for a brother, you know, that I know, bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, running for the highest office in the land, and, and I, I try to see--you know, I toss and I turn, and, and then early in the morning, I got up.  I said, I can't--let me--let me get on up and get out of here, about five or six o'clock in the morning.  And I walked across that park to which I referred where the church was on the--on the--on the corner there, and people had already begun to line up to vote, and I watched.  People had, had started to come from all over the place, in horse--on horses, buckboards, you know, walking, the elderly had begun to line up.  And, and when I, I tried to deliver that message across the country to, you know, brothers and sisters who, who, who were still saying, ain't no need to vote, man, what are we voting for?  It ain't gonna get nothing, you know.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used to say that in the South we can't vote and in the urban centers, you know, people feel they had nothing for which to vote.  But to see these people lined up--and, of course, this was duplicated, not--for me, not as significantly as in Georgia for all the reasons that I mentioned Savannah, but in different parts of the country.  So that's--that kind of stayed with me.  It was--it was quite an experience during that time.
Story_ID: 531662
Speaker 1: When we moved to--I'm still young and now going back and forward which became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Between Savannah [Georgia] and--
Speaker 1: And Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: And Augusta.
Speaker 1: You know, because now my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] had moved back to Augusta.  And the last thing--the last time I remember my father [Alonzo Daughtry] coming to visit is that he--I can just hear my [maternal] grandmamma [Henrietta Cheatham (ph.)], she was just running off at the mouth.  I don't remember all that she was saying, but I can re--can remember her storming back and forward, then--and his sitting.  You know, he was a very quiet man, and he was just sitting, rocking, and listening to her pour out her fury, and that was the last time I saw him in Savannah.  You know, he stayed in Augusta, so I guess when they get tired of me or whatever it was, I come back to Savannah, back to Augusta, like that.  And I learned to travel on my own.  I get the train--used to be a train that leave Augusta and get to Savannah, then I'd walk down Broad Street to get home.  This was in Savannah.  I went to school in--started school in Augusta--in Savannah, Florance, Florance Street School [Savannah, Georgia] it was, and you could walk there, about ten blocks away, and I liked it.  Frankly, I liked--yeah, I liked the school and I developed a good memory because--I, I remember, you know, I loved books and the--and the word so I memorized stuff.  So when I got into class and teacher called on somebody to read, and I remember, you know, I raised my hand, so I started reading, but I had memorized.  And I'm just reading away, but it was all from memory.  And, and then all of a sudden the teacher started laughing.  She said, "You memorized all that stuff (laughter)?"  You know, and I didn't know whether I had done something wrong or not, you know.  She didn't have the wisdom or the experience or whatever to coach me along and say, that was marvelous, you know, to memorize that.  You should--memorize that.  We gotta find a way to help you expand that and then you'll learn how to read the words and then--but I didn't know what I had done.  She was laughing and then she got the kids laughing at me.  So I kind of quelled it (laughter), you know, but I could memorize all that stuff.
Story_ID: 531663
Speaker 1: So then when I moved to Augusta [Georgia], went to Augusta, Florence X. Floyd School [sic. Silas X. Floyd Elementary School] in Augusta in Florence Street, interesting enough, in Augusta.  But an interesting development in Augusta is that I started working, which it seemed I was always willing to do these jobs, always wanted to make my own way.  So I was working at a grocery store in Augusta, Georgia.  It was Chinese, interesting enough, who were the, the, the mom and pop stores, almost every corner.  So I went to work with Big Wu [ph.], his name was, right.  And, and I, I--for some reason, it, it--I knew we weren't--our people, black folks, people in my neighborhood, they weren't getting a fair deal.  And so I would steal stuff.  I would kind of take grits, whatever in the bag, put it in the bag, potatoes, anything I could, you know, give, I would do so.  And they had this young fella named Buddy [ph.] working for the Chinese.  And I remember that he even looked Asian, he looked Chinese, right, and I knew he was watching me and I knew eventually I was gonna get caught.  So it was just a matter of time of how much I could steal, you know, for the people before I get caught, you know.  And sure enough, I got caught.  Buddy, Buddy caught me, he waved--you know, got the people together and they zeroed in.  'Cause I started trying to steal some meat on the scale and, of course, you couldn't (laughter)--I'd get--I, I guess they figure after a while, he gonna go after the money, we better (laughter).  But--and they fired me and I knew I would be fired.  It, it taught me a lesson about, you know, how to fight the system and who to watch in the system, you know, 'cause Buddy was--he was in the system and he was doing what was expected.  Would you believe, in Augusta--I still go to Augusta about once a month.  I'm the national minister, so that church is still there and now the, the congregation talking about tearing it down, moving--but I told them, you can't touch that.  You--just as they built it, that's the way it's gotta remain.  So we're building a kind of memorial complex down there where, where I spent my earliest years.  There's a woman there named Commissioner Beard [Betty Beard], she's in office now.  Her husband [Lee Beard] just recently died; he was a commissioner, that she ran for his office.  And we were just exchanging conversations one day, and I was saying, "You grew up around Pitkin Avenue [sic. Picquet Avenue] and (unclear)?" She said, "Yeah, I grew up around Pitkin Avenue."  I said, "You know, I used to work at that store over there on, on, on I think it's Boyd Alley [sic. Boyd Lane] and Pitkin Avenue, and--the Chinese place and there used to be a little fella in there named Buddy and Buddy, Buddy looked Chinese."  She said, "That was my brother (laughter)."  And she said--she--Buddy, she said, "Yeah, that was my Buddy," said, "yeah we're Asians."  She said that my grandmother was Asian and so that's--and because she has some of the Asian look, too, and so that's why he looked Asian because he was--and that's--and she said, right, the Chinese had pretty much adopted him, would give him the money to take to the bank or the post office that they were sending away, and he belonged to them.  I said, isn't that something?  Isn't that--I said after all these--
Speaker 2: So he was mixed black and Asian?
Speaker 1: That's right.  And that's why my earliest recollection was that he was--he was mixed up with Chinese 'cause I didn't--Asian--you know, but--he wasn't Chinese but he was another Asian extraction, but in my earl- you know, trying to remember all this and, you know, the older you get, it, it gets fuzzy, you know.  And I'm saying, well did it happen?  Did it happen?  But I remember that he looked kind of Asian like.  And I remember him--I know he was watching me and I knew I was gonna get caught.  But I--you know, I felt that, you know, the, the people were--isn't that amazing?  Even at that age, I couldn't have been any more than seven, eight.
Story_ID: 531664
Speaker 1: Was there a need to get this food to take it home?
Speaker 2: Not from my side, but I thought the people needed it.
Speaker 1: And who were the people you were giving it to?
Speaker 2: To black people in the neighborhood, you know, who--the houses were, you know, shanties like, you know.  It, it just seemed to me they didn't have.  I was doing personally all right because my father [Alonzo Daughtry] was the bishop, you know, so people always--one thing about black ministers, that, that we owe our people a debt that I, I know that shows often time we honor, but they've taken good care of us even when they didn't have.  One of the systems that was used--I don't know if you ever heard of pounding the preacher.  You ever heard of that?  Yeah, well, it--well, you pound the preacher.  See, in those days, people didn't have money to give, but they understood that it was right to give the man of God or the woman of God, but in those days, it was the man of God.  And so what they would do is whatever they had, they would give him a pound of it.  Yeah, so if, if you--if you bought ten pounds of butter or whatever, the preacher gets a pound.  If you had a bushel of butter beans we used to call them, the preacher gets a pound, so they call that pounding the preacher.  So our house would have a whole lot of produce in the house because, again, they were pounding the preacher.  So I had, personally, my family, you know, people immediate--had no need for that.  But the people that I would deliver the groceries to, you know, I could see that, you know, they were struggling.
Speaker 1: So you were a grocery delivery--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --person, boy.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you would add to these people's order--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Extra food.
Speaker 2: Extra food.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If they ordered a pound of potatoes, for example--
Speaker 1: You give them two pounds.
Speaker 2: I'll give them two pounds, that's right.  And was doing pretty well until I got to the meat (laughter).  I tried--
Speaker 1: And then you put the meat on the scale--
Speaker 2: Now, to put the meat on the scale--
Speaker 1: And the man recognized it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ah, that--see, then they caught me.  I--you know, Buddy, Buddy had it set up and he caught me, you know.
Story_ID: 531665
Speaker 1: Now, when did you realize that you were black in the sense of--that, that you may be discriminated against or may be considered a second-class citizen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or that black people lived in what you considered the shanty part and you looked down the street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What incident made you aware of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that these--compilation of these incidents, and, and then--I'm talking before I was ten, roughly, so a compilation of, of these incidents.  And then my oldest brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] went to the chain gang, you know, and, and he was with striped suits on.
Speaker 1: What had he done?
Speaker 2: I can't ever remember what he did.  And, and that's good question.  The family never discussed anything that he had done which leads me to believe that he was caught up in that weekend net.  Black men, you know, would get caught up and need some work done somewhere and, and, and black men would get caught up standing on the corner, no, no reason at all.
Speaker 1: What street in Savannah, Georgia, would represent for African Americans what Washington Avenue would represent for white Americans?
Speaker 2: Washington Avenue?
Speaker 1: And--or, or Main Street I, I will say.
Speaker 2: Oh, Main Street, Main--
Speaker 1: Yeah, like what street in the black community would, would have the same weight for blacks as Main Street did for whites?
Speaker 2: In, in a--in Savannah, it would be Broad Street.  Broad Street would, would represent--that's where the shops were.
Speaker 1: Well, describe Broad Street to me--
Speaker 2: Broad Street--
Speaker 1: From your recollection as a kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Broad Street was where the shops were, where the movie theater, I think it was the Star [Star Theatre, Savannah, Georgia], was.  There were the, the beer joints or the, the--you know, the, the, the saloons or beer gardens or whatever they were called.
Speaker 1: Pool halls.
Speaker 2: Pool halls, along that way.
Speaker 1: Shoe shop.
Speaker 2: Shoe shops and barber shop.
Speaker 1: Was there a radio station?  Was there a black radio station that you--
Speaker 2: Can't remember one at that time, can't remember one.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you listen to on Sundays?
Speaker 2: Wings Over Jordan [Wings Over Jordan Choir] (laughter).  Yeah, Wings Over Jordan, Dixie Hummingbirds [The Dixie Hummingbirds].  There was the--I mean, Sunday morning, that was--that was bacon popping, grits, you know, cooking and, and Wings Over Jordan and you're getting ready for church.  I mean, you started getting ready for church Saturday night because you--
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, you started getting your, your clothes, you're shining your shoes, you started getting your bath if you're people who had to take baths in tin tu- tin tubs.  You had to press out--you, you know sisters had to press out their dresses and, and you had to--some of the food had to be cooked the night before and, and you had to get a good scrub down because you probably hadn't had a bath for a week (laughter).  So you, you get a good scrubbing, you know?
Speaker 1: Before you go on, though, I wanna talk about that because that was kind of a common practice when I grew up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I don't tell many people, but I remember us only bathing kind of on Saturday.
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  That's right.  It's the Saturday night bath, man.
Story_ID: 531666
Speaker 1: And, well, for us, we, we had the great big tin tu- tub I remember bathing in.  And that's one of the thing that upset my family.  See, when we moved from, from Savannah [Georgia] where we were rather prestigious, you know, kind of had money and, and, and the most modern convenience, and then moved to Augusta [Georgia], then we had a big tub.  They got to deal with the tub, you got to go to the outhouse.  My oldest brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] was furious (laughter) 'cause he, he took the brunt of that, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: Because in Savannah when he was--when your father [Alonzo Daughtry] was with the larger church--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You had all the convenience of the middle class.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  That's right.  Had our own home, big house, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, do you know why specifically the house was located so close to the white community?  Was that just as middle class as you could get is to be borderline in the white community?
Speaker 1: I would think so, yes.  I would think that--'cause I can't--I can't remember that you do--they were much better neighborhoods.  It might have been, you know, vaguely in my mind, but I think that where we were would, would, would be considered, particularly right off Victory Drive.  Victory Drive was this long street that go straight on through to Florida with the palm trees in the center, you know, houses--nice houses along there which is where, again, where I was born.  And then the, the next street over was 44th Street which is where we were on the corner.  So that area was considered a, a pretty middle class area, shall we say.
Speaker 2: So, before we move on to your high school years, when you--let's say from eight to twelve, thirteen, who were the leaders in the community with your father because your father was the bishop.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: Who were the other people surrounding him that were, were--you know, the pillars of the community?
Speaker 1: The only people that I would know at that period from--say from zero to ten, right, would be people primarily in the church.  These were church people or school teachers, but primarily would be the preachers.  The preacher was the, the, the, the mover, the shaker in the community.  And, and my dad being one of those, particularly as the church began to grow--we in Augusta now.  In, in Savannah, when my [paternal] grandfather [William Van Daughtry] had died, then by that time, my dad had shifted to Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace] and now we were in Augusta.  So as the church began to grow, I can remember preachers, you know, always the church was the center of whatever and so that--those were--those were the movers and the shakers in the community as I remembered them.
Story_ID: 531667
Speaker 1: Now, this is during--because you were born in '31 [1931], so--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we're talking about '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] is in --
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What was happening in the church [The House of the Lord Church] as far as the church fighting for civil rights at the time?  Was the church involved?  Were there incidents whereas you can remember your father [Alonzo Daughtry] being--you know, having people over and talking about, well what are we gonna do about this?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  In fact, couple, couple of developments.  One was that our--the church began to grow after he left Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace], 19--they were incorporated in 1930 and the church began to grow to the extent that even whites were coming to the church, right, and this was against the law obviously at that time.  And so my dad took a stand.  He would not tell anybody not to come to church, and whatever they wanted to do to him, he would have to do it because he--you know, it was just--it just--it was just contrary to everything he believed, that you open the church for everybody.  So he fought that issue and, and they never bothered him, so I assume that he had grown to such a stature, particularly now with--even within the white community that they'd better leave this, this--now, I, I almost used the term nigger.  This just comes across differently now.  But, you know, nigger was a name in the early days that white folks called these, these rebellious types.
Speaker 1: The nationalists.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You're the niggers, that's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Of course nowadays with the hip-hop culture, I don't know if they really knew that when they started using it and, and now it is proliferated to the extent that people are opposed to it.  But it wasn't--I, I mean, to be called a nigger in the beginning was like being called a nationalist.  You know, you love your people and you, you re--you honor it, you rebellious, you're one of them sound niggers, you know (laughter), one of them field niggers.  So I--that was one incident.
Story_ID: 531668
Speaker 1: Another incident, he [Daughtry's father, Alonzo Daughtry] had with Bishop Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace].  Now, after he and Bishop Grace separated and they became--now, he was "Sweet Daddy" Grace and, and I think my dad was right.  History I think proved him to be right because over the years, he had become--he'd become something strange.  And the last time I saw him, Bishop Grace, "Sweet Daddy"--now he was "Sweet Daddy", and he would come to town.  And now they had built this huge building and they had a special place for him, so he would sit out in the evening and people would just gather around and just, you know, look mesmerized at him.  And then he, he--they would pass him--whatever he was eating or drinking, they'd pass him say something to drink, maybe a Kool-Aid or something, he'd take a sip and then he'd pass it around and he'd sit as though he were some kind of--some kind of king or something, and as people would take a sip, they would fall out, dah, dah, dah, and that go all the way around to the--and everybody take a sip, fall out, dah, dah, dah.  And, and, and he--by now, he had--he had be--he had these long nails by now, you know, and big hair, had to say it was down around his shoulders, he'd wear these cutaway suits, and the last time I saw him, he was standing in the church yard, the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer for All People, Augusta, Georgia] still there, and, and people would bring him money and would say to him, "'Daddy,' here's my tithes," tithes--tithes is one-tenth.  You know, some of us still practice the tradition that you owe one-tenth to the church.  And they would--here's my tithes and, and he'd snatch it, "Whose tithes?  Whose tithes?"  "Oh, your--'Daddy,' your tithes, your tithes."  And then he'd, he'd, he'd--somebody bring him some change, he, he had these long fingernails, and he'd hold the change and then he'd take a coin from these long fingernails and throw it up in the air and watch people scuffle, you know, trying to get--old people, scuffling on their knees trying to get to this penny that, that "Daddy" had--and he be laughing, so that is what he had become.  But that's what my dad saw in 1929 or so, that something was happening, that he had become different than what my dad saw originally, that there was a charisma about him, no doubt about it.
Speaker 2: So the break between he and your dad was tantamount to the break between the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X, that sort of a parting of the ways--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And creating two different--having two groups of followers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So how many people left with your dad in the--
Speaker 1: Well, just, just a--that analogy, just make sure we are saying it's only the split.  The, the, the dynamics of the break was the--was for--it was for different dynamics, you, you know--I mean, because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--okay, what were the dynamics--
Speaker 1: Well, I mean in the case--
Speaker 2: For the break with "Sweet Daddy"?  Okay, yeah, go ahead.  In the case--
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Muhammad, you know, and, and Malcolm where, you know, there were rumors which were pretty well substantiated of the old man's philandering and I think that's pretty well documented now, but it, it just completely disoriented them and demoralized Malcolm.  He--it was hard for him to get himself together once he had learned that.  And even then, he was--he, he wanted to stay.  I mean, he--you know, he wanted--he didn't wanna leave, but, but internal stuff that was going on kind of forced him out and I think the rest is history.  And but, but my dad broke with Bishop Grace because he thought that Bishop Grace either through Bishop Grace's instigation or through the people's being misguided, the point is, is that he was becoming--he was suffering from illusions of grandeur.  He was--he was now attempting to abrogate to himself the prerogatives, the prerogatives and privileges of deity.  So now, he was saying to people, you know, if you call on Grace, Grace can save you, you know.  And so--and, and he would tell the preacher--
Speaker 2: He was a god.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was God now, and that's what my dad saw, and, and that's where the clash came.  And that's why my dad used the scripture which says that no person should be elevated above God, that I died for you, that, that Peter died for you, that Paul died for you, we didn't die for you, so we are all servants together and that is the way it should be.
Story_ID: 531669
Speaker 1: At that age, what did you see yourself doing for a c- a life, like did you have dreams to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --something other than--what did--what were your dreams?
Speaker 2: Doctor.  I wanted to be a d--my earliest recollection, I wanted to be a doctor.  In fact, they called me the doc.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any black doctors that you saw?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the guy who delivered me, Macadoo [ph.], Dr. Macadoo, was a doctor who delivered me.  In fact, he is the one they tell me that tried to console my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams], I was born on the 13th [January 13, 1931], so he was trying to tell my mother that, but great things happens on the 13th.  And I went to school on the 13th and dah, dah, dah on the 13th, right?  But he was--he was one of the black doctors I remember, right?
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Macadoo.
Speaker 1: Macadoo.
Speaker 2: Dr. Macadoo.
Speaker 1: Dr. Macadoo.
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so I, I so much wanted to be that they, they bought me a little bag--I remember they bought me a little bag and I would try to walk, you know, like doctor and they would call me the doctor, the doc, which became my gang name in New York [New York], you know, some years later, the doc, you know.  So that's what--yeah, that's what I wanted to be.  My earl--that's my earliest recollection is--and then later on, I wanted to be a preacher as I--you know, around the church and saw the preachers and mocked the preachers and practiced preaching, you know?  Yeah.
Story_ID: 531670
Speaker 1: Did you go to high school in Savannah [Georgia] or Augusta [Georgia] or you shifted between the two places?
Speaker 2: I--by now, when I was eleven, twelve, 1941, we moved to--northward, 'Manchild in the Promised Land.'
Speaker 1: Norfolk, Virginia?
Speaker 2: No, northward.
Speaker 1: Northward, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, northward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And 'Manchild in the Promised Land' as Claude Brown would say and landing first--now, my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams], as I said was separated.  She lived in Jersey City [New Jersey], right, and my father [Alonzo Daughtry] lived in Brooklyn [New York], and now they were remarried, okay.  He had a wife--I assume it was his wife, they lived together, and my mother, likewise, in Jersey City.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're--let me just get this straight, though.  You're--we're gonna change tapes here, but at this--continue, you're still ten years old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you moved to Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: I'm about, about eleven; ten or eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna pick (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that up when we continue--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the tape.
Speaker 2: Between ten and eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I used to try to pin down specifically what that exact date was.  I used to try to look at the movies--the movies that I saw when I first arrived, what year they were produced, yeah.
Story_ID: 531671
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when, when I came to--when they [Daughtry's parents, Emmie Cheatham Williams and Alonzo Daughtry] brought me to--northward, first I, I landed--well, they--I first landed in Brooklyn [New York] and then from Brooklyn just for a, a, a little while to Jersey City [New Jersey] where I started school, Public School 15 [P.S. 15 Whitney M. Young, Jr. School] in Jersey City, right.  And I didn't like it.  It was--that's--I began to feel myself coming apart, becoming disoriented.  I, I, I couldn't adjust to the interracial character of, of the classes now 'cause keep in mind, I'm coming out of a completely segregated situation.  And, and I was--I was--I was the butt of the jokes because I'm--I got the southern drawl, my clothes are loud, you know, and kind of people, particularly whites and blacks kind of made me feel uneasy.  And, and then they had this principal, Dr. Banaman [ph.], never will forget her.  She was a frail little white woman, and she would come to the class and she'd be (unclear) with her hands, and she loved to talk about the darkies in Mississippi, how the darkies would love to sing and the darkies would love to play.  Isn't it something?  This is 15--I'm in 15--this, this is 15 School.  Then, I had an experience that still causes me deep emotional pain.  We had this game in the class, right, and the game was you, you pick a card and then you have to, what, pantomime whatever was on the card.  Now, would you believe--there's a stack of cards like this, would you believe the card that I picked was imitate a little colored boy eating watermelon?  I can see that card now.  That's right.  This is--and this is school.  This is what was happening in school.  Number one, the, the principal is, is talking about darkies and now of all the cards I pick, you know, I pick the--now, I'm--here I am struggling with what to do and everybody's looking at me, you know, what are you gonna do?  What are you gonna do?  What are you--and I--you know, and I got this card, and what I did, and I've hated myself for that, but then I said, oh, I was just a kid.  I did it.  You know, I put my head in my--in my hands and I did it, and I hated me, that school, that teacher, and, and everything related to it, and I just--from then on, I just went to pieces.  And then what they did is they shifted me--they--I wasn't--I was disruptive.  You know, I was--I just--I just didn't go.  I was just out of it.  So they decided, well, maybe I'd do better in Brooklyn, you know, send him to dad.  Maybe dad can do something with him.  And then they sent me here, Brooklyn.  I went to, what was that, 148 [P.S. 148, Brooklyn, New York] on Fulton Street [sic.].  I was about the sixth grade, right?  And, and there, it was--it, it was--it was black kids--it was--who, who laughed at me, you know, because, again, I'm, I'm southern, I'm Bama (laughter), you know, I'm--you know, I'm Georgia.  I got on the loud colors, you know, of--come straight out of the South.  So I just started becoming disruptive.  I said, all right, you know, if I'm--if I'm a clown, I'm a be the best clown in the class, you know?  And if nobody gonna, gonna laugh at me, so I just--I just start disrupting everything.  So somehow or other, they got--they send me out of the sixth grade then--to 178 [P.S. 178 Saint Clair Mckelway, Brooklyn, New York] where I went to junior high school.  I had begun to--at that time, even at that age, develop some athletic skills, you know, I guess going back to my Georgia days.
Story_ID: 531672
Speaker 1: Those were kind of lonely days down there for me as I remember.  I mean, there were people around me and I used to try to figure out what it was, but people--I mean, my [maternal] grandmother [Henrietta Cheatham (ph.)], grandfather [Clair Cheatham (ph.)] there, aunt, uncles there, mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] coming in occasionally--and maybe that's what it was is that there was no stabilizing mother or father, so I kind of--and then sometimes I used to think that my grandmother would take it out on us for what my father [Alonzo Daughtry]--decision, whatever decision, he made.  And then I thought she was color struck because the daughter of, of the Cheatham, her son that was in Florida that was killed, was living with her, so we were all together and we all--my brothers, we all thought that she was treated much better.  She was lighter complexion and her father had died.  So it was kind of lonely, so I began to develop, you know, what they call daydreaming, I guess.  But I guess I developed it to, to maybe a higher level or something because I could play all day by myself.  In fact, what I would do is I would gather me some rocks 'cause my grandmother would say, 'You can't go nowhere, boy.  You stay around the house.  You got all these chores to do.  Stay around the--." I said, all right, all right, all right.  So I just gather up me a great big pile of rocks, right, and there was a lot next to the house, and I would just imagine me--my ball field.  You know, I'd put my bases.  I'd even memorize all the different teams, you know.  I had my bleachers and I'd throw the rocks up and hit them all day long.  I'd just knock them all day long.  And I wouldn't try to cheat, you know.  I had a favorite team, but I made sure where the bleachers were, if they ever got to the bleachers, that was--you know, and I didn't know it 'til years later that that's how my grandmamma and the family would keep up with me.  They could hear the knocks, the rocks knocking, and when that stopped, they knew I had run away from home (laughter).  But I--
Speaker 2: Did you ever run away from home?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, not long, the usual runaway for a--for a few hours.  Not like my, my, my older brother, W.E. [William Daughtry], W.E., he felt that the family--he was in competition with my oldest brother, Lonnie [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.].  He always felt that my family loved my oldest brother better.  So in Augusta [Georgia], my parents bought Lonnie a bicycle, so W.E. took the bicycle and drove the bicycle from Augusta, Georgia, to Savannah, Georgia, 150 miles, and he couldn't have been any more than fifteen or sixteen, and everybody looking for him.  Where's W.E.?  Where's--nobody can find him.  But, they did make the connection that the bike was gone, too (laughter).  So, anyway, I'd run away, but not for long.  And so I developed this ability to imagine, which I learned later was who we are, really.  It--it's what makes us most like God, the capacity to create something out of nothing and then to bring it to pass, right?  So I attributed my very--I like to think fertile imagination to those early years of--I created my own games.  You know, I created my football games and et cetera, et cetera.
Story_ID: 531673
Speaker 1: So, I have two questions for you and you can choose which one you want first.  How did you leave school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And when did you receive a calling from God to minister?
Speaker 2: Well, I left--
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, let me just say because I'm assuming the call came early.
Speaker 2: It came--yeah, early when I got--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in jail.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did--?
Speaker 2: In my twenties.
Speaker 1: How did you leave school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I left--at 178 [P.S. 178 Saint Clair Mckelway, Brooklyn, New York], I, I said I'd begun to develop these athletic skills.  I could play ball, basketball, you know, baseball, and I'd become a star.  And it so happened that my principal, a man named Herbert Nuzzy [ph.] loved sports.  So when I got to 178, I had pretty much become the official disrupter, right.  And, and so they put me in the worst grade that they could get to, close to the CRMD class, they used to call in those days class for ready made dopes, which meant that you were considered to be a retard, right?  So and, and then--and then once you begin to be disruptive, they would write out these pink slips, right, to tell what you did, you disrupted the class, and send you to the principal, and the principal--there was two.  Tweety [ph.] was one of the principals.  He used to try to act the tough guy.  He'd go up in your face, "Why don't you do so and so and so and so?"  It's amazing, looking back, Herbert Nuzzy was the nice guy, but in all probability, looking back, Tweety was better for us than Nuzzy, although in our childish perception, it would be Nuzzy.  So when they give me a pink slip, I would go to Herbert Nuzzy.  He'd wanna see me, and we sit and talk sports all day.  You know, yeah, what do you think about the, the Yankees [New York Yankees] and the whatever.  Because on the ball field, I was the star, you know.  I was the one that they depended upon, you know, to, to get the hits and the--and the basketball and all of that.  So he wasn't about to mess with the star, but I think he sincerely liked me.  I know I liked him.  But this is why I say that, Tweety, as mean as we thought he was probably was the best guy, so that in the end when graduation came at 178, everybody got a diploma but me.  I got a medal, you know.  And I, I remember Mr. Nuzzy saying I--when I came upon the stage, man, he grabbed me, he said, "I want everybody to know this is the man that makes the impossible possible," and gave me a medal, and I thought I was walking on clouds and shifted me off to automotive mechanic school and I don't know that I got a diploma.  As I say, I never got a--I got a medal and I got to--over there in mechanics, man, I was so far removed from anything that this man was talking about.  The only thing I can remember that--from this teacher was that it can be done.  Remember, young students, it can be done.  And I think that's about the--and it might be--I shouldn't say about the only thing, but it might've been priceless 'cause I always remembered that, it can be done.  But I didn't know anything about cars.  I didn't--so I just stopped going.  Then, I got in trouble.
Story_ID: 531674
Speaker 1: Well, had Jackie Robinson broken the color barrier in baseball when you were a kid to give you this dream of being an athlete?  How did you think you could be an athlete because there were no black--who were the black athletes that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were those--now, I'm in my--in my teen--early teen, but I remember Levi Jackson was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] was it?  Yeah, Yale because I remember my brother telling me 'cause I had all these white football players on the wall and my brother told me, "C'mon man, you gotta find a black football player to put on the wall," you know?  I been looking for black, you know, folks ever since.  Isn't that something, how one word, something can be dramatic?  And he said, "No, man, you gotta put some black folks up there, some black athlete."  Kenny Washington I think was at U--UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And I think Jackie Robinson had come a, a little later at UCLA.  But, yeah, Jackie Robinson in our teen years, I remember when he came to play in Jersey City [New Jersey] at Roosevelt Stadium.  I was there, 1946, I think it was when he, he was in the farm system and he come to play.  And, of course, everything Jackie did was all right and that's when my allegiance changed from the New York Yankees to the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] (laughter), you know, where the world--you could root--everybody rooted for Jackie.  It was like Joe Louis which is another athlete.  Man, you remember those days, I guess, Joe Louis fought, I mean every, every punch, we rode--I mean, we were glued to the--to the radio.  And when Joe Louis won, that was celebration.  I can remember running up and down the streets in, in, in Augusta [Georgia], you know, Joe Louis won, Joe Lou--you know, Joe Louis won, Joe Louis won.  So, yeah, there were a few of them around.  The--now the artists--interesting enough, I never liked black artists.  I thought that they betrayed us.  I'm not talking about their talents, their skills, that was no question.  But all the--I should scratch, not all, most of the black artists either wanted to marry white, be white, whatever, and they didn't identify with us, with the people.
Speaker 1: Who are they?  Give me some names?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, Sammy Davis, Jr.  I mean, he was--he likes--like Slappy White used to say, "Man, I went to Sammy Davis, Jr, man, and I said, 'Sammy, you know I been doing so bad, you know how it is.  You used to be colored (laughter).'"  Oh, he was--he was the epitome of the escapists, you know.  But, again, I--I'm speaking only on regards to their, their relationship to their people, not their skills.  That, that, that was--that was beyond question.  But, I mean who didn't?  But that was--that was it.  They, they, they didn't contribute, they didn't--most of what I remember.  Obviously, there must've been some.  But from what I saw--now, when Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] came along, I remember when--that was some years later, but I remember people in Jersey City say, "Man, we heard a young cat down in Birdland [New York, New York].  Man, that bro--brother could blow."  That's what we used to say in those days.  And, what was his name?  Bela--somebody named Belafonte (laughter).  But, the athletes, they didn't--I, I mean, not the--
Speaker 1: The artists.
Speaker 2: The artists, yeah, yeah.  They, they didn't--they seemed to have been on an escape program and, and, and, and, and, and, I mean, understandable because most folks were trying to be white in those days.  You, you, you know, identifying with the conk hair and the--and the skin whitener and, you, you know.
Story_ID: 531675
Speaker 1: Did you conk your hair?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I didn't do that.  I was too scared, wasn't that I didn't want to, I just didn't.  I was--you know, I was just--I was just reluctant.  The pain was--everybody be shaking and going on, so I didn't.  But we admired those people who had conked their hair, you know.  This guy named Rim, Herbert Rim [ph.], in Jersey City [New Jersey].  Man, he had his hair slicked back.  And then Herb Rim used to have a little streak that he'd let hang down in front of his face so that when he shake his head, that little piece (laughter), Lord, help us, help us.  That little--that little piece would be shaking.  See, 'cause he'd been--you know, we went to the movies, saw white folks, the wind blowing in the--white folks hair blowing in the wind and all that stuff.  But, you know, God didn't bless us with hair that blew in the wind, you know?  And, and so, anyway, conk--yeah, we was--I was--we was with the conk deal, you know.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the movies.  Were you sitting upstairs or you could sit anywhere you wanted to?
Speaker 2: Up--upstairs in Georgia in the segregated system there and you come north, you could sit where you want to.
Speaker 1: Did you feel different when you came to the North versus what you had felt like being in the South?
Speaker 2: In, in the South, I had begun to develop, again, some more racial consciousness.  In the South, I had begun to develop this, this aversion to the images--the black images on the screen, right, and, and, and the Stepin Fetchits, Mantan Moreland, and I remember whenever those images would come on, I remember squinching, you know, shrinking, and I would put my head in my hand, you know, like this and then peek through the fingers to see when the image was gone, you know, sit--and then I could kind of raise up again.  So that--those images I'd already begun to, to reject, you know.  And, and the movie images, yeah, and, and, you know, the, the images through the south, they always wanted us around in some buffoon kind of way.  And, and when I was growing up, you know, you a Negro.  There's nobody--you never was mister or misses, you always Negro.  You know, auntie, uncle, anything but mister.  So, that was what we felt in, in, in, in those days growing up and--.  You know, that's why to me, it was all--well, it's rather startling to me that I somehow had come to some understanding of the--of the racial dynamics of, of, of, of American society.
Story_ID: 531676
Speaker 1: After I left 178 [P.S. 178 Saint Clair Mckelway, Brooklyn, New York] and went to mechanics, I didn't stay there, I just stopped going.  And then I had my first arrest when I was fifteen, and it, it was a--it was a nothing rap really.  It just--about four of us were walking along Howard [Avenue]--was it Howard?  I think it was Howard Avenue.  It was Howard Avenue and I have to--well, let me go ahead, walking along Howard Avenue and, you know, we playing and, and, and we saying--I'm saying, "Well, man, you know, I'm superman (laughter)," you know?  "You ain't no superman.  If you superman, fly.  Let's see you fly.  Fly over that transit," you know, at the store.  There's a little small store and there's the door, say, "Fly over the transit, man, if you can fly."  I said, "All right, watch me."  So I get to the door, you know, and I'm playing around the door like I'm gonna fly (laughter), you know.  So, this white man was--came up on--across the street like has staggering drunk, and he sat there and he watched us.  We're kids, we playing, I must be fourteen, fifteen, no more than sixteen.  He watching us playing.  And, and, of course, we didn't touch anything.  We didn't get in the store, and we went on down the street laughing, you know, they kidding--you ain't no superman, you can't fly, man, you ain't--ha, ha, ha.  Next thing I knew, we were surrounded by the police, man.  You know, all these cars were coming from all over the place and scooped us up.  And the next thing I knew, I'm in the precinct, you know what I mean?  And, and so we spent the night in the precinct and, and--
Speaker 2: What was the charge, though?
Speaker 1: Attempted burglary, yeah, attempted burglary.  That's what--
Speaker 2: Did anyone have any weapons on them?
Speaker 1: No weapons, no tools, no nothing.  We were just playing.  And this, this, this guy saw that.  He saw that.  And this, again, had we been white kids, the best that they would've done, I believe, is call the parents down--
Speaker 2: Pick them up.
Speaker 1: You know, pick them up, and then read the riot act.  "If you ever come down here," you know how they can do.
Speaker 2: Did they send you to prison for that?
Speaker 1: I sure did.  They sent us to prison.  We spent--I forgot how many months we stayed in jail.  Used to be the old Raymond Street Jail [Brooklyn, New York].  And, and, and an interesting development, man, listen.  The pink slips that they used to give us became badge of honor.  You know, we used to boast about--and this is some stuff I tried to tell teachers, you know, now.  I mean, you think you're punishing a child by, by exacting the certain kind of punishment, but you may be feeding into his ego.  'Cause when they gave us the pink tickets, and this was supposed to be a badge of dishonor, it became the badge of honor.  We used to almost get into a fight as to who had the most.  "I got more pink slips than you."  "No, man, you ain't got no--you didn't get them pink slips."  You know, "No you didn't--you--I got mine 'cause I was up in the teacher's face, man, that's how I got--how did you get yours?"  You were on the back of--so we about to go to fight about what the school system is calling badge of dishonor.  So when I got to jail--you know, when I got to jail, man, I was the celebrity.  "Hey, doc's in jail.  Man, you know--hey, doc's in jail."  And, you know, all the fear went away and I was celebrity, you know.
Story_ID: 531677
Speaker 1: What was happening at home with your parents?  They must've been devastated.  Your, your father [Alonzo Daughtry] was a preacher, your [paternal] grandfather [William Van Daughtry] was a preacher (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know.  That's a good question.  My dad was--he took everything in.  He didn't--he was not extra--extraverted.  I guess that's why he died early because he--everything he took in--died at fifty-six, and he took everything in and, and, and he--when he died, he was this big.  I got a picture, I'll show you.  My mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] said when he started, he was about my size.  When he died, he was--he was out here, that he--you know, I guess the marriage had gone haywire, my mama had married again, and had a child, and, and the church [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York] wasn't--and now, you know, people were raising questions about how can you be a bishop and get into this kind of domestic situation, and your family is in disarray.  And one of the things I prayed, I said, Lord, if I ever get married, you know, please just, just let, let me break the cycle.  So I don't remember saying too much, you know, he just--he just took it in.  But he never said much, you know.  I remember he ran over--backed over my brother's dog in Augusta [Georgia] and it broke our hearts, and he didn't say a thing until he's dying.  On his deathbed.  He, he called my brother who was standing over his deathbed.  He'd said to my brother Bob [Robert Daughtry], he said, "Bob, remember when I ran over your dog," he said, "that thing tore me up.  It tore me up."  But, so--he didn't--he didn't get too much emotion, he just took it all in.  So he just quietly came and got me and I was on two years' probation.  And I didn't go to church too much anyway, you know.  I just was--had stopped going to church.
Story_ID: 531678
Speaker 1: But you said you found God in prison.
Speaker 2: That was years later.
Speaker 1: That was years later.
Speaker 2: This is--that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: This was the first time.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Now, I got--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I got some more time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I just started on this journey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  So I--but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was like 1946 or so.  You said you were fifteen or sixteen.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, about 1946, and I went and stayed some months, I can remember how many months and had two years' probation.
Speaker 1: But what did you do with yourself as a teenager?  You get out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You get out, what is there to do?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I had begun to develop other kinds of skills that come along with the life.  I'd began to develop pool shooting habits.  You know, I began to develop gambling habits, card games, dice and these kinds of things.  So I was--lead--going into that--'cause I was kind of unsupervised.
Speaker 1: But who were your influences?  Who were--who were you following?  You couldn't be leading yourself?
Speaker 2: No, be--the people around me.  The, the--
Speaker 1: But who were they?
Speaker 2: The peer people.
Speaker 1: The peer people, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: What were some of their names?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: They called you doc.  Who, who--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they called me doc.  There was--well, there was Rudolph Johnson [ph.], the one who had the fight with the big bully, you know.  He had--you know, finally had to have a fight.  There was a guy, Junior [ph.].  There was one--there was only one that is still around named Fred Willis [ph.]; we call him Education [ph.].  He still comes down to the church [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York].  But the--but, but the--some of the more, what, dominant characters in growing up was a guy named Sonny Boy Colbert [ph.], he's the baddest dude in town.  Man, Sonny Boy had the reputation of being beating by the police and never, you know, squealing, never giving up anything.  And, man, he was good with his hands, he could fight.  So I gravitated toward him and he liked me, but I think--my father [Alonzo Daughtry] owned a store, by the way.  Ev- everywhere my church--my father would start a church, he'd open a store.  And so he used to kind of look out for me.  And then Rudloph [ph.] was the bully and he would--well, you know, shaking people down as we would call it.  So I thought I could get Sonny Boy to take Rudolph out.  But Sonny Boy told me something.  He said--he, he saw me one time being pushed against the wall.  He said, "Listen, man, let me tell you something.  You gonna have to fight, and when you do, you just gotta make sure you hurt the person, hurt them real bad because nobody wanna be hurt, and if you hurt them bad enough, you won't have any more problem from them, you know (laughter)?"  So, so I, I heard him, but, you know, I wasn't into--you know, I was--wanted to be tough, but I didn't wanna hurt nobody.  I didn't--you know, I didn't wanna be in no fight.  But we did, too, and we got into it, Rudolph.  And would you believe it again, it wasn't that he had done anything to me, we gambling, we, we shooting dice, right, and there was a kid on the block, you know, who was kind of putty, and he won the bet.  And, and when he won--reached for his money, Rudolph slapped him away and said, "I ain't giving you nothing."  And so from somewhere, I still don't know where it came from, I said, "Man, get up off the kid.  Give the guy his money," you know.  And when the words went out of my mouth (laughter), I wish I could've grabbed them and put them back--'cause when he looked up and he saw--he heard me, then I knew we would--it was it.  The time was it, so I swung first.  I heard Sonny Boy say, "Hit and hit hard and try to hurt," and that's all I remember, and I start swinging, and we fought from the back yard out to the front and then--he so he find up kicking me, you know, and when he kicked me, you know, he, he--it was really rather painful, and, and I don't know if it was all that painful, I don't know if I just had enough and this was a good way out of this (laughter), but I fell and he kicked me.  And to show you the respect he had 'cause I guess he wasn't sure because at that--and once that happened, you supposed to take the guy out.  You're not ever supposed to let the, the wounded, you know, recuperate.  So that's what Sonny Boy was telling me.  Man, if you--if you can hit them and hurt them, they'll always remember that.  So he left me.  He left me in pain, right, and people came, picked me up.  But the word went through the community that we'd had this fight.  And so I could barely walk the next day.  I'm going to school, but I, I walked like a champ 'cause I'd had the battle.  And people were--hey, man, you know--that's--you took him on, man, you took him on.  You took that bully (laughter)--so, yeah, Rudolph--and we became, as usual, great friends and then I become somewhat of a bully.  Now, I'm, you know, taking on this, this--boy, it's amazing how, how, how, how you, you go through these changes.  Because now, now, you know, I'm developing the, the macho.  You know, I'm the guy who now gonna do the first swing, you know--you know, corner somebody, I'm taking somebody--I'm the--I'm the bad guy now.  And then when you put in that jail experience of me, I come out of jail, I was tough, you know.  And they almost threw a party for me.  And here's what I was about to say.  When I came out of jail, the first place I stopped was at--it was 144 [P.S. 144, Brooklyn, New York] then, on Howard [Avenue] and Prospect [Place], right, and that's where we would all hang out.  There used to be a market there, push carts and all of that.
Story_ID: 531679
Speaker 1: And would you believe it, my son [Herbert Daughtry, Jr.] is a principal, his first principal job--I have four children, thank god.  I've been married forty-four years, I've got four children--I guess you'll get to that at some point, but I'm proud to say, my oldest daughter, Leah [Leah D. Daughtry], is the chief of staff at the dem- National Democratic Party [sic. Democratic National Committee], minister.  My daughter, Sharon [Sharon Daughtry], is the national director of music and art.  She's the artist; she travels all around.  My daughter, Dawn [Dawnique D. Daughtry], is assistant principal and a minister, started a church in New Jersey.  My son, he went--he went to be a lawyer.  It was interesting 'cause he said, "Dad [Alonzo Daughtry], I'm--when I grow up I'm gonna get me some money.  I'm gonna be a lawyer.  I'm gonna make me a lot of money, drive Lamborghinis," or whatever they are, whatever--it's a--it's a big fancy car.  So he completed--my daughter then, Sharon, graduated from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  I used to--I told him, I said, listen, because I'm--by now, I've gotten black.  I've become nationalist--I'm deep into the black.  I've done my research and everything.  And so I told them, I said now, "Listen, I'm not gonna pick the school for you 'cause--but whatever school you pick, we ain't gonna have step--you're gonna compete at the highest levels.  I don't--I don't care where you go.  But wherever you go, you gonna compete--at whatever this country says, this is the highest level of intellectual competition, that's where you going."  So, they picked Dartmouth--Leah and Sharon picked Dartmouth and my baby daughter picked Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], and my son picked the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and he graduated from Georgetown Law School [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.].  And he said--then, he came back, he called me, he said, "Hey dad, I think I'm gonna change.  I'm, I'm gonna come back to the hood and I'm gonna use my skills for, for the blood," you know.  And I said, "Man, that's, that's, that's great."  Like, that's great, although in my mind, I'm saying, whoa, wait a minute, I, I got mixed feelings about this.  I like your, your commitment, but I know you gonna be out here trying to defend these brothers and sisters, you gonna still be in my pockets (laughter).  So--but anyway, he just appointed to be principal at the very school, that very place that I came home when I--first stop I made coming out of jail and, and everybody greeted me there.  So this is his first year as a principal.  They've given him--started him--this school, you know.
Story_ID: 531680
Speaker 1: So, continuing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--in the parking lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah the school.
Speaker 1: You have to be thinking about what you're gonna do for a living or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by now, it was clear.  I was gonna be the best gambler, hustler in town, you know.  I had begun to develop some of the skills.  I was sneaking in the pool rooms, you know, and developing my skill.  I was--learned early, you know, cards, even was taught, you know, some of the, you know, crooked dice, how to handle the crooked dice, you know, how to deal from the bottom and just--middle and, you know, all of the kinds of cheats and skills and, and, and, and, and wasn't beyond--
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: But later on, I started selling dope--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was later.
Speaker 1: Did you think at that time you were breaking your father's [Alonzo Daughtry] heart or you didn't even think about what your father thought?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I even thought too much about what they thought, really.  I, I don't know that I--yeah, I don't know that that was too much on my mi--'cause, see, he never showed too much.  My mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams], yes, I could, you know--
Speaker 1: What was she saying to you then?
Speaker 2: Well, she would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like, she--
Speaker 2: Try to--
Speaker 1: --washed her hands with you and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  She would try hard, you know, and pray a lot.  And she had a--she had a quote from the Bible--well, two things.  She had a quote from the Bible that says, "For we know that in all things, God works for good" [Romans 8:28].  And that was her quote, that one day you--you know, I'll leave you in the hand of the Lord.  And my dad--and maybe one of the reasons that he was resigned is, is because he had always said I would be the preacher, you know.  I was the worst of the lot.  And, in, in fact it--I was--it was the family joke because on one occasion, he was telling me I was gonna be a preacher.  By now, you know, I'd come home, had dice and cards in my pocket, so they were kind of getting--my stepmother was trying to get my clothes together and, you know, and, and all these--this dice and cards fell out of my pocket (laughter).  So, my oldest brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] said, "Now, Pop, what do you think of your preacher now?  What do you think of--?"  So it became the joke, but that was what he always said.  He said, "No, this is my boy.  He's gonna be the preacher.  He's gonna carry on the family tradition."
Story_ID: 531681
Speaker 1: Well, how did you get into selling dope?
Speaker 2: Well, that was later on, now--
Speaker 1: Later on like--well, well then what happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: From fifteen, sixteen?
Speaker 2: Well around sixteen, see when--fifteen, sixteen, the other piece is that my oldest brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] opened a cleaners on Fulton Street [Brooklyn, New York].  He had come out of the [U.S.] Army--
Speaker 1: Is this where your mom [Emmie Cheatham Williams] worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she worked there with him--
Speaker 1: For him.
Speaker 2: With him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and she worked in other places too.
Speaker 1: So that's what he did with his G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]?  He opened--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: A cleaners?
Speaker 2: Given his G.I. Bill and so he come home and he opens a cleaners.  And I--he forced me as it were to work with him, glad he did, I'm fifteen, sixteen, I wanna be out playing and he want me back there pressing clothes and, and--clothes and, and across the street was the pool room.  So, I'd sneak over and spend time in the pool room.  And in Jersey City [New Jersey]--now, I'm going back and forward.
Speaker 1: Between Brooklyn [New York] and Jersey City.
Speaker 2: And Jersey, so I'm learning all the rough places and all the negatives in both cities.  I got both (laughter)--oh, Lord, and so I'm, I'm beginning to learn--I became--I, I became very good at pool, you know, very good.  I became one of the best in the city.  And years, years later, I was with David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] on his South African trip.  I don't know if you read about that or if you heard about that.  Yeah, I was with him on--so we going from meeting to meeting to meeting, so finally, you know, I--one place we went to in Soweto [South Africa], it so happened they had a pool table, you know, in the room as we were headed toward the, the private room, so I sat in the private room for a while with the leaders--but that pool table was on my mind.  So I'm outside with the pool--where they were playing pool.  I said, "Can I play?"  They said, "Yeah, okay."  And as it happened, I was having one of my--I hadn't played for a long time, but I was having one of my best--I, I, I amazed me because I had one of my best days.  I was sharp.  The balls were falling, my English--you know, I could put the cue where I wanted it and people stood back and looked and was--you ain't no preacher (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And the guy who wrote about it in New York Times [The New York Times] did an article on that, you know, of all things.  I got on his case, but as I look back now, he probably was doing me a, a turn because all the stuff he could've written about, you know, at least he wrote that, that Reverend Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry] turned the side to exercise his skill on the pool table, et cetera, et cetera.  So I often thought later I should--I owe him an apology, really.  But I had developed these skills.
Story_ID: 531682
Speaker 1: Early on I should say that I used to shine shoes.  One of the things that we grew up with was, was how to be creative in terms of making money.  So in--growing up in the South, you sold milk bottles, Coca-Cola bottles, you, you, you shined shoes.
Speaker 2: Did you chop cotton?
Speaker 1: No, wood yard.
Speaker 2: You never went to the fields?
Speaker 1: No, never went to the fields.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My dad [Alonzo Daughtry] had all kind of businesses.  He had a wood yard, he had a, a watermelon stand, he had a restaurant.  And so I guess we learned from him that our religion should have an economic development component.  You know, 'cause that's--everywhere there was a church, he had a store.  He had one of the first mom and pop stores, black mom and pop stores in, in New York [New York], you know, in Brooklyn [New York].  And so we always--that's why it was nonsense for me to be breaking into a little old store and my dad got all that stuff around the corner, you know?  So it was--it was pure nonsense.  But we shined shoes during the war [World War II, WWII] years.  You had mentioned, I remember, you know, getting my shoebox down on 9th Street, they--called James Brown Boulevard now, that's where James Brown from, Augusta [Georgia], and shining shoes down there on 9th Street, you know.  And so we were hustling--we were taught to hustle.  And I thought shoe shining, the enterprise of shoe shining for a young kid growing up was an exercise in, in challenge and, and creativity, and independence because, you know, we has to--we had to build our own shoeboxes, you know, we had to get our own rags, we had to get our--buy our own polish, you know, our own liquid, and we had to calculate our own money.  So when you got your shoebox, it meant that you were an independent entrepreneur (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And so when we came north, I still brought those skills.  You do a lot of shoe shining early on when I was twelve, you know, like that.  But as I grew older and, and began to get into the--with the fast lane and meet other kinds of people who were doing other--you know, kids sneaking into pool room, you know, kids going to Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] or--stores, you know, stealing stuff and, and so you got--start getting to be negative.  But that's how--that's how I--during those teen years--
Story_ID: 531683
Speaker 1: So after a while, you begin to graduate and, and start smoking reefer.  We started smoking reefers, one of the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How early?
Speaker 1: I was about fifteen, sixteen when I started smoking reefer, and was really one of the first to, to start heroin, the main line.  You had brothers named--they say that adults are influencing kids to do these things, but in my experience, personally, we had moved from reefer, you know, that was what we were doing and you could do that on the street, that was no big thing.  But this, this brother had gotten into heroin.
Speaker 2: What year are we talking about now?
Speaker 1: I would've been sixteen, seventeen?
Speaker 2: In the '40s [1940s] there was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --heroin was around?
Speaker 1: In fact, I'll tell you--I'll tell you what I make the connection with.  Maybe you don't remember, but it's on the record.  When it really exploded was at--was at Birdland [New York, New York].  If I'm--you know, a lot of young white girls was going to Birdland with, with, with Charlie Parker and everybody down there, and then it blew--and I think that was about '46 [1946] or so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I had--my first year, I, I was about fifteen, sixteen, 'cause nobody else was getting high.  And this brother, he was, and, and he was--he was a musician and we were kind of close.  I always associated with people much older 'cause by now--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but now that you think about it, Billie Holiday also--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --was heroin.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Not opium, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, heroin.
Speaker 2: So it was heroin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, heroin--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Was the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Was the--was the--
Speaker 2: So you--
Speaker 1: Had, had--was becoming--
Speaker 2: Becoming.   So--
Speaker 1: And I was at the--
Speaker 2: This brother who was a musician--
Speaker 1: Right, he, he was getting high and, and I saw him and I said, man, turn me on.  He said, "No, man I can't give you this stuff.  You're a young cat.  You don't--you don't need that stuff."  And that's something we called each other, cats in those days.  Now, it's dogs (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But he said, "No, you can't have it."  I said, "No, man," you know, I'm always game, always daring and--nah, nah, "give me--shoot me a fix, give me a shot, I want a shot, give me a fix," nah--he said, "Man, don't do this.  I'm telling you.  I'm, I'm--I don't wanna do this to you, man, I don't wanna do--." I said, "No, you gotta do it, I gotta have a fix, man, come on, give me--." He said, "All right," and he gave me the fix, right, and that was the worst feeling I had.  I threw up over everywhere, man, I just felt awful and--but I went back (laughter) you know.  It was something about, you know, now I've graduated, you know, I've gone from reefer to heroin, you know, so give me another fix and I went back and back un- until I got strung out and, you know, could, could--then, I said, well let me start snorting but it wasn't the same as main lining, so then I had to learn how to do my own, you know, cooking and, and, and mixing and all this stuff.  So now, between gambling which is what I could do, you know, and was good at.
Speaker 2: Sober, though.
Speaker 1: Huh?  Sober, yeah, 'cause if--when--once you get that heroin--see, one of the things that makes heroin what it is, I don't know about crack, I never used crack, but I know what made heroin as potent as it--as it was and is, is that once you get the right kind of high, you don't want anything else.  So any time you hear of some heroin addict raping a woman, he--whatever he's on, he ain't on heroin because you don't want nothing.  You complete.  If you could--if you could think of heaven, that's what you are and nothing else you want.  So when I--you're right, when I was sober, I was all right.  I couldn't, couldn't get too far strung out because I was still daring enough to always be in some cheat.  I was always looking for the odds, so in any card game, I was doing something that was not--
Speaker 2: But the card games, you were always making money for yourself?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that was the--your job.
Speaker 1: That was what I did, cards--
Speaker 2: The cards, the dice, the--
Speaker 1: The dice, the pool--
Speaker 2: The pool.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so then you introduced heroin into that mix.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 531684
Speaker 1: Now what happens?
Speaker 2: Now, when I got into the heroin piece--oh, yeah, one other piece I had going is number writing.
Speaker 1: How does number writing work?
Speaker 2: Oh, well as I--well, well as I can remember--
Speaker 1: Well, how did it work?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Because if--
Speaker 2: You, you--people would play.  For instance, they would say--and they used to come from the stock market.  You'd say--
Speaker 1: I'm gonna play six--
Speaker 2: I wanna put--
Speaker 1: Whatever--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I've got a dime, I want a, a, a, a box 29 for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or a combination of 29.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, 29--
Speaker 2: Yeah, any, any combination--
Speaker 1: Combination, okay.
Speaker 2: Of 29, you win, right, or even box.  If you put something on the box any, any kind of way, it's boxed or any combination thereof, you win.  But if you put it on straight, say 29--say 6, 29 straight, right?  Six, 29, 1--I got--listen, I got $5, I'm gonna put $3 straight, $2 on the combination, and $1 on the box.  So any form that that number come out, you win, but you win big if it come out straight, any combination you win.
Speaker 1: But you running numbers meant that you were--it was your game.  You were setting it all up.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I--
Speaker 1: But who--
Speaker 2: I was the banker.
Speaker 1: You were the banker.
Speaker 2: No, no, I was getting--
Speaker 1: How is that--
Speaker 2: --to the banker.
Speaker 1: How does it work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--yeah, that's where--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--there was the banker.  I'm working for a banker, right.  The guy that I work for was Newsboy Moriarty [sic. Joseph "Newsboy" Moriarty].  I don't know if you know of him.  You might remember the case where they found this million dollars in the back trunk in Jersey City [New Jersey], yeah, that's who I worked for, Moriarty--Mari--called him Newsboy because he had--
Speaker 1: But he wasn't black.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  He was white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--
Speaker 2: There were no black--
Speaker 1: --an Italian guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Or Irish.
Speaker 1: So you didn't work for--oh, he was Irish?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and--
Speaker 1: So you didn't work for--okay, all right, I'm following you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He was the big time number banker.  Now, there were other number bankers, right, around--a number write--a lot of us were number writers which meant that we wrote the numbers, gave the slip in to the banker who paid off in case they hit, we get a percentage of what we write, so we build up a clientele.
Speaker 1: So, you're like a stock broker?
Speaker 2: I would think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, the big--we ain't up there yet.  I mean, we might aspire to be the banker.  That means then we got the runners bringing the money but we gotta pay in case there's a hit.  And you don't want the word to ever get out that you don't pay.
Speaker 1: But the hit comes off of the stock--the stock exchange?
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: At that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So-- Because I'd gotten--
Speaker 2: And the only reason I'm so interested and we'll move forward is because I just saw the movie 'Let's Do It Again.'
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Remember with Bill Cosby--
Speaker 1: I didn't see that.
Speaker 2: And Sidney Poitier and it's all about them and running numbers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I didn't--
Speaker 2: You know, and the banker and the this and the--so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So--but this movie was like in the 19--it was made in 1972 [sic.] I think.
Speaker 1: I got to see that.  Well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's called 'Let's Do It Again'--
Speaker 1: 'Cause this would be before.
Speaker 2: It's called 'Let's Do It Again.'  Sidney Poitier--
Speaker 1: I got--okay.
Speaker 2: --directed it, but it was Sidney Poitier and Bill Cosby and, and they go to New Orleans [Louisiana] to run numbers--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --for the church.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause they wanna build a new sanctuary.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So they take the church savings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, but it's very similar to what you're saying.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that, that--
Speaker 2: So you started--
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I--let me see, I went away--I went away in 19--when did I go away?  Nineteen fifty-three [1953], so I'm talking earlier than that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So--but you're making your money with the Luciano--what, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Moriarty.
Speaker 2: Mariat (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Newsboy.
Speaker 2: Newsboy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, there were--there were other black bankers, but he was considered the biggest one.  He had come from a news--he used to be a newsboy.
Story_ID: 531685
Speaker 1: Now, was that illegal at the time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first arrest was with Ray Brown.  You know who--Ray Brown, the attorney?  In fact, we're just talking about him today.  He was--he was--I was his first case, yeah, he--on a number writing deal.  And--but he--
Speaker 1: And how did they catch you?  How would they catch you on a numbers writing because--
Speaker 2: Well, quite frankly, I, I made the mistake of having the slips on me.  I had developed--remember my memory, the thing again, I had developed my memory and I was influenced by Cadillac Stewart [ph.].  Remember the Malcolm X movie ['Malcolm X'], the guy who wouldn't write anything down?  That was--I think--I haven't seen Spike [Spike Lee].  Every time I see him I mean to ask him, but in Jersey City [New Jersey], there was a brother that we called Cadillac Stewart; he used to drive this big, long Cadillac, and he was a number writer, did his number writing around Dewey Square [ph.], you know, and he would never write anything down.  And all of us young number writers wanted to be like Cadillac Stewart, you know (laughter).  So I think that Malcolm and Spike Lee, somehow wove that in, heard of, of, of--
Speaker 1: Cadillac.
Speaker 2: Cadillac Stewart and wove that in because there was a character, Cadillac Stewart.  He lived on (unclear) Avenue in Jersey City and all of us young cats wanted to be like Cadillac.  Man, Cadillac don't write nothing down, man.  Cadillac--when you--when you start, you know, he'd go where you go, he might be around somewhere and you say, "Hey, Cadillac, I want 322 straight up, man," and you give him the money and he'd point, got it, you know.  "Man, Cadillac, give me so and so and so," and he's never known to fail to pay people who hit.  So I figured that I'm gonna be Cadillac.  You know, I'm always trying to strive to the best at whatever you gonna be.  So I--when I started writing, I start practicing not writing anything down.  So I started--until I get to a, a--there was a gambling joint in Jersey City.  I still go by there.  Now, it's moved around a little bit, but it was called the Colored Independent Civic Association [Jersey City, New Jersey], on Jackson Avenue [Martin Luther King Drive] is what it is called, and anything and everything that happened in Jersey City would come through there.  I mean, gamblers, politicians, prostitution, everything come through there.  So I was very close with the people who ran--who owned the place.  In fact, they hired me as the houseman when I was sixteen.  In other words, it was the gambling place.  And by houseman, it meant that I cut the games, all the gambling games that was going on, you know, you get a certain percentage for the house, you know, and I was the person who collected.  I was about sixteen years old.  So when they had moved further down Jackson Avenue, it was a vikings club at first and then they moved further down, became the Colored Independent Civic Association.  So everybody knew me and they kind of like--'cause I'm the youngest dude around.  You know, I'm in my teens and I'm, I'm, I'm gambling with the old veterans, you know, and so they--you know, you--they kind of liked it.  In their twisted mind, they think they, they helping the kid, you know?  So (laughter), so that would be my drop, the club, CICA, 'cause then I could get to the room and go in the back and tally up, write all the numbers out of my head on, on the sheet of paper, tally up the money, and then get it to Newsboy [Joseph "Newsboy" Moriarty], and he'd be driving around.  He never would--he was the raggediest banker.  Man, he'd have this old hat, he drive the oldest car in town and have on the raggediest clothes in town, and then get the money to him.  So I started with like say five or six blocks, you know, memorizing, you know, and then get to the club, write it down.  And I got so I could do about twelve blocks of--you know, from, from Jersey City say--the CICA was on Union Avenue [sic. Union Street], about twelve blocks would be around Claremont [Avenue] or further up that you would stop in people's houses and then stop on the corners, barber shop, you know, beauty saloon, you know, I could--just like Cadillac (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, just like Cadillac, man.  "Hey, doc [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], you know, give me so and so and so," well, they wouldn't--"doc, give me so and so and so," you got it, get the money.  So when I got to the--write it, you know, and never, never, never reneged on anybody who hit.  So I had this going and, as I said, I was good, good with the pool stick, good with the--with the--with the cards, and, and, you know, was doing, doing pretty well.  I made my way around the metropolitan area, Harlem [New York, New York], Brooklyn [New York], whatever, and then I got out--got strung out on this dope thing.  But the--for--the rest with Ray Brown came because I made the mistake of holding the number slips and they caught me.  Then, they swooped on me and they caught me and put me in jail, but the, the bankers pay off everything.  And so Ray Brown had just started and I remember he, he was so, so stayed and, and regaled and, and, and commanding in his bearing.  And so when we came up to this judge and he was telling the judge, you can't sent--sentence this man anywhere because there's no corpus delicti.  And so the judge say, "What the hell are you talking about?"  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, man, he said, "What are you talking about?"  Anyway, they, they paid a fine, so no big deal.
Story_ID: 531686
Speaker 1: But then as I'm using this stuff [heroin], I'm getting strung out.  Now, I've got to find ways--my gambling can't support--you, you know, so now I've got to find other ways.  So then I got into the selling business, you know, and, and so began to sell it.  I didn't like it.  I hated it.  Not--I don't know that there was any kind of moral reasons, I just didn't like the fact that I was enslaved and didn't like the fact that I was doing what I didn't want to do to support an enslavement.  So I would never get real deep in it.  What I would do--because all I really wanted to do was just support my habit.  If I could just support my habit, I could make it otherwise.  So I would buy and get people to sell and, and I would take a very small percentage to stay away from it, so I would never wanna be close to it.  Even at that time, there wasn't a lot of time that we were given--that--I, I guess I just didn't like the, the feel of it.  Because when I really got strung out, I went to the hospital.  I tried to turn myself in.  I went to Margaret Hague Hospital [Margaret Hague Maternity Hospital] in Jersey City [New Jersey] and I said I'm sick.  I--you know, I must've been maybe about seventeen, eighteen.  I'm sick--I'm, I'm--you know, I, I need help.  I need help.  They didn't know what to do (laughter).  They sent me home.  The only treatment center was in Lexington, Kentucky, at the time, and I sure wasn't going way out there.  And so the, the only other--the only two other persons that I--that I knew in the metropolitan area at that time who were strung out, there was a brother here in Brooklyn [New York] who was strung out and they say he went to Lexington and this brother who turned me on.  So there wasn't anything for me to do but go back out and get deeper.  So as I got deeper in it, I, I, I developed a, a check cashing ring.  You know, we had identified the times checks would be delivered, and so we had people who would go and steal the checks and then we had a--what, what do they call it, laundry--laundered the money.  You know, we had business who would--know that they were checks, would still cash it and so we got--so I got busted on that rap, right.  So the feds came and they bust me and I got out on bail.  But that was a federal charge of, of, of--
Speaker 2: Embezzlement or whatever.
Speaker 1: Check--
Speaker 2: Larceny or whatever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, larceny (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Grand larceny.
Speaker 1: Check and, and then forgery.
Speaker 2: Forgery.
Speaker 1: Yeah because we had to forge people's names.  And so I got out on bail but I'm still--you know, I'm still out there.
Story_ID: 531687
Speaker 1: No, I tried to join the [U.S.] Army first.  Yeah, before, before the arrest 'cause I--(laughter) I tried to join the Army.
Speaker 2: But you were strung out at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they didn't--
Speaker 1: I, I was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --getting further and further out.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So I figured if I get in the Army, I can get away from everything, right?  So I had to be before I was eighteen 'cause I had to get my momma [Emmie Cheatham Williams] to sign.  So I went down to register to sign up.  I got--interesting, I got all that stuff--you know, I keep it before me.  This is--and I went down to sign up and, and they rejected me, said I was dummy.  That ain't what they said, said well, we don't, you know, need you at this time.  And so when I went to my mama, I said, "Mama, you know, you need to sign.  I wanna go in the Army."  She said, "No son, don't go in the Army."  But I always believed she was crying crocodile tears.  I think deep down, she's saying, son, go, go, go--please don't go, son--said, yeah, go, go (laughter).  So, I--she signed, I went down and they rejected me.  Now, the Korean War is building up.  This in the '50s [1950s], right?  The Korean War is, is, is building up.  And when the Korean War built up, I went back down to--and man, I suddenly became an, an intellectual, you know.  I mean, yeah, yeah, come on in, glad to have you (laughter).  So I signed up, went in the Army.  I was about eighteen, nineteen or something like that, went in the Army and stayed there, but I'm still strung out, you know.  I'm still using dope.  My, my sergeant--
Speaker 2: What year did you join the Army?
Speaker 1: I can tell you 'cause I got the picture right inside.  It was 1950, I think it was.
Speaker 2: You--
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: And it was the Army.
Speaker 1: It was the Army.
Speaker 2: Did you go to Korea?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So you didn't go.
Speaker 1: That's when--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I decided not--that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Okay, so tell me about your Army career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when I joined the Army, I'm strung, so now I figure I'd get away, just wanted to get away from this--the whole scene.  It was--it was destroying me and just--and, you know, I was creating havoc in a lot of people's lives, you know, which always bothered me.  And one of the things I did see--you mentioned a question about what did your parents [Emmie Cheatham Williams and Alonzo Daughtry] think, and I remember when, when it--I, I can remember my mother starting to age.  I could see that, you know, looked like her hair was turning gray, her face was looking haggard.  So I said if I can get in the Army, I can get away.
Story_ID: 531688
Speaker 1: So I got in the [U.S.] Army, got as far as Fort Dix, New Jersey, and, and my master sergeant was a brother from Brooklyn [New York] and he's strung out.  So, here he's supposed to be--I'm supposed to be--the Army and we shooting dope, you know, we (laughter), Lord.  I said there no--there's just ain't no help for me, Lord.  But I stayed through Fort Dix.  I did that bivouac but it was a challenge, you know.  I kind of got--I guess for me, I rise to the occasions of challenges, so when they said, you know, the bivouac training in fourteen weeks, you know, and man, we bivouacked.  We went through the training, the, the rifle and the whatever.  And, and then after we completed the bivouac in, in, in, in, in, in Trenton [New Jersey], they sent me to Aberdeen, Maryland, the proving grounds, right?  So now, I'm a soldier, man.  I--yeah, I'm, I'm ready to kill somebody, all right.  They then taught me how to go under the, the barbed wire fence, you know, and with the machine gun over here and how to take a machine gun next and I--you know, I'm good at the rifle.  I mean this, this rifle stuff feels good and I'm ready.  So they sent me to Aberdeen Proving Grounds [Aberdeen, Maryland], but I'm still strung out.  Then, the orders came.  I went to school there and then the orders came for me to go to Korea and, and, and one of my friends, Stitch, Stitch Henderson [ph.], he went to Korea, never came back, man.  We still don't know today whatever happened to Stitch.  We always, you know, growing--and, and so now I got these Korean orders and, and I go outside out of the base on I think it was Route 54 [Maryland Route 54], red--a little restaurant out there and I, I--I'm, I'm sharp, you know.  You know how we were.  We were sharp with the buttons, polished shoes, spit shined we done learn, and all the--pressed down and I gotta go to the bathroom.  So I comes out of the camp and where you catch the train right on the other side, there's a little diner, and I run into the diner to go to the bathroom.  Man, that guy stopped me at the door.  He said, "You can't come in here."  I said, "Man, I gotta go to the bathroom."  He said, "I don't care where you going, you ain't coming."  I said, "I don't wanna eat (laughter), I just gotta," my knees knocking.  And he said, "No, you can't come in here.  You gotta get, get out of here," couldn't go there, man.
Speaker 2: Because you were black?
Speaker 1: Because I was black.  I'm, I'm, I'm in the--I'm sharp.  I'm going to Korea.  I'm gonna kill some folk to protect American liberty, you know?  You know, I'm, I'm ready to go.  And I can't even go outside.  So, listen, I'm thinking wait a minute, if I gotta kill somebody--I don't wanna kill nobody, you know, but if I just gotta kill somebody I don't need to go thousands of miles away, I can start with this dude right down there on the corner (laughter).  So I go back to the base and I went in; when I went in, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] or was it Truman [President Harry S. Truman]?  One of the presidents had just begun to integrate the armed services, and what I saw made you sick.  Because when I went in, in the front part of the camp, there's these beautiful white barracks, well painted just like the houses in Georgia, beautifully well cleaned, the service club up on the hill like some mansion, you know, beautiful pool tables and, and everything was clean.  And you go down to the bottom or the base, you see old, dingy shanties and the pool table is ripped up and--that's where the black soldiers were.  And so I decided, ain't no need in me going to no Korea to fight, so I'm strung out anyway, you know.  So, I'm--yeah, I'm dope--I'm dope addict, you can't trust me with nothing (laughter).  Don't put no rifle--I might--I don't know which way to shoot 'cause I'm--so they, they, they said, okay, they caught me, they said, okay, get out and they gave me an undesirable discharge, you know.  Now, they wouldn't--
Speaker 2: What year, though?  That's--all that happened within one year?
Speaker 1: Within--yeah, one year.  I just--I think I completed about one year and learned some things.  It was a good kind of learning experience again, you know.  In fact, I became soldier of the week.  You know, I'm--you know.
Story_ID: 531689
Speaker 1: In any event, so now I'm back home, I'm nine- about nineteen years old, and--
Speaker 2: Jersey City [New Jersey] or--
Speaker 1: Jersey--
Speaker 2: --Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 1: Jersey City, but I'm still doing the back and forth, principally Jersey City.  And I'm strung out now, so--
Speaker 2: Where are you resting your head at night, though?
Speaker 1: Usually with my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams].
Speaker 2: With your mother.
Speaker 1: You know, because--I'd begun--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to live with a woman, you know, in Jersey City so that, that--live with her a time and then after that, you know, it was usually either by myself or with, with some woman, but I could always go back to Mama.
Story_ID: 531690
Speaker 1: So, coming out of the [U.S.] Army now, I'm still strung out and so I'm back on the street and I go back to the place where I had originally been the house man, you know, in charge of the games and, of course, they were glad to see me back and I got my old job back, the number writing and all of that.  But I'm strung out and, and now, somebody hit and I'm so far out, I just used the money myself which was a no-no.  You know, that put everybody after me.  Now, I got number writers and I, I got real gangsters, you know, kind of after me.  Then, I tried to get involved with one of the old hustlers, veterans.  As I mentioned, said that the numbers come from Wall Street [New York, New York] and he had devised, he thought a plan of getting the number early, when it first hit and getting it to the street to the number writer before it becomes public, and if we could do that, then we had a way of cheating the bankers.  And, again, he said, "No, you a young cat, man, you can't be in--do you realize if--you'll get killed.  If anything happen, you gonna be killed, you'll get--." But, again, "No, cut me in, cut me in."  But as it turned out, we missed--something happened that it--we didn't go through with it, but that's how desperate I had become.  I knew I was playing with, with death.  So now I've got to duck and dodge and, and, and so finally, I decided that if I could just now pull a job, you know, just, you know, pull--get a job, you know, just one big hit and then pay off everybody 'cause now I owed everybody.  You know, when I was doing good, people didn't mind loaning you money because you knew you gonna get it back.  Not only that, your rings--your, your gold and diamonds become your constant money.  That's why gamblers--you know, one of the reasons they love the, the--what they call it now, bling bling, yeah.  Because in those days, bling bling meant that if I'm playing skin or gambling and I go broke, I could take off my ring and that would get me so much to dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, so as long as you had the bling bling, you always had (laughter).  So anyway, all that stuff was gone and we tried to do this deal.  I don't know, this brother talked me into it, an armed robbery, and it was just a supermarket.  I don't know what I was thinking.  I guess I wasn't thinking clear enough because I wasn't--I don't know how much I thought I could've gotten out of that, but it was a supermarket and I had the gun, he had the idea, that's about all he had was the idea.  So we took off the supermarket and, and got away.
Speaker 2: How much money did you get?
Speaker 1: Several thousand dollars, you know, it was all right.  It--except that then he ripped me off (laughter).  We got--I didn't--that's what we--that's what the, the police calculated we had, but when we divvied up, there was about a thousand or so dollars, maybe two thousand, as well as I can remember.  But, so he had ripped off part of the money and that--you know, that's the kind of--I hope this message go through all those young brothers out there talking about thieves with honor.  But--so he had ripped off part of the money, and we got away.  And then one of my friends got arrested in, in New York [New York], completely unrelated to what we had done.  So he gave us up to lessen his sentence, isn't that something?  "I know who did so and so job, you know, Herb [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], Herb done--did so and so and so and--," Uptown [ph.] was the name of the other brother, "they did so and so job."  So he got a cut sentence and, and we went, went to jail.  So now, I'm in jail.
Story_ID: 531691
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1953, '53 [1953] or '54 [1954], '53 [1953].  So, I'm in jail now, I got--remember the, the, the check cashing charge on me, right, and I got the--now, I got this armed robbery, assault charge and I'm strung out.  So I'm in jail, you know, nineteen fifty--February, strung out, I can't get out, you know, and I'm just in--just desperate.  I don't wanna say I'm a junkie now 'cause now the word is out, you know, these junkies are crazy and there ain't no telling what they'd do to me now (laughter).  So, so now I'm sick, I got all this time, and so I'm--I remember sitting there in that jail cell, it was a police precinct because it was a holiday which meant that you don't go directly to say the, the, the county jail or wherever.  For instance, if you got arrested on a holiday, they send you to these little police jails.  They stink, they roll in--dah, dah, dah, dah, and I had to stay there over the weekend before they sent me to Pavonia Avenue [Hudson County Jail] in Jersey City [New Jersey] which is where they hold you for the trial, a little bit better.  So I'm sitting there and, and all of this--these lives, you know, is coming across.  I'm, what am I?  I'm about twenty-two maybe and I done lived through all this stuff, man, and, and all kind of faces started coming back at me, you know, people that I'd done stuff to and--particularly, I had a young lady, boy, I had been looking for her ever since.  She, she was--we were very close during those teen years and she loved the ground I walked on.  And--but I got strung out and, and, and, you know, people were putting people on the block, people were turning people around.  And so some people came and I said, man, put the sister on the block, you know what I mean?  (Unclear) you know the Malcolm X movie ['Malcolm X'], this nice (unclear).  So, I said, you know--you know, put the sister and she was a looker, she was beautiful.  Just a--man, you know--can you imagine what kind of money--but, anyway, I disappeared.  I just left her.  I never told her what was happening, never--I just walked out of her life.  And, and years after that, I always remember what had happened.  So I went back to look for her.  After I come out of the [U.S.] Army, I went back to look for her and I found her.  Rose [ph.] was her name, and I tried to tell her.  I said, you know, "I was messed up, I didn't know."  She said, "But you never said a word.  You never said--," and after that, I be left and, and I don't know.  I still look for her.  I'm almost certain that, that she's dead now 'cause just about everybody coming along those days are dead.  I'm about--maybe the only one left.  And I often wondered why with my, you know, visibility and high profile, I keep hoping that some of the old friends--I go looking for them some time up around the old hangouts in Jersey City.  I still go over there, I know where they are.  That club is still there, so I go over there and sit with people for a while.  Just about everybody is gone but there are pictures on the wall.  But any event, I'm there now, strung out, and all this stuff come--so I got on my knees and I said, Lord, I made a mess of things.  I just--I just need to give you my life.  And I'm not sure what I'm doing.  I'm not sure I'm--I've been manipulating and cheating and swindling so long, I'm not sure I'm not playing games now.  I may be playing games, but as, as far as I know in my heart, I wanna make a change, and I wanna give you my life here, now in this stinking jail cell, and you do whatever you please, but I don't ever wanna go back to where I was before.  And I can say, from that day to this day, I been changed.  I went to jail, I didn't get out, you know.  And it was a good thing, looking back.  I some time use that as a teaching tool.  I went--
Speaker 1: How long did you stay?
Speaker 2: About five and a half years.  I went--I did--I went to the state for the armed robbery 'cause I hurt the guy, I assaulted the guy up a little bit.
Speaker 1: You shot?
Speaker 2: No, roughed him up.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I assaulted him.  And so I had three charges of, of armed robbery.  So I got seven to ten years on, on each count, but the judge ran them concurrently, so I ended up with seven to ten years for the state.  Now, you know, that was a jolt 'cause I said, Lord, you know I give my life to you.  I--you know, you don't have to give me all this time.  And then, I went to the feds and the fed, they gave me two years, and that really threw me for a loop 'cause I said, Lord, why do I need two more years?  If I can just make it through this other, I don't need two more years.  It seemed like to me he would at least got me out of the two years, but they gave me the two years.  So I started in, in Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey] which was tough; it was a tough jail, one of the toughest in the country, maximum security, did about three years there, right--three, yeah, I did about three years there, and they paroled me from New Jersey, Trenton, to the feds.  Because, you know, state, they, they figure, he ain't going nowhere, so my parole said that we parole you to the feds.  You will complete your sentence there and once you're on the street, you'll do the rest of your state time on parole, you know, so they got me locked in.  And as it happened--it must've been about four years I did--oh, yeah, I did part-time waiting for the court on Pavonia Avenue in, in the county jail, waiting for the trial, waiting for the court to come up.
Story_ID: 531692
Speaker 1: Now, Ray Brown is still my lawyer.
Speaker 2: I was about to ask (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Where was Ray Brown?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was still my lawyer, but he said I didn't--he--I didn't wanna fight because I ended up pleading guilty.  Because now I made a commitment, right?  And the first test of my commitment was, was I gonna go to court lying?  I mean, I did it.  That's it (laughter).  The--so I had to say, no, I made a commitment.  I'm trying to clean up things, so I'm, I'm pleading guilty, so I did.  And he even visited me when I was in Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey].  In fact, I got the receipt that he gave my mama [Emmie Cheatham Williams] for the fifty dollars that (laughter) he charged.
Speaker 2: Now, the riot you talked about in, in New Jersey--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Were they prior to this or after you got out?
Speaker 1: This was prior to this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: You said there were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --big riots and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were, you know, a couple of riots that were on the verge of happening because one of the white guys had done--had, had pushed me and he was a pretty big guy.  And when the bigger guys my, my brother's age heard about it, they went looking for him and punched him out.  And when they did that, then white guys began to circle all--from all across the world it looked like, and, of course, black guys had begun to circle, too.  So they met and kind of developed a truce on Jackson Avenue [Jersey City, New Jersey].  I--whatever that meant.  In other words, Jackson Avenue, one of the main stems--it's Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard [Martin Luther King Drive] now.  You know how it is when the, the streets deteriorate and they become Martin Luther King, something.  But any event, they met and they developed a truce, so that was one kind of race riot that, that was averted, didn't, didn't, didn't, you know, come to fruition.  But there were always, always, you know, tension.
Story_ID: 531693
Speaker 1: But growing up in Brooklyn [New York], we, we grew up, though, with Irish, Jews, Italian, you know, and, and we pretty much got on pretty well as I--well as I can remember, you know, at that time, you know?
Speaker 2: So, at that time, do you remember--you grew up with everybody.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Were you ever--I mean, later on, you'd been--you'd been said to have said anti-Semitic things.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: Were you ever considerate of that as a young kid?  Did everybody say everything about each other?
Speaker 1: Everything--
Speaker 2: Like--or did you get along?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we got along.  Every--I mean, we called--everybody called everybody names, wops, you know, and guineas (laughter), you know, niggers and spics, and, you know, it was the thing to--I mean, Jews, Jew people down.  And I think some of that as I thought about that, it sort of--people say things--now, I'm sensitive to certain things that we might've said as kids.  Like, you, you know, we wouldn't nothing--what're you trying to do, Jew me down?  You, you know?  That's offensive, you know, but as kids, everybody said Jew me down, you know?  So, so, so they--I don't know it--if it carried the same kind of meaning that it may carry today or maybe as kids, we didn't think about it so much as it being offensive.  Now, I know in the Jewish--as I said, we played ball with Jews and--but now, as I mentioned, the, the, the Jews on the--with the pushcarts--Orthodox push--Jews, with the pushcarts on Saturdays, they would have these pushcarts all week long and then we'd bring them in, and then after we brought them in, then one of the kids momma was the chief in charge of it, Ma Brown [ph.], and she had all these--us kids and we'd bring these pushcarts in at night for nickels and dimes and whatever, and then she'd negotiate the terms.  We, we got a nickel, dime, whatever, and, and then when the Saturdays come, then we were hired to go turn off the lights.  There are certain things that they, they could not do, and then we would do that.  And, and now, what happened is, is that because of this clash--you know, what I--what, what, what, what is true is that we generally have the clash with the people who are closest to us, you know?  And because there was such a closeness between the Jews who had--these pushcart Jews and, and, and the black community, so there was always tension because the kids were trying to steal stuff, they were trying to get us to work for as less as they could, and so in my thinking it was, so that there was this kind of tension, but only with the, the, the pushcart Jews.  We, we, we realized that there was a difference, that, that they didn't represent all the Jews, but that these who were here on these pushcarts and, and, and, and disappear on the weekend--when Saturday come, they disa- the place is clean, that there was a different kind, so we schemed on them, meaning that we'd steal from them.  They, they could've been Irish, Italian, didn't make no difference.  But it--the pickings were--had greater potential in that because they hired us to go and turn off the lights and because the pushcarts were there and they had to be put in somewhere, we knew the stores, we knew which ones could be broken into, et cetera.  But I don't remember our having the, the same--in fact, I'll tell you something.  I--first time--I don't even remember saying this ever publicly before because I know it would be misunderstood.  One of the gangs we had was the Gestapos, right?  And I can tell you that those--in those days, it was just a--you know, it was sharp.  It was--you know, we never made the connection between the hollows of what they were doing.  But if I said today, and as I--I'm, I'm only doing this here, I'm trusting you that there was a--you know, I joined a gang that was the--that were the Gestapos.  We were mem--members of the Gestapos and we were members of the Nits [Royal Knits].  You know, so we had these gangbanging days and that was--happened to be one of the days.  But believe me, there was no association in our mind with hatred to anybody, you know?  So, those were some of the tensions there.
Story_ID: 531694
Speaker 1: So when I went away, in Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey], Trenton was tough.  Trenton--it, it was not geared toward rehabilitation.  It had no gymnasium.  It had no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were there any other--was it--go ahead, no gymnasium.
Speaker 1: No, you could get books but you had to order them.  There was no library, you know.  We played in a--in a yard and there was no library there.
Speaker 2: How were the racial tension--
Speaker 1: Now, but--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, by now, once I did this, this is commitment, see, in, in--at the police precinct in Jersey [Hudson County Jail, Jersey City, New Jersey], now I gotta begin to get myself together, you know.  And, and I remember sitting down writing.  I said, now, you know, I'm beginning to feel that, that God is gonna use me, my experience, my background, my whole family.  I gotta get myself ready.  So then I sat down with a paper and pencil and I said, but, I don't know anything, you know what I mean?  And I began to try to figure out how to write and count, you know, numbers, math, English.  And, man, I was so far off that I used to try to get somebody to help me to write my letters home 'til I could kind of get in the habit.  And so I started--I, I, I drew a list of the things that I needed to study in preparation for one day I'm gonna be home and I wanna be ready, and these are the things I need to get ready.  I got to go back to school, I gotta get my English, I gotta get my math, I gotta get my history, you know, all the subjects, right?  So I started on that quest and started getting books and asking my brothers for different books.  There was a man named John Lawrence that--preacher that my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] sent to pray for me and he became a great friend and followed me through my jail years, so he would bring me all the religious books that I needed.  So during that summer in the Pavonia jail, the county jail, waiting for the grand jury to return, although we didn't need them, I began to get ready.  So when I got to Trenton, you know, I was pretty set, you know, and I was kind of--knew where I was headed and was prepared for the kind of jeering and, and disbelief because, you know, I'm still the doc and, and when I get to the jail, they expect one kind of behavior.  So when they meet another kind, it disoriented people.  In fact, they said to my brother--the word got back on the street to my brother, said, "Man, Herb [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], you know, the doc, something going off on his head.  Man, he's into that religious stuff, you know.  Man, you gotta, you know, watch him (laughter)."  So Trenton, I, you know, prepared.  I, you know, read all that I could.  And what I would do in Trenton I've learned is to--is to--is to--I, I maneuvered myself into a position of being a part of the orientation when new people come in, so every, every prisoner come in that come through this orientation.  And so I, I wanted to be there so I could see who was coming in and, and, et cetera.  So you can imagine looking down the book of--and seeing all these former gangsters who had come through Trenton.  So I, I--when, when a professor would come through, I would be looking for a different kind of professor for--professor for history, professor of English, whatever would come through.  I'd pull him on, I'd say, "Man, listen, I heard that you a professor, you're a teacher."  Said, "Yeah, yeah," I said, "Listen, I wanna t--I wanna learn.  Teach me, you know, what'll it cost me to teach me?"  So I pay--in, in jail, everything is done in, in cigarettes, you know.  So even if you--if you into prostitution thing, it's so many cartons of cigarettes, you betting so many cartons of cigarettes, so for me now to get a professor, tutor, you know, was so many cartons of cigarettes that I had to pay.  So I know how was coming in and who was the professor of this, that, and the other, and that's how I started, you know, getting my education, and, and reading everything that I could.  So by the time I got to Lewisburg [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania], I had done about four years in Trenton, right, and Lewisburg, they did come to get me and they took me to Lewisburg, the feds, and now I'm in the fed's hand, and that was like graduate work because the prison--the whole thing was different.  When I--when--you remember Ethel Rosenberg, remember that case?  Her brother was there.  He was--he was my math teacher, Harry Gold, you know, he was the story--he used to love to tell stories.  He was a--you know, he just wanted to tell stories.  We had a literature class.  My professor of, of, of English was a German trader named Chandler [ph.].  And so my teachers were--it was a higher caliber of, of intellectuals there.  These were, you know, super gangsters so to speak.  And so, so that's where I did my graduate work.  In, in other words, you had a extensive library.  Man, you could go--you had more freedom.  I could go and stay in the library all day.  The guys would make fun of me because I had--I got this great big watch and I became disciplined, you know.  I had so much time, I'm gonna spend here, so much time I'd spend on this subject, and so when I'd take out my watch--we'd be sitting around talking, so when I take out my watch and look at my watch, I don't care what we're talking about, I'll see ya later, and I go to the books, you know, and, and, and--philosophy--I, I knew that I had to get into the whole philosophical mindset, the German (unclear), Kant [Immanuel Kant], Schopenhauer [Arthur Schopenhauer], (unclear), the full range of to the best that I could do in that period.  And then I--through correspondence, I graduated from high school through the correspondence in Pennsylvania, and then started doing college work.  I didn't stay long enough to complete the college work.  So that's how I, I sort of got ready to do the ministry.
Story_ID: 531695
Speaker 1: So in the prison, I became conscious of, of, of the kind of ministry that I felt God was calling me to, was what they later called holistic ministry, that is the continuing spiritual depth, but now the dimension, a Afrocentric dimension, because I realized what had happened to us, and in our study of, of history and theology, how even, even while the Bible is accurate, it had been taught in a way so as to make Europeans still superior when in fact the Bible writers understood blackness to be the origin of civilization.  Those early biblical writers understood that there was--it was blackness out of which it all came.  And, and even, even within the Jewish community, the com- maybe one of the reasons why there's constant tension, there's always been because out of--out of the Jew--the Jewish situation, the Jews who were originally called Hebrew Israelites according to the Bible, those who cross over, those who have special relationship with God has crossed over into Egypt, right, and Egypt was a black country and they stayed there hundreds of years, so that's why when they came out, so much of what is Judaism had already been in Egypt and already been in Africa, so I understood this and, and, and be--and knew I had to teach this.  In addition to that, I knew I had to teach the revolutionary dimension, that there was no way, you know, you could be religious now as I understood it and not challenge the powers that exploit people.  So when I came home, you know, I came home with that kind of religious understanding and the attempt to implement that.
Story_ID: 531696
Speaker 1: But I knew it was gonna be a struggle because, you know, let's face it.  When I came home, I did--I came home in '58 [1958] and, you know, people weren't talking black.  Black Power hadn't arrived in '58 [1958], you know, in essence, so in my jail years, I was in a kind of incubation, you know.  These ideas had time to--I'm--would you believe I'm kind of grateful for my prison experience because the ideas that were forced--that were coming in my mind, I had a chance to test them out because we used to gather in the yard and debate with the Nation of Islam.  I knew that they were gonna have tremendous success in our--among our people because I encountered them in jail.
Speaker 2: I was going to ask how parallel was your journey to Malcolm X's.  Were, were the timeframes the same?
Speaker 1: He was, what earlier I think than I.
Speaker 2: He was earlier.
Speaker 1: He came out--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the same.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: He found Allah, I found Jesus (laughter) or they found us, right.
Speaker 2: But I am interested in your confrontations with them on the grounds.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, with the--
Speaker 2: Because they were much more Afrocentric than anyone else you'd ever encountered.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And, and that's what I recognized.  See, when I first encountered--nineteen fifty--well, when I went into Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey], say about 1954, '55 [1955], is I met a brother and we started talking and then we started--
Speaker 2: What did he say?
Speaker 1: Well, he was saying, "Man, you know, you don't even know who you are, man.  You know, you Christian, that's the white man's trick bag, brother.  Don't you know that's the white man trick bag?  White man created Christianity to keep, keep the niggers in their place, keep you docile.  You don't know what--what's your name?  What's your name?  Your name Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry]?  That's a slave name, man.  You got a slave name, brother.  You need to get rid of that name, you know.  Look at that, see, that a white Jesus.  Ain't nothing about--black about that.  Look at all these pictures.  They all white, brother.  Join into your own, the Nation of Islam, you know, Elijah Muhammad, you need to join--." And I'm hearing this and it's making sense, right?  He's making sense but at the same time he isn't making sense.
Speaker 2: How did you then find blackness in that white Christianity that he was talking about?
Speaker 1: What he did was challenge me to go to the history books, to do the research, right?  And the more research I did, the more I found that they, they were after something.  They were after the blackness as origin of civilizations but they had it in a--in a--in a faulty theology.  In other words, the history--they was shooting for a history which, which, which told the truth as it relates to blackness, black civilizations of, of Sumer and Egypt and, et cetera, et cetera.  But what, what--and they were--see, they were accurate.  One of the things I discovered early on, they were accurate in their indictment of Europeans, right.  See they would--all the--all the bad stuff they could say about Europeans, it was true.  I mean, they did all that and more.  So I learned early on not to get into a debate on the evils of the white man, you, you know.  I add to that.  I--brother, I know some things, too.  You don't--did you read about so and so and so--but where we differed is that they would say that the white man is incurably evil, that the white man's coming out of Yakub, the big head scientist had been created from the evil in us and had created the white--so the white man is in--incorrigibly evil.  So I said, come on, brother, you know better than that.  You know, people are more apt to act as they do because of their family system, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  So we would argue on that score.  And then as I did my research--see, what I did then is we--I challenged them to a debate in the yard, say, "Come on, let's, let's take it to the yard.  Let's take it out to the yard and let's, let's debate it."  Because now, they began to accuse me of putting people back in the icehouse.  See, they said it--they had resurrected the brothers and I come along, put them back in the (laughter)--because I saw that their argument was faulty.  So we go to the yard and debate, right, and, and my mind was sharp.  I'd done my research, you know, and, and could argue their case and, and mine too.  So in some instances, they were being made to look like fools and, you know, people would laugh at them.  And then somebody came to me and told me, said, you know, "Listen, brother, maybe you need to back up because the brothers don't like it, you know, that you're--they say that you putting brothers back in the icehouse and they don't like it."  So I gotta make a decision, you know, whether I'm gonna take them on and there, there were people who was with me, you know, who had become in a sense converted through my teachings, and so it would've been a blood bath.  So I said, wait a minute, I'm gonna get out or here, man, you know.  So I will not--I, I struck a compromise that I could live with myself 'cause I wasn't gonna stop teaching, I said, okay, we won't do the debates anymore, you know, but I'm not gonna stop teaching brothers who wanna know, and so that's how we were able to live together and, and not have the clash until I got home.
Story_ID: 531697
Speaker 1: Who after getting out was the first civil rights leader that you encounter that had an impact on you?  And it's a one minute answer.
Speaker 2: I, I can't answer that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I need a little time to think about it.  That's a good way to, to, to start back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to think about it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Who, who, who was the civil rights, who was the leader.  I know that Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at that time I--'cause in '55 [1955] as you know, he was starting out and, and Emmett Till was killed.  I remember when he was killed, I, in jail wanted to raise some money to send to, to, to family, to the movement [Civil Rights Movement].  But, so, I'll have to think about who, who really--when I got out where did I go.  I can tell you the Evangelist, you know, John Lawrence, the brother that started with me from, from five some years before was there who was--I hung out with.  I had to hang onto his coattail, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, we'll, we'll end here, but we'll also go back to some more stories about the days inside [prison] because that's interesting.  I'm interested in you raising money for Emmett Till.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you know Reverend George Lee [George W. Lee]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: By chance?
Speaker 2: I did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I'd heard of him and but I did not know him personally.
Speaker 1: But he was murdered also?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I want--
Story_ID: 531698
Speaker 1: This is the second part of an, an original interview we started a few weeks back.  I don't remember the exact date.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But if you will reintroduce yourself.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I am--
Speaker 1: Spell out your name for me.
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm Herb Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry].  I serve as the national minister of The House of the Lord Churches [The House of the Lord Church].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November the 26th, 2006 [sic. November 27th, 2006].
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is 415 Atlantic Avenue between Bond [Street] and Nevins [Street], that's downtown Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay and just for the record again, same interviewer.  I'm Shawn Wilson, interviewer, Neculai Burghelea, videographer.
Story_ID: 531699
Speaker 1: So because--we will pick up where we left off.  We left off talking--we, we had talked about the Nation of Islam and then we were talking about what impact the Emmett Till murder had on you at that time in your life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you had served some time in jail and was--and was coming out of that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We will come back to that just because I wanna move forward to today because history is being made here in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I would like to have comment on what is happening.  We saw it with the Amadou Diallo case.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We've seen it several times before, police brutality in African American communities.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If you can just tell me briefly what the issue is this time around and what role you're playing on the inside.
Speaker 2: Well, the issue is police abuse of power and that's a comprehensive term which covers everything from police killings to police disrespect, to even language abuse.  In this particular instance, police officers fired fifty rounds, shots into a vehicle in which were three African American males.  One was killed, Sean Bell, twenty-three, he was killed.  He was hit--he was the driver, hit four times.  Another person named Guzman [Joseph Guzman], he was shot--he was hit I think eleven times, and he is presently in critical condition, and the third person was Benefield [Trent Benefield].  He was hit three times.  He seems to be in stable condition.  According to the police report, the policeman, there were five in all, were two in the car, two walking, and another undercover cop coming up one of the streets.  They, according to the police, thought they heard one of the persons say that he had a gun or go get my gun.  According to the police, one of the officers jumped up on the hood and said, "I'm a police officer, pull over, put your hands up."  And according to the police report, the person driving the car which had backed up, now put it in, in gear, in drive, and rammed into the police van whereupon police began to fire their weapons into the car.  One officer, a twelve-year veteran fired thirty-five times.  Another officer shot, what seventeen, and, and all total it came to fifty shots.  Witnesses say there was no such thing as identification and that Sean never rammed into the police car, it was the other way around.  So what we have is conflicting reports.  What is hard to understand is the fifty shots being fired at a car in which there were no arms and thirty-five by--and one officer, which means he had to reload, so he had time to think about reload and, and fire.  At present, I've been involved with the, the prayer vigil yesterday, yesterday being a Sunday the 25th, November 25th, and also in a meeting with the mayor [Michael Bloomberg] today.  [HistoryMaker] Reverend Al Sharpton has been the lead person in this regard, and he it was who called me and gave me an update on what happened and asked me to, to be involved with him.  We have had--well, Sunday, yesterday, we met with the family after the rally, after the prayer vigil, we met with the family, and so today, later today is a meeting with the D.A. [district attorney], D.A. Brown [Richard Brown] in Queens [New York].  That's about where it stand.
Story_ID: 531700
Speaker 1: Of course, everybody--at the, the meeting today with the mayor [Michael Bloomberg], I guess just about every black leader who has any stature or, or renown or known was, was at the meeting, pardon me, and it was a pouring out of, of the usual frustration and fury at the police behavior, which was a unan--unanimity on police ba- a, a pattern of police abuse which is what I call abuse of power.  And it was interesting because it, it was a wide spectrum of leadership, but there, there was a unanimity on the abuse of police behavior in our community.
Speaker 2: Who were some of those leaders that showed up today?
Speaker 1: Well from the political side, it's hard to say who was not there (laughter).  Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] was there, the House and Means [U.S. House Committee on Ways and Means] person, the chairperson elect.  There were--just about every, every elected official out in the Queens [New York] area.
Speaker 2: Well, Reverend [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], let me ask you this.  When an incident--and, and these incidences have happened before.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: All right, and well just go back to the most recent one, Amadou Diallo.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What are--what are the leaders talking about behind closed doors?  Okay, you have Charlie Rangel here--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You have, I'm sure Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] is--.
Speaker 1: He was not there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: But I mean, a part of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A part of the leadership.
Speaker 2: --of the, the, the leadership.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And so behind closed doors, what is that you're talking about in an instant like this?
Speaker 1: Right.  And the same thing we always talk about which is what's one of my frustration as I raised it at the meeting.  Number one, the police's pattern of abusive behavior.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 2: --part we understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But go ahead.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then--and then number two, the imperative for the mayor to set the tone, mayor--and how the mayor approached these instances.  The mayor can deliver a no nonsense posture that if any abuse of police power, that the hammer will fall significantly.  There is the question of, of, of how policeman are trained.  Are they trained properly?
Speaker 2: So these are the issues that you would gather with--that you would talk about behind closed doors once people left the steps of the city hall, the rally today, and people are, you know, dispersed or talking in smaller groups.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They're talking about the issues you've, you've mentioned.
Speaker 1: That--that's some of the issues--
Speaker 2: Some of the issues.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about.
Story_ID: 531701
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Does anyone talk about what steps the black community needs to take to rid ourselves of being at the other end of this police brutality?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there anything we can do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not--generally, in that meeting, I mean we talk among ourselves, but at that meeting, it was--utilized the time to challenge the, the, the, the officials.  But when we talk among ourselves, obviously we are concerned that--how young black males in particular, approach the police.  They should always approach them from a defensive posture, not to engage in any, any verbal exchanges, not to adopt a--an in--a, a, a hostile posture, but to be very responsive and very respectful to the police no matter what they do because we tell them that you may be deliberately being provoked and it doesn't take much for them to shoot you or to beat you up.  So we try to tell them to watch their words, watch their attitude, watch their behavior.  We try to tell them to steer clear of anything that smacks of suspicious behavior, to, to, to--even--in some instances tell them dress a certain way because they're marked.  They--there, there is a--there is a--there is a, a--there is an image that is--that is projected or there's an image that the police have internalized which represents for them a threat and, therefore, they--even to remember that the image that they're projecting.  Obviously, we tell them stay out of trouble, that's a foregone (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let me ask you this.  As a community leader--
Speaker 2: And, and one other thing--
Speaker 1: Okay, one other--go ahead.
Speaker 2: Is that should anything happen, to, to move away, don't try to engage the police, but to call, you know, a--various numbers, various ministers.  You, you--what you do is back away and call us and we'll take it up from there.  Don't you try to engage in any kind of altercation.
Story_ID: 531702
Speaker 1: This is a civil rights issue.  You see it as a civil rights issue?
Speaker 2: The--that--now that's--I see it as such--
Speaker 1: As--okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a--that's a possibility--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of raising that issue.  We have done that before.  We have not won any, any of the--those cases significantly.  We used to raise that issue when Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] was the U.S. attorney here in, in New York.  On several occasions, we came to him to raise the issue of the civil rights violation.  Because at the local level here, justice has never been served.  The, the, the Louima [Abner Louima] case, I think, was the first one to my, my memory, that police officers stepped up to start saying what happened with their colleagues' behavior.  You--generally, everybody clam up and this is why I reject and criticize that phrase that, you know, every--there's only a few bad apples in the police department.  Well, you, you can't have it bad both ways.  You can't say that many of the police officers are good cops and, and you got bad cops and nobody does anything about it.  If in fact you are the majority and you are a good cop, then you ought to be able to have some influence on the bad cops.  You ought to be able to police your own barrel of bad apples because if you don't, then they gonna spoil the whole bushel.  Not only that, I think there was a law that says that you can be accused of aiding and abetting a criminal act although you didn't do anything, so if there are so many of these good police officers, why do we have this continuing police abuse of power and, and seldom if ever does a police officer get convicted and, and they are unable to police themselves.
Story_ID: 531703
Speaker 1: How do you see your role in an incident like this?
Speaker 2: Well, at this point, I see my role as a kind of elder statesman, you know, to try--to, to be there to kind of guide debate, and, and try--our challenge have always been not to try to cool things but to try to use things, that is to give constructive channels to people's outrage.  I mean, it--it's, it's, it's--I don't--I never thought it was a wise counsel to tell people to cool it, cool it.  I think you simply exacerbate the situation.  We've heard some people in the meeting today, particular clergy and, and, and--you know, who always wanna--they've not been around to do anything before and completely off the scene.  They, they, they can't start anything, can't stop anything, don't even know the people who might blow the city up and yet they're the first ones to say cool it, and all that does is infuriate the people who are angry, so we always took the position to challenge people to constructively use their anger, be angry--yeah, get upset, everybody should be angry.  If you're not angry, something wrong with you, but how you gonna channel that anger so that it produces something constructive?  So I think, I guess we can receive the, the dubious credit for New York [New York] never going up in smoke, is that we were able to give--to vent the raw anger of the people, but here is what happened, is that then we get blamed for inflammatory language, you know, using irresponsible language.  But I knew--to give an example, I think this is, you know, part of the history, when Randy Evans [Randolph Evans] was killed, sixteen--fifteen-year-old shot in the head, Arthur Miller was killed or found the next year, so we had pulled--had this massive rally in Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York] because we had had the confrontation with the Hasidic community.  So there were people in the crowd who wanted to blow up the community and I knew this, and I knew who they were.  I didn't wanna see that happen, but I knew that unless I expressed that rage, then they would be bottled up and, in fact, would actualize their rage.  So I stood on the police steps and I said something like, you know, well the next time the Hasidic community touch one of our kids, we gonna tear this community up, right?  Well, I knew it was gonna get headlines and I knew I was gonna be blamed. But I was prepared to take that if in fact my verbiage sole satisfied the people who were going to tear it up.  I--it wasn't me.  I wasn't (laughter) gonna tear up anything, you know?  But if that language could, could satisfy the people who were gonna tear up the community and buy us some time, I was willing to take that, you know, to, to bear that--to bear that brunt, and that's what happened.  Nobody can say that--and where I led rallies and, and, and demonstrate--and I led them all across the city from one thousand to tens of thousands that there was ever any violent confrontation.  The only time it was is--was, was precipitated by the police who was trying to provoke us that--but we never, never--nobody can ever accuse me in all the forty-odd years of leading a violent demonstration.  My language had to be--had to be passionate.  It, it had to.  It had to express the rage.  Otherwise, people were gonna express it another way.  So I read an article maybe about a year ago in which one reporter finally came around to giving me the credit that perhaps I was responsible, that New York didn't go up as other cities did.  So I never try to tell people to cool it.  I tell them to use it.  And some people go that route; we never did.
Story_ID: 531704
Speaker 1: Do you feel that you have led in, in sort of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] language, nonviolent protests?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you preach nonviolence too when you're standing on the steps?  I mean, how, how--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And your phrasing, you know, trying to get the language to talk about it is what I've had to struggle through.  Because King's language wouldn't work in the urban areas of, of, of, of America, I mean.  You can't go to these Bloods out there talking about nonviolent, you know?  I mean, that was for a southern scene, of a middle class southern, you know, scene.  But what we were dealing with when I shared the National Black United Front and we were the--we were the mass base independent, all the rank and radicals and the revolutionaries were in the group, and it was my challenge to hold that body together.  So when something happened in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and Detroit [Michigan], I mean, I--that's the last thing I do is go telling people to be nonviolent, be cool.  You know, that's basically saying, hey, be nice now.  And people are bloodied, they're beat up, cops been killing them.  So I try--although I'm nonviolent up to a point.  I don't--I'm not absolutely nonviolent as King appeared to have been.  I mean, I don't--I'm not a initiator of violence, but I never tell people not to respond.  I--I'm not sure--I'm not sure--I'm not sure it's helpful to say if you're being attacked, humiliated, just take it, turn the other cheek.  I, I don't believe Jesus meant that.
Speaker 1: What role does Christianity play in these protests that--protests that may follow--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This incident or protests that have come before this?  What role does Christianity play?
Speaker 2: I--yeah, I don't--I don't think there's an absolute, you know?  I, I coined a phrase when I was active.  Let's not try to absolute--absolutize methodology.  Now, there are various roles.  There's a role for King to play, you know.  Here's a--somebody need to be calling for nonviolence.  But there's a role that somebody need to be saying if you touch me again, you're gonna bleed, you know.  The--you--you're gonna be hurt as much as you hurt me.  That was the counsel I got by the way when I was growing up.  I don't know if I mentioned that before, as a bully was beating on me and everything and I went to one of my friends, an older guy, and, you know, for help.  "Man," he said, "listen, I can help you but you're gonna have to fight, yourself.  You've gotta convince this bully you gonna hurt him as much as he gonna hurt you and you won't have no more trouble, right?"  Well, it, it worked, you know?  We got in a fight, I closed my eyes and started swinging, and after that, we--he kicked me.  That was the only way he could win and after that became great friends.  So, you, you need somebody out in the street there where, where people are angry.  I mean, they are angry, and to go out there talking about be nice and turn the other cheek, and--that language is not helpful.  So you need a multiple approach.  And so we in the Black United Front took the approach that we never call it nonviolence.  I couldn't even stand before a, a, a Black United Front rally and say we're gonna practice nonviolence.  No, I couldn't do that.  I'm nonviolent and I'd hope for and will strive for and try to use constructive channels, but that's not the place to talk about nonviolence.  The place to talk about there is what are we gonna do to change our community, change ourselves?  What are we gonna do to bring change in this nation and whatever that is, let's do that.  And so if, if we gotta march--because some of our people didn't even like marching.  They couldn't--they didn't even wanna sing (laughter), you know?  Our chapter in Chicago [Illinois], man, the intellectuals, they didn't--they were through with marching and singing, and it was a long time before we even got them to participate in the political process, so it's a multi- multi- multi-tactical approach to the struggle.
Story_ID: 531705
Speaker 1: So when you talked about this on Sunday, yesterday--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Here [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York] to your congregation, what is it you said to them about what needs to be done?
Speaker 2: Well, what I said to them--we have two services, one at 8:00 a.m., 8:00 to 8:45, the microwave service, and then we have one from 12:00 to 2:00.  Well, what I said to those at the 8:00 a.m. service, I won't be at the 12:00 noon 'cause I'm going out to the prayer vigil.  And, and keep in mind, and this is what makes our church different and I guess why we won't ever be classified as the mega churches with the thousands and thousands because I had not been in pulpit for two weeks.  I'd been in Florida, been in Georgia.  So when this happened, I couldn't be in the pulpit and they having a rally, a prayer vigil at 12:00 noon, same time we would be having worship, so I said to people, well, you know where I'm going to be.  I, I won't be in the pulpit this Sunday.  And what I talked about is being trapped in traditions, right?  By that I mean, why should I be in the pulpit and preach to people who've been listening to me preach every--for years and maybe some visitors, right?  Why should--is that where I'm most needed or is it out in the street?  Is it out in Queens [New York] with this family who is grieving, with these people who need direction and these people who look to, to me as--for--to guide--for some kind of guidance?  So my position has always been I'm gonna be where the need is and, and so the pulpit, that may be the last place a preacher may need to be.  So what we have done across the years is--I remember when the Soweto happened in South Africa.  I came to church that morning.  I said, "Listen, I can't be up in this pulpit preaching the sermon.  What we're gonna do is that we're gonna get some caskets, get a casket and we're gonna get a hearse and we're going to five points in the city.  We're going to the South African Mission, we're going to the mayor, we're going to the governor, we're going to (unclear) West End, and to the UN [United Nations]," I said, "and we're gonna make a statement that the world--this city cannot go on with business as usual and our people are being killed in South Africa, and I surely can't stand in the pulpit as a--as usual, so you can come and go with me if you want."  I got in touch with a funeral director; he provided a hearse, got me a--us a coffin, and we did that.  So that has been our challenge, what makes us different than most religious--they have--they are trapped in traditions, Friday, Saturday or Sunday, whatever that is, it calls for a certain kind of ceremony.  The world can be going on fire around the corner, but we gotta do the ceremony, see?  And, and so I've been freed up from that.  It, it, it might've cost me membership or whatever because I understand, people come to religious organizations, they need to be healed.  They, they--and that's legitimate.  They need a personal message.  There's so much crises.  So I'm torn between a crises across the city or across the world and the personal crises before me.  Hopefully, I get another chance at those crises.
Story_ID: 531706
Speaker 1: So when we spoke last time, you--we, we were ending, finishing up with you having served.  What years did you serve?
Speaker 2: Oh, I came home in 1958, I think it was, August of '58 [1958] I think it was.
Speaker 1: And when did you go in?
Speaker 2: I went in about five years before, so that'd be about '53 [1953]--
Speaker 1: So when you were in--
Speaker 2: App--approximate--
Speaker 1: --prison or was it jail?  I mean, where were--
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it was both.
Speaker 1: It was both, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, go through all that constitute being incarcerated (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Police jail, precinct, county jail [Hudson County Correctional Facility, Kearney, New Jersey], and the penitentiary [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So that was when you--we left off talking about Emmett Till.  You said that had a profound effect on your life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had begun to have my--the light had shone in upon me.  I had committed my life to Jesus Christ and was trying to get myself together and feeling that I had been called to the ministry, yet a special kind of ministry which I was still trying to define and pray through.  So when this happened, I--it, it--I was so angry about it and, and it, it fueled my determination that once--upon my release, I was gonna be involved in the struggle for human rights and self-determination.
Speaker 1: You say before this happened, you'd received your calling to be a part of the ministry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that happen for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I had reached a point of desperation, you know.  I was at that time, what was I, about twenty-three.  I started using dope when I was about fifteen.  I was one of the first to start using heroin.
Story_ID: 531707
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were using, you were one of the first people to use heroin, you were fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That led to where you were incarcerated (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, all the--yeah early arrest.
Speaker 1: And we talked about that, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  We covered that anyway.  But that led to, to a life of, what shall I say, of crime, one thing leads to the other.
Speaker 1: But you were going to tell me about how then Christ came into your life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so by the time I had reached, what twenty-three--let me see, I went in the [U.S.] Army--and by the way even when in the Army, I thought going in the Army--I was--the Korean War, and I thought going in the Army I could escape and as it turned out I ended up doing bivouac at Fort Dix [New Jersey] and my sergeant was a dope addict and--
Speaker 1: We talked about that also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, okay.  So, I'm twenty-three and here I'm locked up in jail.  I can't get out on bail because they--I've got a federal charge and, and if I get out on bail, it's more--it cost me too much money and I'm not sure I really need it to get out because I've, I've got a habit, I've got an armed robbery charge and, you know, violent assault charge.  And so there I was in, in, in 1953, I think it was February '53 [1953], that--no, that--so that makes me about twenty-two and I have sort of in those years from the time I left Georgia, about ten years, I had sort of done the gamut.  You name it, I claim it, and I did it.
Story_ID: 531708
Speaker 1: I was about twenty-two, and so there I was, hemmed in, locked in, Hudson County Jail [Hudson County Correctional Facility, Kearny, New Jersey], and it was a weekend.  I was arrested like a, a Friday, and it was one of the president's birthdays, so that's a long weekend which mean that you have a long weekend in the police precinct and that's, that's, that's hard time.  And, but it was good time for me in, in that I couldn't go anywhere.  Everything was bad, the cells were stinking the, the, the bench was hard, just--'cause it's a transient thing.  And in that state of desperation, I think a lot of--I came face to face with myself.  And what had precipitated or helped it along was my mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams], but she would visit always faithful, and the last time she visited, she just looked so old and worn and beat and I realized that I had contributed to her aging process.  I'd, I'd, I'd been hell on wheels, as they say.  And with all of this coming in upon me, I, I threw myself down on that--on the--on the--on that floor, kneeling, and I put my, my hand, my head in my hand and I said, "Lord, listen.  I made a mess of things.  I've, I've created so much pain and so much agony and I just wanna give my life to you.  I, I made a mess of it and I can't even say that I'm telling the truth now.  I'm so messed up, I don't even know, God, I might be trying to manipulate now just to get out of jail.  I don't know if I wouldn't go back into the same thing.  But as well as I know myself, as well as I know myself, I just wanna make this commitment today, just take my life as it is and make me what you want me to be."  That was February '53 [1953] if my memory serves me correctly and that's when the change start.  I didn't hear any angels flapping wings.  I didn't feel any great burning fire.  I didn't--I just felt within myself, as well as I knew myself, I'd made a revolutionary commitment and a revolutionary promise.  So, leaving the police precinct, then you'll go to the county jail where you're now going to be arraigned and then wait 'til the jury since I didn't have any bail, wasn't gonna put up the bail money, so I commenced the process of, of, of rehabilitation.  I remember sitting down with a piece of paper and saying, you know, I, I--it wasn't long after that, I had felt that there was something special I was supposed to do, you know.  I had not yet called it ministry or whatever, but I said now, if there is something I'm supposed to do, I might as well get ready for it because I was out of school at fifteen.  So I sit down with a piece of paper, said these are the subjects I'm gonna need to learn.  I gotta go back and get English, math, history, psychology, you know, like that.  And then I set about trying to accumulate the books and, and the teachers.  There's a saying, you know, when the student is ready, the teacher will appear.  So I was ready.  And so--and, and, and I pride myself on my boldness and eagerness of finding teachers.  I mean, I'm--if, if whoever came through the place, if they look like they were reading, I would say, "Well, what're you reading, man?"  And I would try to find out if they were teachers, who they were or what they knew.  So I became--I became--I think it was Ralph Waldo Emerson who said, "Every person I meet is my superior in some things and, therefore, I learn of them."  Well, long before I'd read Waldo Emerson, I, I adopted that posture.  Everybody I meet, I'm a student, teach me.  And fast forward, when I got to--after I--I stayed there about nine months waiting for the trial and so now I've got a decision to make.  If I have committed my life to God, I, I, I got to give up the lying business so now I can't go to court, go to trial saying I'm not guilty.  So now I gotta cop a plea.  And that's what I did.  I, I pleaded guilty.  There was three, three counts of armed robbery, assault and, and weapon.  And my lawyer was Ray Brown; I was his first case, senior.  I still got the amount he charged to handle my case (laughter).  And so I went to court and I got seven to ten years.  I don't know to what extent if I said this before, but I got seven to ten years on each count and they ran them concurrently, which meant then after there, I went to Lewis--Trenton Penitentiary [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey], and I stayed there I guess maybe about three years, and I was eligible for parole at the expiration of my minimum sentence.
Story_ID: 531709
Speaker 1: And since I was not going anywhere because I went to court also and got two years from the government, so I got ten years running concurrently from the state and then went to federal court and got two, two years for forg- forgery.  I was into an old forgery, check cashing ring.  And so when I went to the parole board in Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey], they paroled me to the government.  And, and the government came and got me and I spent another nineteen months or so in, in Lewisburg [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania], which I always considered to be graduate study.  There was a whole different kind of prisoner in Lewisburg.  The atomic energy spy, Greengrass [sic. David Greenglass], was my math teacher or so I think his uncle, Ethel's [Ethel Rosenburgh] Uncle, Gold [Harry Gold], was--he loved literature and so constantly telling me about the various books to read.  There was another German trader named, oh man, his name escapes me, but he's my better diction teacher.  So I, I sought out the professors and what I used to do, in, in Trenton, you know, the, the, the token of trade is cigarettes, so anything you wanna buy, you buy it with cigarettes.  I mean, even when you're playing numbers, you do everything in that to do outside.  And so what I would do is look for the professors and I, I, I maneuvered myself into being a, a part of the orientation committee.  They allowed the inmates to be a part of welcoming in inmates and, you know, writing down in the book, you know, orientation.  So I knew who the teachers were, the professors were, and so once I discovered that, then I'd bargain with them for how much they charge to teach me whatever subject I was pursuing.  So that's how I became acquainted with, with their old educational process and then began to take correspondence courses.  So that was my education.
Story_ID: 531710
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you think about what was happening in the outside world?  For example, in '55 [1955], the bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] in Montgomery [Alabama], Rosa Parks.
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I guess if I had--if--my, my greatest regret is that I was not out there to be in it--
Speaker 1: Were you organizing--
Speaker 2: But I was not conscious enough.
Speaker 1: You were conscious.  Were--did you do--ever organize any of the other inmates in any sort of rallies within the prison where you may have--what--which may have been the early start for you to get involved in civil rights?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah, I did.  And (laughter)--yeah, I, I, I, I--that's where I started my organizing.  I am a firm conviction from--I'm, I'm firm in the conviction that whatever you're gonna do, you start where you are with what you have.  And so in jail, I--some of the things that I'm doing now I started practicing, and one of them was organizing.  In, in fact, in Trenton [Trenton State Prison; New Jersey State Prison, Trenton, New Jersey], there was a chaplain, a nice little dude named Snetica [ph.], right, and, and so one of the choice jobs was working in the chaplain's office.  So after each inmate would leave, he would always invite other white inmates to the office.  So I got together with some of my friends and I said we, we gotta confront him about this discrimination.  So--"Hey, man, you crazy, we in jail.  You ain't (laughter)--why you gonna go and talk about discrimination in jail, man?  You gotta get out of here."  I said, "No, no, no, no, we have a right.  We are carrying the religious service."  The choir, most of the people in the choir were, were black, the musicians were black and, and we were conducting the Bible study, but when the choice jobs came, they were given to white people.  So they, they followed me.  They said, "All right, we'll, we'll, we'll go with you," so we went and talked with the chaplain and said, you know, "We recognize that we're all inmates, but there's a practice that you engage in that we have to bring to your attention.  You're a Christian man and you're practicing discrimination because we are carrying the religious program, black people, and yet every time you get a choice job, you give it to a white guy."  He turned red as a beet, man, he turned red as a beet and he looked and, but real professional, he just got still and, and, and changed colors and, and shook his head and he said, "You know, I never thought about that."  And I said, "We--that's why we bringing it to your attention."  So we changed that policy.  This, this, this was in jail, you know.  So in addition to that, I found the road to--I'm, I'm--now I'm practicing the religion and how I wanna share with everybody 'cause I'm changed.  Man, life has become for me a totally new experience.  And I was so radically changed that people who knew me before began to worry about me.  They--in fact, they told my older brother [Alonzo Daughtry, Jr.] outside, "Man, you need to talk to Herb [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry] because he's deep in that religion, man.  We think he's going off, you know."  But I had found the answer for me, the life in Jesus Christ.  That was a reality and I wanted to share it with everybody.  So I had to now begin to organize as to how to do that.  And I found that one of the ways to do that as people were gaining consciousness was to talk black.  In other words, I memorized the whole--the Frederick Douglass Fourth of July speech that he did up in Rochester [New York], I think 1854 [sic.], what to the--'What To the American Slave is Your Fourth of July' [sic. The Meaning of July Fourth for the Negro].  I memorized that and would hold people mesmerized in the park as I would--you know, would do this speech of Frederick Douglass, and they would gather around.  And then--it was a way of raising consciousness because--
Speaker 1: Where--which park?  Where did you do that?
Speaker 2: That was in Lewisburg [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: In Lewisburg.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was in the--
Speaker 1: So you would go out to the yard and you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--they'll, they'll have occasions where you could go out in the yard assuming you were not locked up or locked down, but in Lewisburg, you had greater freedom.  They had a gym.  You know, I played basketball.  I--I'll show you my picture the year that I played.  We were the best fair team ever, you know, 37-4 record, you know.  And I was good and still good.  I still play at seventy-six, oh yeah, oh, man, oh--you know, we bang away at the park.
Story_ID: 531711
Speaker 1: You would learn the Frederick Douglass--you'd learned the Frederick Douglass speech--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And take it up from there.  You would give the speech in the yard [at United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania] you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would give the speech in the yard, you know, because people would circle and the word would circulate through the place.  "Man, you got to hear the doc [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry] do this speech, man."  You know, and so I'd do the history of Fred Douglass, who he was, how he escaped, and, and so on this occasion, they invited him to speak on the Fourth of July in Rochester [New York] and, and, and the kind of person he was, he couldn't celebrate a Fourth of July when four million of my people are enslaved, God forbid, you know, so I'm--"I would the God for your sake and for mine that an affirmative answer could truthfully be returned to these questions would then would my burden be easy, my task lightened.  Who is so cold that would not be warmed by nation's sympathy?  Ah, I'm not that man."  And then he goes on to lay out the charge.  The last paragraph was, "What to the American slave, is your Fourth of July?  I answer, it is a day that reveals above all other days the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is a constant victim.  Your celebration is a sham.  Your boasted liberty, unholy license, all of your prayers and sermons and hymns are to him a thin veil that would cover up crimes that would disgrace a nation of savages.  Go where you may, search where you will, grown through all the monarchies and despotisms of the old world.  Travel through South America, search out every abuse.  And I tell you, you place them beside the everyday practices of the people of this country and I'm sure you will agree with me for revoked and hypocrisy, America reigns without a rifle."  That was the final paragraph.  Of course, needless to say, he never got another invitation, but that's just the last paragraph.  And so everybody would be mesmerized.  But it was my way of raising consciousness, you know, because there was no way they could hear me do that speech and want--not wanna know more with--because that would be the--man, where we can we get the speech, you know, where can we--so yeah, I did a lot of organizing and a lot of experimenting with my sermons.  I did a lot of practicing.  I'd get people in the corner and, you know--yeah, I got prepared in jail.  Yeah, I did the writings, most of the writings, the ideas.  I got papers now, you know, in which I had organized, written up organizational structures, constitutions, so I was ready.
Story_ID: 531712
Speaker 1: So, what year were you--what year were you released?
Speaker 2: August, 1958.
Speaker 1: Where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: I--well, I had to make a decision.  I went to Jersey City [New Jersey].  My mother [Emmie Cheatham Williams] was living in Jersey City, so I went to Jersey City and my father [Alonzo Daughtry] was in, in Brooklyn [New York], had the storefront on Fulton Street, 2024.  But I had a friend, John Lawrence, I think I talked to you about him before.  He befriended me from my earliest time in jail, so I made a V-line to his house.  One of the things I knew I could not do, and this is why I said it to the brothers in jail.  I, I could not go back to where I used to be.  I would not even walk that block.  In Jersey City, it was what used to be called Jackson Avenue [Martin Luther King Drive], and along Jackson Avenue was the strip.  Everything took place along Jackson Avenue.  And I--so I would never go to John Lawrence's house along Jackson Avenue; I steered clear of that.  But I had to get to his house because he was my rock because I didn't know anybody who was doing good.  Everybody I knew was (laughter)--do you know what I mean?  So I had to latch onto somebody who I believe was righteous and that I--and that would be a rock for me, and it was this man named John Lawrence.  So I would go to his house, when I wasn't working, I'd get there early and he wasn't there, I'd just sit with his wife and children.  And then when I started working, as soon as I got off a job, I went straight to his house.  And so I would travel with him; he'd allow me to travel with him.  I think I told you about the experience with the, the parole officer and John Lawrence and me.  Yeah, well, when I got out, John, you know, wanted me to travel.  He's an evangelist.  He'll go from state to state, but to do that, you need to have special permission.  So I went to this parole officer, man named John Horn [ph.], because I'm still on parole now.  I still haven't completed these ten years.  And, and so John (laughter) came to him and, and said to him, you know, I'd like for this man to travel with me.  And so John Horn--he's dead now--the parole officer looked at him and looked at me and he went in his desk drawer and took out my dos--dossier.  You know, he was, do you realize this man in jail when he was fifteen?  He's been arrested for this, that, and the other and he just--and he just got out of jail?  And that was a defining moment for me.  And--because everything I hinged on what John does.  If he says, oh, I didn't know all that, okay, I'll rethink that, I'm not sure how that would've shattered my faith.  I'd had a whole lot of picking up the pieces.  But John Lawrence said, and I can see him now as though it were yesterday, he said, he, he raised up--he was a big man, very, very big man and he said, "Listen, man, I'm not concerned with all of that.  The only thing I'm concerned about is that this man has had an experience with God."  And, man, when he said that, you know, my heart leaped and, and, and the parole officer began to shrink, you know.  And, and so I would travel with John Lawrence.
Story_ID: 531713
Speaker 1: So I had to make a decision whether I continue as an evangelist or my father [Alonzo Daughtry] had start- had the storefront [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York] here as I mentioned, had church in Georgia.
Speaker 2: And by storefront, you mean storefront church?
Speaker 1: Sure, storefront church, that's right, which had come into existence really during the early '40s [1940s] as the flock--the members would be going northward, escaping the South, trying to do better during the war [World War II, WWII] years, so the ministers followed behind them.  They didn't have the money for the cathedral, so they just could get storefronts, storefront churches.  And so I made the decision to, to become pastor of my father's church, the storefront.  And he had predicted in my worst years that I was the minister.  As I said, I'm the fifth generation in my family.  He said that boy, that's my--that's my preacher.  And it was the family joke because I was the worst.  I've got four brothers, I was the worst of the lot and, and everybody would laugh.  They'd, you know--and on one occasion, my mama [Emmie Cheatham Williams] was taking my clothes up and out of my pocket fell dice and cards (laughter), so it was a family joke.  "Pop, what do you think of your preacher now?"  Ha, ha, ha, ha.  He said, no, 'til his dying day, he said, "No, that boy's my preacher.  That boy is the preacher."  And, and he never lived to see me say--as we say, on his dying bed, when he died, I was so, so stooped and, and, you know--and he'd recog- he'd call me over, he was on, on his dying bed and he motioned for me to come closer, and he mumbled something.  And, as I said, my head was swinging, and I, I couldn't make out what he said.  So he laid back, he smiled, you know, and shook his head, and just laid back and smiled, and said never mind.  So I always believed that he was saying something.  He realized the state I was in, I wasn't ready for it.  No matter what he would've said, it wouldn't have made any difference.  So, I took over the, the storefront.  There were about five or six very elderly people, no children, and, and--but it was an opportunity for me to put into practice the things that I had prayed about, dreamt about, and practiced in incarceration, and it was a good place to start with the--it tested my sincerity.  I had to work two jobs, man.  I worked two jobs to be able to take care of myself and to contribute to the storefront.  It had a potbelly stove in the middle that I had to start the fire (laughter) (unclear) church.  I'd get there early and start up the fire and go out in the street and look for kids because there were no young people.  And then when I got a car, I had to go and get these old people and bring them to the church, sweep up the church, paint up the church, put the--that little potbelly stove, start up the fire.  So, we stayed there for two years and it was quite challenging to say the least.
Speaker 2: And you said you started it with five adults?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the congregation?
Speaker 1: That was the congregation that attended regularly.  They--I mean, they had some on the books that never showed up.  But there were five, I used to call them my old warriors, and they were all very--gone, they're all gone now, but they were there, you know, they watched me, and, and, and been patient with me as I was experimenting.  You know, I, I, I knew half the time they didn't know what I was talking about because I was--I was experimenting with the holistic approach to ministry long before they started talking about it.  Because the challenge for me when I came out of the jail, the challenge was, how to sustain the depth of spirituality, at the same time bring it in the context of a struggle for human rights and self-determination in a Afrocentric--Afrocentrism, and, and, and to--and to mesh that in, in a holistic approach.  So, nobody was doing that at that point that I--and I knew one other person, Bill Bentley, out of Chicago [Illinois], was attempting to do that, so I was the only one.  I had no one to turn to.  Even John Lawrence was a spiritual man.  He'd had no political awareness.  He was not in any Afrocentrism.  So I had to think this through and work this through and experiment with this and it was lonely because there was no one I could go to, and the people that I had, they were elderly.  They was very patient.  So I had to master--I had to master pursuing your dream and not cheating your reality.  That is to say, my sermons had to be preaching to millions of people while at the same time not cheating or shortchanging the few people who were there.  And, and so when I preached, you know, sometime the two--the five couldn't come, so maybe two, three people, I had to preach just as hard to those two and three as though the place was packed, but at the same time, I couldn't get locked into that reality.  I had to constantly visualize myself speaking at rallies of a million people.  We helped organize, by the way, the first million rally here in New York [New York], June 12th, the international rally against disarmament.  So I have spoke to millions of people, and that's what I had to do.  I had to constantly see myself where I wanted to be while dealing with the reality of where I was.
Story_ID: 531714
Speaker 1: What year did you organize that first million rally?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was here in New York [New York], June 12th, nineteen eighty-something.  I'd have to get the date.
Speaker 1: Is that the free Mandela [Nelson Mandela]?
Speaker 2: No, no that was--
Speaker 1: Okay, that was--
Speaker 2: Before--
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: Free Mandela.  It's--I don't see a banner, but, yeah, we had--in, in fact, from all over the world, it was a, a, a disarmament rally.  They came from all over the world.  We had rally in front of UN [United Nations] and then in Central Park [New York, New York].  I mean, it was a celebrity studded kind of--Orson Welles was there, did some of the emcee, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 1: So you had to build up to that reputation of being this, this spiritual leader, political leader, you know, Afrocentric--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That--inclusive, that was adding all of these together.  What were the defining moments of you--of this transformation?  I mean, I'm thinking about the things that happened in the country.  I mean, in this--1960, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He is going to come into office.  Did you think--I mean, and, and people said that the black vote was, was the turning point for him, getting the black vote.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Helped to solidify him becoming president.  Did you--were you closely aligned with him?  Did you have--were you involved in that race?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Politically, I--at--but that point, I had reached some degree of, of what, renown--people kind of knew who I was.
Speaker 1: How did you get there then?  And the--'cause that was 1960, so you only came out in fifty--
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did you build up to having some notoriety in 1960?
Speaker 2: Now, he was--he was elected what year?  He was elected, see, my first child was born nineteen sixty--what, seven [1967]?  August '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  He was elected, when?  Sixty--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty?  Nineteen sixty [1960].  Yeah, sixty--okay.  So yeah, in the--in, in the--in the time from, from, from, from the--from the storefront [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York], what I--what I had the capacity and the boldest to do was to--was to project myself in various places and--because I never saw myself staying in that area.  So I would attend rallies, meetings by myself sometime, and constantly trying to organize people, and so I got to know some of the people through that route.  For an example, I attended--I was--attended when Dr. King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was at Riverside Church [New York, New York].  You know, I took some people and went up to see him at Riverside, '67 [1967].  So that having, having met and having been willing to do, you know, to talk about the, the political process when--not that I got a hearing all that much in our circle, because people were shunning politics and religion, yeah.
Speaker 1: At that time people were shunning--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --politics and religion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was called everything but a child of God, you know.  Significantly, some of the ministers who used to criticize me on the air have since come back and said now we see what you're talking about.  So, as I said, it was a lonely kind of road because it was--there were few people out there who really was trying to--you know, you either went one extreme or the other.  You either went to being all political, all liberal, political or you went to being unpolitical and, and conservative.
Story_ID: 531715
Speaker 1: When we look back on the Civil Rights Movement, it's the ministers that stand out most, preachers that stand out most for having been involved.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Not as significantly I think as people now like to claim.  Let's face it, the 'Letter from a Birmingham Jail' wasn't written because King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had all this support out there. Is that he was being criticized, he's moving too fast.  And, and I know where when he wanted to organize the Poor People's Campaign, it was hard to get on their agenda of some large churches and, and, and, et cetera.
Speaker 1: So in '63 [1963] when he wrote that letter from that Birmingham [Alabama] jail, what was happening at your--where were you and what was happening with your church [The House of the Lord Church]?
Speaker 2: Well, I tried to be involved and, and, and carrying forward my, my feeling that my focus was, though not exclusively, in the street.  I was at home there and I think maybe that's where God wanted me.  And one of the persons that I met early on was Sonny Carson [Robert "Sonny" Carson].  I don't know if you know of Sonny Carson.  Sonny Carson was, was the--he was--headed Brooklyn [New York] CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and he, he was the, the ranking radical, and I heard him speak in the park one day on Fulton, Fulton Park [Brooklyn, New York], and I liked what I heard.  So I, I--and this is example of what I mean.  So the next day, I went to the office.  I had a office on Fulton Street, and I said, "Listen, man, my name is So and So and so, I'm a young minister in this city, you know, we got a small church, but I heard you, I liked what you said, like to work with you (laughter)."  So Sonny in his usual, "I don't like no preachers," you know, "I don't deal with no preachers.  I don't like no preachers."  So I said, "Well, you ain't the only one don't like, I don't like them either, but the point is, what can we do together?  Can we work together?"  So he smiled in his inimita--inimitable way, heh, heh.  Once you challenge him--as most people, once you challenge him, you know, they kind of like that.  People who are tough and forward, you know, like to be challenged.  And so once he said that--I said that, then he said, heh, heh, heh and he stood up, shook my hand, so we became great friends in terms of struggling around Brooklyn [New York] on the various issues.  So that we were involved in, in those kind--those kind--in, in--related to--see, well integration of the schools was one of the issues at that time.  We hadn't reached community control, but it was now trying to be integrated in the--in the school system, police brutality, you know, was, was, was always a question.  There was always a question of racism.  And there was always questions of, of, of jobs, you know, discrimination in, in the work place.  And it wasn't long before I joined Operation Breadbasket in Brooklyn which had started.  Dr. William Jones [William A. Jones] was the chairperson and I became the executive vice chair.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], well, became the national director before he went to PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] where I first met him.  So Breadbasket challenged the, you know, economic structure to be more responsive.
Story_ID: 531716
Speaker 1: During those days, those early years, I was involved with the welfare rights mothers, they used to have an organization, Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] and Bread--very much involved with Operation Breadbasket because these were ministers who was--and, and--worked fulfilling King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] vision of, of breaking open Corporate America to be more responsive to our job, job training, and, and, and more resources in the black community.  So--
Speaker 2: And Operation Breadbasket is where you met Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: For the first time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the first time.
Speaker 2: You were both very young and eager.
Speaker 1: Oh, man, yeah.  He came to New York [New York].  I remember we were engaged in a struggle against Operation--I mean, not a--against A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], and he was the national director, so--
Speaker 2: What was the struggle against A and P?
Speaker 1: A and P--we had a policy that preachers only meet with presidents and A and P would never respond to our request to meet with the president.  So eventually, we launched the boycott and then did a civil disobedience; we went to jail.
Speaker 2: You sat in an A and P store?
Speaker 1: In the corporate business.
Speaker 2: Corporate business, okay.
Speaker 1: We found out that their--one of their corporate offices was at Graybar Building on 42nd Street [New York, New York], I think it was.  And, and once we found it, we went there and spent the night and so they came and got us out, you know, put us in jail.  And, and then the next morning, we went to court.  Jesse came and he went to jail.  In fact, they got a shot of him hanging out of the back of the (laughter) paddy wagon.  But he came--I had heard of him but had not--and I can't remember working with him, like in the same kind of issues, but he came.  And a couple things I remember was his saying that what we have to do is swing somebody through.  And what he meant was, somebody has to become a, a recognized leader, an opinion maker to the extent that the media will look for them, and as you bec- as, as you--when you swing somebody through, that person's responsibility is to always be responsive to the principles and the objectives of the organization.  And, and so I always remembered that that--and, and one of the other things, he says--he said, think about it.  Here in New York, there, there are about eight million people, and how many events can they cover?  You know, twelve or so will get coverage.  And you--we have to reach the point where we're one of the twelve so that when things happen in New York, they gonna call us, and that's swinging somebody through (laughter).
Speaker 2: And that still holds true today.
Speaker 1: It holds true today.  I--
Speaker 2: Because Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] has become--
Speaker 1: Oh, man.
Speaker 2: --the swing through for several events.  Reverend, you have been--
Speaker 1: Oh--.
Speaker 2: --a swing through man--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: For several events.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Jackson's legacy--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, lives on.
Speaker 2: --of swinging through lives on today.
Speaker 1: That's right.  In fact, Sharpton was the youth leader at that time.  He must've been about thirteen, fourteen, maybe fifteen, and he was Breadbasket's youth leader, so when he referred to Jackson as his teacher and father, and, and that's true.  So much of what you see Sharpton do is, is a direct imitation of Jackson's--as a Jacksonian (laughter), you know.  You know, from his Wall Street Project, Madison Avenue Project that he does, Jesse does the Wall Street.  You know, he--Sharpton has some Saturday rallies.  Jesse used to have Saturday rallies in, in Chicago [Illinois].  So Jesse's influence is, is extensive and I, I think the world of him.  I think that he is bigger than life.  I think one of the best descriptions I have of him is that, that, that guy is something, man.  I've traveled with him, different parts of the world.  But anyway, it was in Breadbasket, and then--
Speaker 2: And what year would this have been?
Speaker 1: This would've been the early '60s [1960s].  What, now--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: King was killed in '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], yeah.
Speaker 2: So this was before King's assassination.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Was it before Malcolm X's in 1965?
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm not sure.  I have to remember that.  I think--I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  Now, this--the, the March on Washington was '63 [1963], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: August, '63 [1963].  And I remember that.  That's the year my daughter [Leah D. Daughtry] was born.  And so some days kind of stand out.  And, and I was on my way to Washington [D.C.] when my daughter was born and I was telling [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and--on the occasion, I said, man, I always wonder if I made the right decision, whether to stay home with my wife [Karen Smith Daughtry] and baby or to go to Washington.  So I said I made a decision to, to stay home with my baby and my wife.  So he said, "Reverend [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], you made the right decision, man, 'cause I have--made a decision, too.  I had a son that was born and I decided to come to Washington and I ain't seen my son since (laughter)."  You know, Dick Gregory's funny all the time, man.  Oh, man, so those are--that's one kind of date that, that stands out in my head, and then, you know, became involved in Breadbasket.
Story_ID: 531717
Speaker 1: You were just talking about some days--some days are--stand out more than others, '63 [1963], the day your daughter [Leah D. Daughtry] was born was the date that stood out for you and just trying to move through some of the events that happened--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That may have been pivotal in, in adding momentum to what you were doing here in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.  So--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] would've been some of my intense involvement.
Speaker 1: And then--and then King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination comes, but before King's, was Malcolm X's?  Did you have a relationship with Malcolm X?
Speaker 2: Distant.  Distant.  Because I--distance--we never had a chance to have the debate.  I wanted to, but obviously, I was not the stature that Malcolm was at the time and I still had reservations about what happened when I was in, in Lewisburg [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania].  I think I mentioned that--I had a confrontation or they had a confrontation with me with the Nation of Islam because they thought that I was putting people back in the grave, as they say, and they were resurrecting them.  And because in our debate--we had debates and for me, it seemed that the, the, the theological position was untenable.  I can understand the indictment of white people.  You know, I can add to the indictment, but then to go from there to say, therefore, all white people are incorrigibly evil, you know, created out of some wickedness in us.  So we'd have these debates and in, in many instances, it, it--their position was just illogical and it wasn't hard for me to sort of, I guess in their mind, humiliate them.  I wouldn't intend to do that; I wouldn't do that, but the argument was--they--and they were not masters of it themselves, so I was sort of preparing for this major debate and--but it never happened.  I did have some, some, some--I don't know if we call it debate, some exchanges with Minister Aziz [Tariq Aziz] and Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan].  Of course Farrakhan and I became great friends and so we never really had any public, you know, differences expressed or debate to express.  So, no, Malcolm was from a distance but, but there--there's arguments.  I mean, he was so persuasive and yet I, I, I knew the argument and, and, and, and, and listening to the people with whom he'd have the debates knew that they were no match for him, you know, because they were arguing from an old tradition and, and trying to--he would always maneuver them into a defense of white people and then end up--you come across him and be, oh, man, you love that (unclear) don't you?  You love that blonde, blue-eyed devil, don't you?  That's what it is, you just love--and, and you're trying to say, but, no, I just don't believe all people are bad.  I--oh, man, you--so I, I had another strategy.  I'd share the indictment, you know, started--look at it, man, do you know this white man has killed our babies, rape your momma, rape your grandmamma, you know what I mean?  And it could be evil everywhere.  I said, "Yeah, did you also know that eight million Africans were killed in the Congo, man?  (Unclear) Do you know that the Pope got together with these European and divided them," so I'd out-indictment them so I couldn't then be loving white folks if I can--I got a strong indictment (laughter) and I could base mine on history.  I could cite the chapter and verse.  And then from there, you could go and say but, man, you know, when you really look at history, though, you--you're not--we can't really say that all--any people are incorrigibly evil.  I, I mean, come on.  You, you know, people in (unclear) classic phrase, people are generally what they had to be, so if you take people and put them in, in one kind of system, you know, they gonna act a certain kind of way, put them in--so we gotta look at systems that human beings create as we look at behavior.  So, anyway, that was--that was a way that I would always approach that argument.
Story_ID: 531718
Speaker 1: So when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated in 1968, you still had the storefront [The House of the Lord Church] here in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, we had moved.  We moved--in two years, we moved from the storefront on Fulton [Street] to a parlor church.  That is a church that has a floor used as a church and then two apartments overhead that we rented.  So it was a nice move because it provided income from the rental and then at the same time, we had this church which was a legitimate church with a C of O [certificate of occupancy].  So that--when we moved there on, on Pacific Street and about two years, two or three years.  We stayed there about, oh, seven or eight years, what I thought was too long in that small place; seated about fifty people.
Speaker 1: Did the congregation grow large from the five?
Speaker 2: Maybe to ten, fifteen, you know, twenty at the most.  And, of course, I bemoaned those years at, at the time because it seemed that I wasn't doing anything.  I wasn't making any progress.  I called it one of the crises of my life.  It just seemed I was--I was just barren, just--you know, all my friends seemed to be in churches, were growing, and, and mine, you know, was standing still.  But I come to appreciate what sometimes we call barren times.  If we be faithful at what we are called to do, those can be some of the most educational times.  So those years on Pacific Street were very, very, very, very meaningful, in that it gave me a chance to really refine my writing style, to really refine my ideas because, again, I'm cutting a path through the wilderness here, and so I did a lot of writing, lot of writing, rewrote our church's constitution, rewrote all the doctrinal statements, rewrote the history, you know, rewrote our creed and they all--put them in publishing form.  Well, I couldn't have done all that if the church would've been running over.  All my time would've been given to just pastoral work.  And then I was a lot of time out in the community.  I traveled the country with evangelists, and then I was active in the community.  I couldn't have done all that if I had a pastoral work, so Pacific Street was a--was--those seven or eight years there were probably some of the most valuable years of my life.  So then in '69 [1969] or so, we moved here to this church and this was ideal because it is walking distance to City Hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York], to Wall Street [New York, New York], downtown Brooklyn, Board of Ed [New York City Department of Education], borough president's office, all these centers of power, so we developed a tradition of walking across the bridge.  In my study of history, there's something dramatic about crossing a bridge in Selma [Alabama], (unclear), and, and so when you cross the bridge, you don't need a whole lot of people.  You know, several hundred people crossing a bridge is like an army, you know (laughter).  And, and, and when you got the banners and flags waving, it's like a great army, you know, descending upon an objective.  So we would--we, we, we developed the tradition of going across the bridge to City Hall, going down into Wall Street, and, and, and so it was walking distance from this church, so this church became the hub of all this activity.
Story_ID: 531719
Speaker 1: From the Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] years where the, the ministry you might say that we've been fashioning all these years really took off in, in the '70s [1970s] when I became the chair of the National Black United Front.  It took off significantly from a police killing.  That was, I mentioned before, Randy Evans [Randolph Evans], and--
Speaker 2: Can you tell me the Randy Evans story briefly?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Randy Evans was a fifteen-year-old black youth.  On Thanksgiving Day, the police came upon him and, and, Randy said, "Yo, man, what's going on?"  And this officer, Robert Torsney, shot him, shot him in the head, killed him.  The following year in 1977, the jury pretty much acquitted this officer, said he had psychomotor epileptic seizure.  Nobody knew what it was, not even the epileptic foundation, but it was sufficient to--for his--to circumvent the full weight of the law, right?  Well, the--again, the community was furious, man.  People talked about burning up the city, they talked about tearing things up.  So what we came up with was an economic policy that I had learned, economic strategy that I learned in Breadbasket, and so the people gathered here, we said, "All right, what we going to do?" "Okay, let's launch--let's, let's, let's shut the city down, economic boycott.  Let's call it Black Christmas '77 and ask people to stay away from the stores."  And one thing about a boycott, it's tremendous--tremendously effective because it can involve everybody.  Grandma can get involved, you know, children can get involved 'cause all it means is not participating in, in, in, in your--what you might perceive to be your dehumanization.  So we launch Black Christmas '77 [1977], and, and we made a vow that, number one, Randy Evans would never be forgotten, number one, number two, we were going to build a movement.  We needed a movement.  Keep in mind, here in Brooklyn [New York] at that time, we didn't have a black congressman, we had little black political power, no black economic power, and a sense of apathy and a sense of self-rejection, so we knew we had to change things.  So, Randy Evans was a catalyst.  So we said we're gonna build a movement, we're gonna--we're gonna--we're gonna--we're gonna perpetuate his, his memory, we're gonna build a movement, and, what was the third piece of that, I can't remember now, but there were three things.  So we launch Black Christmas '77 [1977] and call upon people to stay out of the shops.  We knew that it--you know, that was a--that was a grandiose plan, but what we did is narrowed the focus to downtown Brooklyn.  We could manage that.  We could shut down downtown Brooklyn, so that's what we did for a whole year.  We--it's interesting in some sense like Montgomery [Alabama].  We stayed out on the Brooklyn streets, downtown Brooklyn, which at that time was the sixth largest shopping district in Brook--in New York [New York], in, in, in America.  We stayed out there for a whole year until the stores began to realize that we weren't going away.  And then we finally settled a negotiation.  We used Randy Evans and we called for a violation of his civil rights which the justice department refused.  We called for a massive comprehensive youth plan which according to (unclear), they were already in operation, and we called for an investigation [of the] police department.  But what we had was a movement because in that year's time, we were constantly on the street, organize--you know, organizing, educating, and, and that's what demonstration--that's what a demonstration does.  It gives you a soap box to education, and so every time I got the soap box, I would politicize, you know, point up--you know, we absolutely powerful.  Brooklyn is the largest--there's more black folks in Brooklyn than anywhere in the world except maybe Lagos in, in Nigeria and Brazil.  So look at you.  You, you got--you got the numerical strength and, and you have no political representative.  That's the--who's fault is that?  You know, look at the education system.  Children are being miseducated everywhere you look, and yet you have the numbers.  Why can't you translate that into political power, economic power?  So I kept hammering away, you know.  And I knew I had to make people angry, so I would--we would lead demonstrations and you, you know, just fired up.  In fact, we coined that phrase, fired up.  We ain't gonna take no more.  Then, so we start screaming that across the city.  "We're fired up, ain't gonna take no more.  We're fired up."  But what we were doing, again, is verbalizing the rage of the people.  And by verbalizing--so, when you marching people across the city and they're screaming fired up, ain't gonna take no more, well, they're expressing all their anger, their rage.  So by the time you get finished expressing it that way and then you're giving people a program, if you'd register and vote, you can change the political process.  If you keep your money in your pocket, you can change the economic situation.  These businesses are giving you what you want if you just stay home.  That's all you gotta do.  So just to conclude on the Randy Evans, so when we concluded, the business agreed that they would fund the Randy Evans educational program [Randolph Evans Memorial Scholarship Fund, INc.] for five years, so we give ten students fifteen hundred dollars every year.  You see the plaque over there?  That represent all the students from 19--it started in 1978 who have received the Randolph Evans scholarship fund, and some of the people are now doctors, Yvette Clarke who just won the congressional seat was one of our students.  So they come back and every year, we have a lunch in which a lot of them come back and we continue to talk about Randy Evans.  I wrote the book ['No Monopoly on Suffering: Blacks and Jews in Crown Heights (And Elsewhere),' Herbert D. Daughtry, Sr.] with a chapter devoted to Randy Evans.  So we honored our commitment, that his memory would not--and before his mother died, I would hold her in my arms because, you know--he's right over there.  I got his pictures and everything right over there and I would say to her, I say, "Mrs. Debrannon [sic. Annie Barron], I told you that we're not gonna let him die.  God will take care of him on the other side of history, but he's not gonna die on this side of history.  As long as the sun shine, they gonna remember Randy Evans."  And so all over the world, wherever my books go, you know, videos and all the kind of stuff we do, and all these students coming back, every last one of them on that board right over there, every, every year, ten more go up with that, and we built a movement.  We built the National Black United Front.
Story_ID: 531720
Speaker 1: After that demonstration, we organized the local Black United Front and began to call all the organizations together and to say we, we, we're powerless.  Why are we separate and powerless?  So we organized a local Black United Front and became so effective that we decided to make it national.  Now, everybody had been talking this talks, Kwame Ture, Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan].  Well, Farrakhan came a little later.  By that time, he was out of power.  And so we--I start traveling.  I travel way out to Portland [Oregon], wherever people were doing the Black United Front stuff, independent mass base, angry, radical, revolutionary, wherever they were doing that activity, I went and organized chapters.  And then--when was that, 1978, we called for a national convention for the Black United Front, and it happened right here in Brooklyn, New York.  We had the national convention, over, over thousand delegates, five foreign countries came, and agreed to set up National Black United Front.  I was elected temporary chairman.  It was--I mean, it was a stunning achievement.  Can you imagine, in one place, the full range of ideologies within the black community from the--from the All-African Revolutionary Party [All-African People's Revolutionary Party] to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], from, from, from the--from the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] to the Urban League [National Urban League] was locked up in that--in that armory in Brooklyn.  And we fought and argued for, for almost, what a whole weekend at least.  And finally, we decided on a temporary 'cause I would said if--you, you can't go the way you going and we don't have anything out there like the Black United Front, so you, you gotta stick it.  So they did a temporary constitution.  I was elected temporary chairperson, all right.  Nobody trusted anybody to give anybody any permanent anything (laughter).  So after the meeting was over, the brother that has really--I hope his, his name is on The HistoryMakers, Jitu Weusi, Big Black.  His name was originally Les Campbell [Leslie Campbell].  But that brother did more to bring about a cultural revolution in Brooklyn, to create independent economic ventures and independent educational, you know, schools, et cetera, but he became chief of staff, chief of operation.  And we sat down together, and we identified the brothers and sisters who were the most passionate about what they believe and who went away--went away angry, and we identified where they came from.  And my wife and I got in the car and we spent three weeks traveling across the country.  We went from, from New York to Jersey [New Jersey] straight down the east coast, right.  Man, I'd stay up all night sometime arguing with people, sometime be two or three men.  Where you going?  You can't go nowhere.  You know, so--you mean to tell me we can't--we can't fight it out and, and, and, and come to some agreement?  We came back up, went way up, up through West Virginia, Virginia, West Virginia, on out to Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], my wife [Karen Smith Daughtry] and I.  We got to Chicago.  They--I think we went as far as Texas, Kentucky, but they told us later after we left Chicago, the brother who is the chair now, Dr. Conrad Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill], told us, said, "Man, when you and your wife came through here and knowing that you all had traveled across this country, we said, this So and So and So is either crazy or sincere, you know, and he don't look crazy," and, and that's what won them, the fact that my wife and I had put in all this time.  So when we came back for the next--after two years, came back for the next convention, they--we firmed up the constitution 'cause I, I took--one of the--there was a major achievement.  We took the constitution that we had developed and went to four parts of this country.  First, we--first, we went and did the, the, the, you know, talking to people, got people back on the ship and everything, right.  And, and then the next year, we went to four--we had said that the constitution had to be ratified, and in order to ratify the constitution, we had to go to the four regions in the United States, four conventions, right.  And I went, we, a couple of us, but my--primarily went to four areas where there were Black United Front's chapter and argued for the ratification of a constitution.  Can, can you imagine that?  Man, I'm talking about these, these, these, these folks hadn't been together--I mean, one of the reasons I think that I could do it is because there was so much--so many scars among each other in the--in the--in our--in that part of our struggle and they didn't trust each other, so I--here I come and blew everybody's mind because here I was a preacher and, and so many of these folks hated preachers, but somehow I had won their hearts.  I like to think it was God's doing, my own background.  And so I, I went to the four regions in America and argued for the ratification of a constitution and came back to, to, to the convention and ratified a constitution.  To me, it's one of the major achievements.  The Black United Front has a constitution that has been debated across the country.  Can you imagine that?  Debated across the--every kind of ideology you can mention had a chance at it and we finally succeeded in hammering out the constitution that governs--and I became, again permanently, you know, elected for another two years.
Story_ID: 531721
Speaker 1: And then about 18- 1986, thereabouts, I decided I had to resign [as president of the National Black United Front].  I had--I had--I no longer wanted to be the chair.  I needed to come back to the church [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York].  I needed to devote more time to the church 'cause that had consumed all my time.  That is when I ran into Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  Jesse and I traveled.  Because I, I like to feel that the--I don't wanna caress my ego too, too firmly here, but when Jesse set out to run, you know, there was a lot of distrust particularly within the radical nationalist Pan-Africanist community.  He had never really become the darling of that crowd, right.  So I as the chairperson now of that crowd, nationalist, Pan-Africanist, radical, revolutionaries, grass root folks, I had to argue for his support in that crowd because they, they, they didn't wanna support him.  And my argument was, "Listen, man, whatever you think about Jesse, you gotta look beyond Jesse and you got to see where the people are, whether we like him or not, the people are out there with him.  This is a mass movement.  And if we don't get aboard of this mass movement, history is not gonna judge us kindly."  And, and so I was able to persuade an endorsement from the National Black United Front.  And what that meant is that I was with Jesse on a lot of the stuff that he was doing and I, I--some of us succeeded in bringing support from the--from those quarters, so we became real close, real, real friendly.  I--as I said, I always liked him, man.  I, I know his strengths, I, I know his weaknesses.
Speaker 2: Well, because the two of you became really close, you can speak to this.  Some people feel that his downfall in that election was when he stumbled or, or when, when he called New York Hymietown.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Said that he never recovered from that.  Well, the two of you been close friends and you having had your dealings with the Hasidic community, I'm sure you've had several conversations about the tension between the relationship between African Americans and the Jewish community.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very much.  I was in--yeah, I was--I was in Manchester [New Hampshire] when we argued whether or not he should even go out and make that apology.  Oh, oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 531722
Speaker 1: How did the comment come up, Hymietown?
Speaker 2: (Background noise) That's not so clear in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it--at one of the airports--Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] had said to one of the reporters, his name escape me now, well, let's talk black.  And--
Speaker 1: I think they were--
Speaker 2: He's going up to, to--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, you go.
Speaker 1: He was talking to a black reporter?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And said let's talk black?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's talk black and he's going up to Hymietown, coming--meaning, going to New York [New York].  And this reporter's name will come to me before I'm through.  Of, of, course, you can get it from your research.
Speaker 1: Was it Milton [HistoryMaker Milton Coleman]?  No.
Speaker 2: That doesn't sound right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been, but that's--
Speaker 1: But he was with The Washington Post?
Speaker 2: This was--I think it was.  I think it was.  But he revealed it; he wrote about it.  And it was some time later that it--the--some people picked it up and began to make an issue out of it.  Because he was not the first one who referred to New York as Hymietown.
Speaker 1: And what is Hymietown mean exactly?
Speaker 2: It, it means Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hymie is, is a--is a Jewish name primarily from what I understand.  So basically going up to the--to the town that the Jews control, so it's Jew Town, right?  And it depend on how you wanna look at it.  I mean, I wish--I wish I could--somebody--I could make some claim I'm going up to the Black Town, the Chocolate City somewhere, you know what I mean?  I mean, that's something to be proud of, I mean, if you all control the city to that extent.  But in any event, it became an issue and Jesse ducked it for a while.  He, he, he said he didn't say it and he did say it, and so finally, he came to Manchester, New Hampshire, and somewhere along the way, he had come to a decision to come--to go to the synagogue and, and 'fess up, confess, right?  I had been up there for a couple of days campaigning up there.  So when I heard that he--you know, people say, well, meet us at the synagogue, so I went to the synagogue.  And when I arrived, they were in the office arguing about whether he should go out there and make this statement.  Part of the staff said, "Yeah, you gotta do it.  You gotta do this, Jesse, it's the only way out.  You gotta do it."  Another part of the staff said, "No, man, you don't do that.  You, you gonna be apologizing 'til the day you die.  That's not gonna be the end of it, so you ought not to go out there and do this.  Don't do this, Jesse."  And he was busy writing.  He was at the desk and he's writing and, and--you know, and every once in a while he'd look up and he'd continue to write.  And so I was listening to both sides of the debate and so finally, he said--he looked up and he said, "Well, listen, I tell you what, my instincts tell me this is the right thing to do, to go out here and make this confession, and that's what I'm gonna do."  And I went over to him, I put my hand on his shoulder, I said, "Well, bro (laughter), you know, whatever you decide to do, you know I'm gonna be with you."  You know, and so when he got up, I--he went out to the synagogue--this, this happened, now he went out to the synagogue, he went out to the congregation and, man, those people, when he was finished, they gave him a standing ovation.  I mean, they--and he said, "I'm here, ask me any question you wanna ask, you know, whatever you wanna say, I'm here."  And Gene [ph.] used to travel with him.  Gene said, "Man, I seen that brother do that a thousand times.  Somebody set a noose for him and he takes the noose and lightly and firmly, you know, fold it up and put it in his pocket and proceed to, to deal."  So when it was over, man, he was jubilant.  I, I--it'd been a long time since I seen him in such an upbeat state and the rabbi and his family came, wanted to take pictures with him, everybody, Jewish leaders wanted to take pictures with him.  And so when we started out, I said to him, I said, "Man, did you call any other black leaders?  Did you call Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]?"  He said, "Mo, no, I ain't--I ain't called nobody."  I said--he said, "Would you do that for me?  Why don't you start calling people and let them know what's happening."  So I said okay, and then he said, "Come on and, and, and ride with me up to (pronunciation) Berlin [New Hampshire]," because we campaigned and, and going up to (pronunciation) Berlin or Berlin, up to the tip of New Hampshire, and the idea was to campaign, coming all the way back down New Hampshire, right.  And, man, we in the car, you know, we thinking this thing is over, it's behind us, (laughter) you know.  And so we got way up there and that night, it was early in the morning and, and we went to the--our room.
Story_ID: 531723
Speaker 1: First thing in the morning, must've been about 6, 5:30, 6:00.  You know, he called me down to--said, "Come to the room, man, let's talk."  He said, "Did you call Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]?"  I said, "No."  He said, "I did.  I, I called Farrakhan and talked to Farrakhan, and, you know, all right.  Let's go face the day."  Man, we went out and the first thing those reporters said, "Well, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], when do you plan to resign?"  And it was like a ton of bricks.  And, "Jesse, did you say that Hymietown, you were going to New York [New York], and, and, and, and Hymietown, did you ever hug Arafat [Yasser Arafat]?  Did you ever make any anti-Jewish statements?"  And, and, and it, it--I mean, it--you know, it took a while for him to adjust 'cause it was so removed from what he was thinking and, and I was thinking, too, 'cause if I'd have thought otherwise, I'd have tried to say something.  We rode in the car together, the Secret Service up at the front, he on one back seat and I'm on the other.  And now, Ted Koppel called him.  And, you know, before that, every stop we'd make, it was the same thing, "Jesse, you plan to resign?  When are you gonna resign?  I mean, do you think that was a nice thing to say, you know, So and So."  And, and by now, his head--you know, he was bobbing and weaving, you know.  So, I said to--I said, "Listen, man, listen, listen.  They got us on the defensive.  We got to assume our offense on this thing, that first of all, you need to challenge the media about being irresponsible.  All the issues in the world, particularly issues in our community, and they are--they are locking you into a Hymietown thing.  You, you apologized for that.  You're on the other side of that.  And they have the responsibility to, to ask questions and to provide news that covers the world, so you need to challenge them on how responsible they're being."  The second thing, I told him, I said, "You remember the story in the Bible where the woman that Jesus caught--they brought the woman to Jesus and said they caught her in adultery and then Jesus started writing and, and said--looked up and said, 'All right, whoever is without sin, you throw the first stone.'"  I said, "Why don't you use that reference?  You know, why don't you say, 'All right, I've admitted my mistake.  So if there's anybody out there that never made a mistake, you, you, you throw the first stone,'" right?  So he started doing that.  You know, he started challenging and they backed up, you know, and, and, and backed up, and then Ted Koppel called him and said, "Well, Jesse, I want you to come on air tonight and we want you to, to be on for the hour."  So we--in the car, we debated and we said, no, let Reverend Wyatt Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] handle that, man.  You, you know, you don't need to go back through that kind of beat 'em up game, so we did that.  We called Reverend Wyatt Tee Walker who was, as you know, King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] chief of staff and asked him if he would handle it for Jesse.  So as we drove along, Ted called back again and he said, "Well now listen, Jesse, you know--you know I'm gonna beat you up.  I ain't gonna lighten up on you, but, think about it, you'll have a chance to tell your story, you know.  If you got a story to tell, you can tell it (laughter)--you know, you can tell your story.  But at the same time, I'm not gonna lighten up on you."  So we, we thought about that and changed our mind and said, okay, let's do it.  Riding up in the car, I would--I would--he would be groggy (unclear)--I'd be, "Wake up, say, wake up.  Wake up, son," I said, "wake up, wake up, man.  Why'd you call them Jews Hymietown?  You Jew hating, you anti-Semitic.  You're--you know, why you go through those changes, man?  Don't you wanna apologize?  How--you ain't fit for no president.  How you gonna be fit for pre--hate Jews, you know.  You know, what do you--what--when are you gonna resign?  Wake up.  Wake up" (laughter), you know.  Come on and (laughter), and we rode like that in the back of that car until we got to the place where we're gonna do the, the interview.  I can't remember exactly the city.  And to the eternal credit of [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, he met us there, and, and while they were doing the interview, Marion Barry was on one side and I was on the other and Ted Koppel started pumping the questions.  And, and, and Barry, Marion would say to him when he'd get a break, you know, Marion out of his vast experience would say, "Now, Jesse, you know, he's leading you this way.  You gotta, you know, wake up and be sharp and be prepared, so and so and so," and the--and Barry got him through that with my little bit of help.  And finally, we got through that night and when we got to the hotel that night, and one of the few times that he'd ever come to me and he said, "Man, I thank you for being with me."  He said, "My head was spinning and groggy.  I don't know how I would've got through that if you hadn't been there," you know.  And, and, of course, I, I felt--I felt great 'cause I'm, I'm, I'm just a great admirer of his 'cause I, I see what he's doing.  I see--I see how he has used his influence.  I, I see the people who, who the doors have been opened for them.  When you go to Washington [D.C.], just about every black person has a Jacksonian in power, in any position of prestige.  So I have--I think the world of him.
Story_ID: 531724
Speaker 1: So to--having participated in some way of, of getting him [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] through that time--but I, I--to, to--some, some of the Jewish leaders had their own agenda and, and wouldn't let him alone, some of the Jewish leaders.  Because it seemed that the Jewish populace, the people, everywhere he went was responsive.  And, and there were Jews in the campaign.  And you know what else was strange?  We met with, what's the name of the lawyer, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyer--we tried to--now we got to spend time trying to get around this Jewish thing, right?  And so we met in this office and, and with--what's the name of the lawyer, Harvard lawyer, very famous, very popular--his, his name will come--
Speaker 2: Dershowitz [Alan Dershowitz]?
Speaker 1: Dershowitz, yeah, met with Dershowitz.  He rode in the car with us all through--what's that, I can't remember that town.  It might've been Boston [Massachusetts].  So in the evening was gonna have this meeting to help Jesse get his Jewish stuff straight.  And, and Senator Crandall [sic. Alan Cranston] was there, remember him, out in California?  And I think his name was Knight [ph.], had just written a book, he was there, and, and Zogby [James Zogby] was in the meeting.  So they're telling Jesse, "Jesse, you know--Crandall, Senator Crandall, I can say this, he's gone now, you know, Jesse, you know, you, you gotta be, you gotta understand the Jewish thing.  You gotta get straight with the Jewish people."  So Jesse said, "What are you talking about?  I'm, I'm doing all that I know.  I mean, I made a word, I said something, I apologized.  I mean, I got Jewish friends, I have Jews on my staff, I've reached out everywhere I go, so what do you mean?"  He said, "Well, you just to keep on reaching out to the Jewish."  And so Jesse said, "Well, I reach out to everybody.  I reach out to the Jews," and he said, "I was just--." He--so the--Crandall said, "(Unclear) you mean you reach out to Arabs too?"  And so Jesse said, "Yeah, Zogby, he's, he's Arab."  So Senator Crandall looked at him and said, "Which one of the crazy Arabs are you?"  Right, to the--to the--to Jesse's eternal credit, he never made public.  And I'm, I'm the first making this public.  We could've, could've blew him out of the water.  And nobody ever said anything about it, neither Zogby, Jim Zogby, you know, he's a big, big wheel now and, and Jesse never said--and this is the first time that I'm, I'm, I'm mentioning that because Senator Crandall now is gone.  But here he was, lecturing Jesse on, on being, you know, open to everybody and Jesse said, well, I'm being that.  And he says, which one of you crazy Arabs are you (laughter)?  So, any event, we had some of my--some of my greatest memories, man, was traveling with that dude, went to see the pope.  I didn't get a chan--I missed the Goodman [Robert O. Goodman] trip.  I really regret that.
Story_ID: 531725
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go to Syria when he [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] wa- that was the Goodman [Robert O. Goodman] trip.
Speaker 2: That was the Goodman trip.  Yeah, I, I, I missed that.  We missed the phone call and I missed out on that.  But most of the others, you know, I was there.  We went to see the pope, there as you can see.  And I always--I always liked that--we, we were supposed to have an audience with the pope.  You know, when you go see the pope, you can't tell him, well, I'll be there Tuesday at 5:30, you just go to Rome [Italy] and you wait 'til the pope is ready.  But the respect that they had for him when he got there--when he got there--I, I guess we arrived I think that day, the next day we had the audience.  That's how quick it was which was considered very, very quick.  So we met the pope.  We went through the Vatican [Vatican City] and sat where everybody sits who goes see the pope and so we were told--
Speaker 1: Only those side chairs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah, and we walked in that office.  And, of course, this huge office with this little man sitting behind his desk and he was frail and bent over, so we were told you only have a half an hour.  I knew that wasn't gonna work with Jesse.  Jesse ain't gonna be no half an hour.  But anyway, we got--engaged the pope in, in his posture with regard to the apartheid system in South Africa.  And I guess it must've been over an hour.  Jesse, you know, was engaging the pope and then did the photo sessions afterward.  And--well we went from--we went from Rome to England.  And when we got to England, we went--no, we went to Canterbury [England], yeah, went to Canterbury, to see the Archbishop of Canterbury up at Canterbury, which was quite interesting because I had read Becket [Thomas Becket], and it was there that, was it King Henry VIII [sic. Henry II] I think was stabbed, his friend, Becket, at the alter and they have a, a spot there where he is supposed to have been stabbed.  So we got--we went up from England, about a forty-five minute ride in this little plane.  On the way back, it started snowing and, and the pilot started back to Canterbury and couldn't see.  So the pilot--the pilot said, you know, it's, "I can't see how to land here at Canterbury, I'm gonna try to make it back to London [England]."  And, you know, people who are terrified act differently.  And so, so Jesse gets real quiet, you know, and start (laughter) looking all around.  Then I looked at him--now, I wanna talk, you know.  I just wanna start talking about some of everything.  And so he shook his head, I don't wanna talk about nothing.  I don't wanna talk (laughter).  But we made it back to London and landed, and he was trying to free up some prisoners at the same time.
Story_ID: 531726
Speaker 1: What was interesting about that, you know, which I always admired about him, we went from Harlem [New York, New York]--before we left, we went to Harlem and--up to Sylvia's Restaurant [New York, New York], and, and we'd held a rally early in the day.  And Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was his usual way of opening doors for people at this rally of about 25,000 people.  Jesse said, "And when I leave here, I'm going up to Sylvia and have me some fish."  You know, now you knew everybody was gonna show at Sylvia's, and that's what happened.  Everybody descended on Sylvia and there we were in the middle of the street, pimps, prostitutes, buying--everybody, go, Jesse, run Jesse, run Jesse.  So we went from the pimps in Harlem to the pope in Rome [Italy] to the archbishop in London [England] to the prime minister of Italy to the ambassador, American ambassador in Italy, all in a matter of less than a week, and that's the range of, of, of, of Jesse Jackson, and I always liked him for that.  In fact, I told him, we were coming through Virginia, and had this long entourage, and he looked up--I might have told you this, he looked up and he saw what had formerly been the chain gang, now they got brown suits, but both of us growing up in the South remember the chain gang days.  That was another--legal slavery.  They'd snatch black folks off the street for nothing, make them work.  And, and when he looked up and he saw that scene, he said, "Stop, stop," you know, "stop the car, stop the car."  And so this long entourage 'cause, you know, you got the Secret Service, you got the, the wagon in the front, and all the Secret Service, and then--you got a car in the front, Secret Service, then you got the wagon and depending upon how many threats he has received, which he used to see--receive them all the time, you have so many Secret Service and the staff, so it's a long entourage, right?  So when he say stop, everything has to stop.  So along the highway, you got this entourage, long entourage.  And he gets out of the car, and we get out--he gets out of the car and he goes over to the sheriff, you know, who's sitting under the shade of a tree, you know, with--the typical potbelly, big shotgun, and he says, you know, "I wanna talk to these men."  He says, "All right."  So the guy said, "Okay, yeah, sure, talk to us."  He went out--went out into the field, right, and we start talking, and he start talking to them, "How's the family, how you doing, how you making it?  Everything's all right, can I help you with anything?"  And he said, "Okay, what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna leave some money up there with the sheriff so you all can buy you some sodas or, or sandwiches or, or whatever, okay?"  "All right, Jesse, man, thank you, thank you."  So we got back in the car and I said to him, I said, "Man, you know, that's what I admire about you.  You know, you'll always be my leader.  You relate to the people in a biblical way, the least of these."  He used to say this boat stuck at the bottom and as long as you can relate at that level, you got me, you know.  And he said to me, he said, you know, "I guess that's why I like you.  Other folks, you know, we had some names we called each other, said other folks want me because of, of what I do for them, but you the only one around, one of the few around, one of the few around who judge me based upon how I deliver for the people."  And so we travel--I mean, from that London trip, first time I was ever on the Concorde [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde], you know.  He had to make a--get back because he was trying to free up these prisoners.
Story_ID: 531727
Speaker 1: And this is interesting, too.  He [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was trying to free up these prisoners and, therefore, missed the plane that we came over on, but he had to get to Washington [D.C.] because he had another appointment, so the only way to do that was to take the Concorde [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde].  And, and it was quite an experience riding in the Concorde.  He wasn't satisfied.  He wanted to ride first class in the Concorde.  The whole thing was first class (laughter).  And when he got back, they criticized him because he had to take the Concorde.  You know, he couldn't ride like other people.  You know, to show you how people can be critical based upon the lack of knowledge.  He was trying to free prisoners which made him miss the flight that would've got him back to take care of his business, so the only way he could fulfill the, the, the appointment was with the Concorde.  It wasn't that he just wanted to do that.  That was the way he had to travel.  So traveling with him was always an education, always a door--a, a way of opening doors.  I told him, though, I don't want--know if I wanna ride with him anymore because the other ride we had was after he had won Washington.  This was first--he, he had won Washington and was going to Dallas [Texas] for the presidential debate and we were on this plane.  And, man, we hit something in, in the--in the sky, and that plane was bucking and shaking like riding a bronco, you know.  And, and it would dip down from--looked what appeared to be a mile and forever, and then go back up and the whole plane was rattling and shaking.  So, again, he was sitting in the back, he was seated in the back with Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy] and Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] behind, behind.  I was seated in the front with, oh, man, Gold--Godwin [Lamond Godwin], Godwin, Godwin, yeah, brilliant brother, we were seated in the front.  So Godwin and I were on the same page.  We, we, we, we scared but we were gonna talk, you know.  Back there, man, they scared but they, they in a knot.  So we talking about history and, and whatever, whatever, and when we landed, the Secret Service grounded that plane.  You could smell the gas and, and, and everything, so they grounded the plane and Jesse Jackson went on, he had to do the presidential debate in Dallas, and man, it was like nothing had ever happened.  But a few months later, that plane crashed.  They, they, they--it was a private plane and the, the staff that we all knew and the--about sixty passengers died in the crash several months later, and I always believe--what gave me confidence--you know, when I look back and I say, Lord, you can't let us all go down like this, you know, 'cause you had leadership--we were in the front part of the plane where, you know, his chief staff, people advisor--but in the back were other leaders and, and the press, and, and I said, Lord, you can't let us all go down like this.  So that was the--that was the first time.  And then in London [England] was the second, so I--he going to have too much trouble with me getting back (laughter) on a plane with him.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm about two strikes.
Story_ID: 531728
Speaker 1: A couple other things I wanna cover--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Before you have to leave and, and one was Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Crown Heights, you even wrote a book about it ['No Monopoly on Suffering: Blacks and Jews in Crown Heights,' Herbert D. Daughtry, Sr.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, but, here, you were at the center of the fire--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: For other reasons that Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was, prior.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, that was in '78 [1978], 1978.  Now, we had launched Black Christmas '77.  We had organized the Black United Front [National Black United Front].  In Crown Heights, Crown Heights is a mixture middle class, it is a strong, Caribbean population.  It was increasingly becoming a strong (unclear) Hasidic, because you've got different sects, segments of that.  And, and so there had been these clashes between the Hasidic community and the black community early on going back, what '74 [1974], something, because I remember meeting at that little parlor church [The House of the Lord Church, Brooklyn, New York] I had--no, had to even be before that 'cause we hadn't even moved.  We moved here in '69 [1969], so that would be going back in the '60s [1960s] when I first was brought--acquainted with the Hasidic community.  And so the, the--this had been going along for a while.  And what, what brought it to a boiling point is that a young lad, sixteen-year-old, Victor Rhodes, had been beaten by fifty of these people according to the--to the newspaper, that fifty of these people had jumped on him and beat him to a pulp.  I visited him in the hospital, his head was big as a watermelon, we didn't think he was going to survive.  In addition to that, keep in mind, the police had killed a businessman by the name of Arthur Miller.  So here we were, being attacked by the Hasidic, being attacked by the police and, and we, we, we were in the midst of organizing the Black United Front which was, again, one of our compelling reasons for organizing, we had to be together, man.  They're, they're, they're tacking us all over the place.  We had to be together, so we did.  We organized and then we had the rally, I think it was July, 1978 in Crown Heights, right in front of the headquarters of (unclear), right.  And, of course, you can imagine the resistance that we got from that.  And we marched, maybe some people say five thousand.  If the media said five thousand, we must've had ten and, and on Eastern Parkway and had the rally.  And I made the connection between, as always, somebody called me the lasso king, I'm always lassoing everything into one bump.  They'll be attacked by the Hasid- Hasidic, you're attacked by the police, you, you have no political power, you have no economic power, we just helpless here.  So what we gotta do is organize, organize.  And then--and then we went to the precinct.  We marched onto the precinct.  And I don't know if said this before, I said it earlier, and, and there, I was, again, confronted with people who wanted to tear up the community.  And, and I--did I mention that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I used some very strong language, you know.  The next time the Hasid touch one of our kids--
Speaker 1: We're gonna--
Speaker 2: We're gonna--
Speaker 1: Tear this community--
Speaker 2: Tear this community up.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: But, now--
Speaker 1: So, I'm going to ask if we can just have you for another twenty minutes?
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I haven't heard anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I--yeah, if I don't hear anything, I'm good.
Speaker 1: All right.  So that was--
Speaker 2: Now, let me get the--I, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The part that that did to me is that at one of the rallies, I said that the next time the people in the long black coats--no, no, here's what I said.  We're gonna organize our community patrol, right, and the next time one of the people, persons in the long, black coat--no, and when men meet men, that's what it was, when men meet men, we'll see what they will do, right.  We're gonna organize a community patrol and when men meet men, we'll see what they gonna do.  That was my statement and it was deliberately intended to be provocative.  After all, they would attack it, but they only attack children, women in, in droves.  So basically, I was saying, okay, when we're organized, we'll see what you'll, you'll do, and we did, we organized.  Our, our, our community patrol had no problems because we'd walk the streets with them.
Story_ID: 531729
Speaker 1: Now, what the media said I said, "We gonna get the Jews and the people in the long black coats."  That's--that was headline, New York Post, right?  And when I saw that, I said, man, I didn't say that.  I talked with the publisher, the editor, the New York--first, I talked to John Mitchell [ph.].  He was the one who had participated in the writing of it all.  He said, "No, you didn't say that, and I'll write an affidavit to that end."  And then I called, talked with the editor at the--at Post.  They said, "Well, they didn't do it because they got the script from AP [Associated Press]," and so they went--we went around and around and around.  So I went to one of my Jewish friends and I said--because now, I, I--I'm going to my Jewish friend and say, "Hey, I didn't--but I didn't say that."  So when I said that to them, they said, "Well, Herb [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Herbert D. Daughtry], we know you wouldn't say that.  You would say a lot of provocative stuff but you (laughter)--you wouldn't say that."  Now, so I said, "Okay, well then maybe I don't need to pursue it because my friends know I didn't say it, so why, why pursue it."  It was one of the major mistakes of my life.  That thing haunted me wherever I would go, no matter where I'd lecture is the--one of the first things they say is, you know, about the--you know, getting the Jews and so and--so I had to keep explaining myself year after year after year, and I never said that.  So it helped to write for--it, it helped--prompted me to write the book, you know, to--so that I could say and leave it on the record, and I was thinking primarily for my children.  Because then I had a couple of daughters at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and, and, and, and so Ken Auletta had written some--a series of articles, very critical of me, taking words out of context, had me calling Jews savages and, and, and all of this.  And then they made the articles into a book, and I'm up at the library at Dartmouth, you know, thumbing through the book and I see advertised Ken Auletta's I think 'New York Politics' [ph.] and I said, oh, god.  I hope that this stuff ain't in here.  I pick up the book and there it was, you know, that I called Jews savages and, man, my, my, my knees trembled.  You know, my hand trembled, my knees--I said, my children up here, supposing this book become a part of their discussion, you know.  I vowed then that I had to write.  I had to put my story out and I did that.
Story_ID: 531730
Speaker 1: I think that you strive to bring a positive out of every negative.  I think the capacity that God has granted us is never to be defeated, that you can take whatever people do to you, whatever the negative and make a positive.  So what I decided to do was write the book ['No Monopoly on Suffering: Blacks and Jews in Crown Heights and Elsewhere,' Herbert D. Daughtry] and so the, the layout in a book that I can get to my children and to my friends so that if ever the question come up, if they don't even wanna argue the case, just say, "Well, he wrote a book.  Why don't you all read the book," right.  So when I wrote the book, and very interesting enough according to my publisher, Africa World Press [Trenton, New Jersey], said that there were people who were very interested in, in the book until they saw the galley [galley proff] and after that, the interest disappeared.  And I, I wrote the book, I, I, I thought there was gonna be some critics, somebody to challenge me on my presentation, on my facts.  Would you believe it, I don't think I've encountered any critic at all.  I find it very strange that I've written a book, what I think documenting my experience with the Jewish community and I've been hard-hitting.  I didn't--I, I--where I made mistakes, I, you know, confessed that I should've used different language, and, and where I'm critical, I, I didn't pull any punches, you, you know.  And I've always thought it strange--I think the book came out in 19- [1997]--I don't know where--I, I--some time, but it's been around for years and I have never been in--I've, I've not had any critics, no Jewish leaders have stepped forward to challenge me on, on the book.  It has--it has experienced the death of silence which, which, which you're almost forced to believe, a conspiracy of silence, that somewhere you're, you're, you're forced to believe.  I mean, you don't want to believe that such a thing like that is out there, but you're forced to believe--you mean to tell me, you write a book where you've been accused of, of being anti-Semitic and you write a book to lay out your position and to admit where you might have used the wrong language and nobody, nobody wanna discuss it (laughter), you know what I mean?  Nobody wanna be critical?  Nobody?  So, the book is there but I'm, I'm so grateful that I, I, I can leave on the record what I believe and what I said and can document it from the record of my position.
Story_ID: 531731
Speaker 1: So one other thing I read about you which is probably one of the most controversial things you've been involved in, hopefully you are the, the guy, but, but cofounded Ebonics [New York Ebonics Movement]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's Ebonics the language as--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I--what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, when it--when the hit--the more modern time--
Speaker 1: Was 1996, '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Seven, something like that.
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997]?
Speaker 2: Along with Councilman Charles Barron.  He was chief of staff at the time.
Speaker 1: And I remember being in Mississippi, and one of the--and I was doing, working on another oral history project and this older woman was talking to me about Ebonics, and I'll never forget what she said to me about it at the time, and she's like, don't being me that Ebonics stuff because, you know, we live in America in a country where you cannot rule it or run it unless you speak English--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As spoken by the people who handle the jobs--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or who are in the position to hire or hand out the jobs.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I want to know how did Ebonics come about and how did you--how did you think it could be used to benefit African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I think what this old woman said missed completely the point.  It is a principle of organizing.  If you gonna organize people to get to where you want them to go, you got to start with where they are.  So if people are speaking, it can be Chinese, it can be whatever you--name you wanna call it, but if, if, if that's the way people are talking, then you start there.  You don't wanna stop there.  You wanna teach people how to speak perfect English and, and, and any other language that they can master, but Ebonics, and I think people confuse that with slang, some of the slang words and whatever, but it was a way that, that people talked and there were professors--I don't remember all the argument now--who talked about it, did a, a linear--you know, a history of it and different words, how different words were used and, and then--and et cetera, et cetera.  But as an organizer, just as an organizer, is that you, you--if people are--you, you know where you wanna go.  This is what I've been saying all along.  When you do a demonstration, you're not doing a demonstration because you love demonstrating, you're after an objective, and the objective is to gather as many people as you can, to be as highly visible as you can be so that you can get your message across.  You--until you get their attention, you can't--you can't teach anything until you get people's attention.  And I'm convinced that, that we can learn--people can learn anything if we find a way to teach them.  And having seen my children come close to being victimized by people who had a set teaching program and, and couldn't deviate as far as my children was--were concerned--my son [Herbert Daughtry, Jr.], the teacher said, "Well he's creating problems, he doesn't pay attention."  I happened to go down to the school, look up, and he was on the front row, I put him on the front row because I guess the teacher could watch him, and she was right.  He was just playing.  You know, he ain't paying attention.  But he looked up long enough, the teacher had put up a word and somebody said that's a B-word.  He said, "No, that's a D-word," and he went on back to playing.  When I talked to the teacher later, she was telling me how he doesn't pay attention.  I said, "Listen, I was just watching him.  But you're, you're not challenging him.  He is on a different level than you are and you need to be challenge--." What we were saying is that many of our children rather than--rather than struggling with them and beating them up to speak what we call perfect English, why not start with what they are, where they are and, and, and recognize where they are and try to take them to where you want them to go, right?  So if they're speaking a certain kind of way, why humiliate them?  Why, why make them feel bad about themselves?  Why not take that and say they're speaking a certain word or certain phrase and you know it's incorrect, you know, why not show, why not take that and say, well, this is the way that you're speaking, this--your use of this word comes from so and so and so and so.  You picked it up here so and so and so to use it.  But I know--I want to compare something now.  Let's compare the way this language is used, and so it becomes a teaching means.  That's all that we were saying.  We were not saying that people were supposed to end up with Ebonics, speaking their own kind of language.  We weren't saying that at all.
Story_ID: 531732
Speaker 1: To me, it was a way of, of, of, of employing a strategy that is old as the Bible, as when God wanted his prophet to reach the people, he put them where they are.  He's like, oh, you sit them on the dry bones and, and you get a feel for the dry bones.  And when you--when you feel where people are coming from because they, they listen.  When I come up from Georgia, part of the problem, people laughed at me, the way I spoke, you know.  And, and it was a way--for, for an example, the--one of--a number of examples. One that come to mind is that when I grew up in Georgia, we pour tea in a--in a jar, you know.  I don't remember ever drinking tea out of a cup.  You had a jar and you had to put a spoon in it because if it's too hot, it breaks the jar.  So when you come north and you say--somebody say, "Well how did you drink tea?"  Well, we had--you drank tea out of a jar.  Well, rather than to make fun at me and, and tell me how wrong I am, why not, you know, take me from where I am and, and, and teach me, show the difference.  So--various expressions that we have.  Charles Barron made the point when he was talking about he was gonna slap white folks for his mental health, you know, which was an outlandish statement, but and, and try to clean it up by saying, "Well, you know, in our people, my mom used to always tell me she gonna slap me into next week (laughter).  Yeah, boy, I'm gonna--if you don't get out here, I'll slap you into next week."  But, no, the, the, the mistake that people made, those who were critical, most of them were thinking that we were talking about making Ebonics the official language or the accepted language that is comparable to English or any other language.  We were not saying that.  We were saying that there was a way that people talk.  You can't get around it.  There's a way that we--there are expressions that we use that come and eman- emanating out of our experience, so rather than put that down and, and, and, and make people feel as though they are less than intelligent because they speak with certain phrases, why not accept that as a way of phra- of, of speaking, but at the same time, teach this is where we wanna go, so that was our position on Ebonics, right.
Story_ID: 531733
Speaker 1: So, and, and, moving on, in 1991, after the first Gulf War.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to give the--what was considered the prayer that ended the war.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Or the war ending prayer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, during--when the Gulf War came, I was invited to House--Congress, [U.S.] House of Representatives to do the invocation, and I was invited at the instigation I think of Congressman Ed Towns [Edolphus Towns].  I know it was Congressman Ed Towns, and so I did give that invocation during the day and it was--it was quite an honor.  After all, I'm--I guess I was the first and maybe the only Pentecostal minister that ever given the invocation in, in the House of Representatives, and it's, it's good history for the children to pass on.  And, and, and you get a chance to roam the, the floor, you know, and I knew a lot of people there, and so they honor you by--you know, now you can kind of hang out with us here on--in the floor and you roam around all day and take pictures and, and, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's quite an honor when you stop to think that a few years before, I couldn't get near a Congress (laughter), you know what I mean?  The only way I'd get in there is there be trying to rip everything off.  But I prayed the prayer and, and, and that night, Bush, Sr. [Presidents George Herbert Walker Bush], came on the air and said we have decided to end the war.  So I--man, I had a field day.  I called back to Washington [D.C.], said, "Congressman, listen, the next time you all start up a war, don't take so long to call me, you know, so we can get this thing over with (laughter), you know.  But don't call me for no small stuff, now.  You, you--if you got a war, something like that, just give me a ring."  So that was the prayer.  He put it in bronze over there, the, the prayer that ended the war.  But on that--similar to that had I--invitation to the White House, I usually get invited to the White House, when Clinton [Presidents William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was there.  We used to have these presidential breakfasts with about two hundred interfaith leaders.  And that was always, always a thrilling kind of, almost unbelievable experience because, you know, you get these gold embroidered invites.  You know, the president trying to invite you to the White House for breakfast.  And we'd have these breakfasts at the--at the--in the State Room [State Dining Room] and, as I said, it's a select group.  It wasn't--it wasn't just black.  It was the full range of American religious experience.  And so I'd sit there and, and with President Abraham Lincoln brooding over the proceedings.  And, and, and I, I say, you know--I think I told you, I was--I got a undesirable discharge.  I--did I cover that?  Yeah, I got an undesirable discharge.  And I'd sit there and say, you know, a few years ago, man, I was undesirable.  Folks--no, no--nobody wanted me around anywhere, and here I have an invitation from the commander-in-chief to come to the White House and, and have breakfast, which is--relatively few people have that opportunity.  The last breakfast we had, I was, I guess, honored to sit at his table, you, you know.  So we sat there with the president and, you know, about eight other ministers.  It was--it was interesting because when you go, you know, you get a number and a table and it's reserved for you.  And it's, it's interesting because obviously, you know how it is, people wanna know who's the closest to the president, you know, so wherever you're seated seems to suggest your (laughter)--Lord, the games, the games humans play.  It is incredible.  But, you know, our--whoever gets closest to the president means a certain prestige.  So, so we--you know, you start comparing numbers and see where people sit.  So the last time, you know, I got this number that--I, I forgot what it was, say seven, doesn't matter, says seven, and I'm looking around for seven, you know, looking around, and then suddenly I spotted seven, table said seven, and then I see President William Jefferson Clinton, you know--I said, wait a minute, let me check the number (laughter), let me check--let me check this number here.  So, sure enough, it was--it was there.  You know, so I'm sitting there, breakfast with the president and, and he is--somebody say he has a black gene in him.  I mean, he is so personable.  I--he is--he is--I, I mean, when you're with him, it's like, that's it.  You, you are it.  And, so the Vice President Gore [Al Gore] tried to come and get him out of the breakfast because when breakfast over, people be, you know, hanging around and, and they be trying to extract him to--find the president--Vice President Gore said, "Mr. President, I hate to do this to you, but your staff keeps sending me messages that you gotta leave here, you got other appointments." And he still be hanging around talking, very personable.  So I--it was just incredible that, that--what God had done in, in my life, you know, to bring me from that point to be able to--and not one time, but on a number of occasions, to sit there and have breakfast with--and engage in conversations, to raise issues across the table with the president of the most powerful nation in the world.
Speaker 1: Did you ever talk to him about reparations?
Speaker 2: Came close to it.  I talked to him about the, the, the debt.  The reparations at the time was not as prevalent as it can and I wanted to utilize what I thought was the time 'cause obviously other people engaged.  But I wanted to get his position on eradicating third world debt, which was a kind of way of talking about reparations--
Speaker 1: Reparations.
Speaker 2: --is that these nations ought not to be carrying this burden of debt.  Why not, you know--debt.  So we engaged in that and he said that he was for that and he would work at doing that.  You know, he was--he was trying to find a way to, to work at that I think was his (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of--
Story_ID: 531734
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of reparations do you wanna see here in, in America, United States?
Speaker 2: That's a good question and, and I think that, that need to come out of some commission.  I, I think that repar- let's think about the Marshall Plan, building, what Western Europe. They developed after the world war, Second World War [World War II, WWII], they, they developed the Marshall Plan and rebuilt Western Europe because they were afraid of their--of the--of the--of the increasing power of the Soviets, but something like a Marshall Plan that looks at our communities and, and, and see how they can be rebuilt, something that related to the educational plan, something that related to the prisoners that--I mean, it's a--it's a shame that this country ranks so high among incarceration.  That's, that's a--that's a lot on this country and, and a lot of these people disproportionately, I think, happen to come out of our communities, so I think something that relates there, something relating economically.  In, in other words, I--when I think of reparation, I'm not thinking so much of a prisoner getting a check, although I hope they could get it.  You know, I'm--but I'd be a little concerned that if it were just a matter of dispensing checks to everybody, I think we'd be about in the same predicament.  Next generation, about ten years from now, we'd be back in the same predicament probably because it--it's, it's more than just having money.  So I think that there are institutional changes that need to be made.  I think that there need to be the creation of institutions to--in terms of addressing the reparation question.  And that's why I say that I think that it, it, it, it, it requires a kind of commission on reparation among, among our thinkers, among our leaders who come up with a viable, meaningful, long range way of addressing that, I think legitimate demand.
Story_ID: 531735
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a--I'm, I'm like Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu].  Bishop Tutu used to say all the time in, in--during the apartheid situation in, in South Africa, I'm addicted to hope, so I'm, I'm addicted to hope.  But as always, you know, I, I tell people, life is a kind of balance.  It--it's a kind of way in which you can hold conflicting ideas into some kind of balance.  So while I say I'm addicted to hope, I don't wanna sound like I'm Pollyanna, you know, I'm unrealistic.  I think I'm realistic about the problems, the challenges that are before us, but I've lived long enough to see some changes that I thought wouldn't have happened in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: For example?
Speaker 2: Well, out of the South.  I grew up out of the segregated South.  That--it--it's always--it's still incredible to me that the changes that have happened. And I'm well aware, this is what I mean, that the economic situation is still a long way's off, and some people will even challenge how much progress we made and so far as a lot of people don't have the jobs, institutions they used to have.  But one of the strange and interesting things that happens when I go south, I--you know, I walk and run in this river walk in Augusta, Georgia, beautiful flowers, trees, grass along the river, and, and inevitably, I meet white women running and walking.  Do you know, I'm seventy-six years old and when I see a white woman coming, I start getting instinctively frightened, you know, and, and don't, don't know what to do until I catch myself, and then I catch myself, I'm not sure.  Because when I grew up, a white woman held your life in her hands.  All she had to do was say he winked at me.  All she had to do was say he whistled at me.  All she had to do was say that he touched me passing by, you were gone.  So now, here I'm a old gray-haired man, meeting a white woman coming and, and not knowing how I should relate.  And then generally in the South, they speak--everybody--I, I wrote an article called 'Gently in Georgia' [ph.] and people smile and I speak, and so--and go on my way and say, wow, isn't this something?  Now, that may not seem like a lot, not much, but it is a--it, it is because it's, it's, it's getting at something inside of us that we had to relate to that maybe whites couldn't relate to, and maybe those of us who grew up in the South relate to.  So, I've seen changes there.  I've--it seemed to us that the only way we would ever get to a city hall or state house is coming in the back door with brooms and mops.  But, you know, you look around now, you see our people there as mayors and, and you even got a governor there.  So, there.  The apartheid situation in South Africa, you know how many years we went up and down these streets screaming, "Free Mandela [Nelson Mandela], free Mandela, free Mandela."  I'm not sure we really believed Mandela was gonna be free or that the apartheid situation was ever gonna change, but we saw it change, and it so happened I was in South Africa, and so I changed, met Mandela.  So I've, I've seen that change.  I've seen Africa change.  In 1946, two hundred African leaders met in Manchester, England, to talk about African liberation.  At that time, only Ethiopia had some kind of African independence.  In, in a generation, 19--from 19--, what fifty-seven [1957], 1957 I think it was, 1957.  From 1957, 1957, Kwame Nkrumah led the people of the Gold Coast, Ghana now, into independence, and in a generation, forty African countries gained some kind of independence.  I was at 6th PAC, 1976, 6th PAC, Pan-African Congress.  You know, there'd been these con- con- congresses. The 6th PAC was in Tanzania; I was at Tanzania.  Ross McConnell had been one of the financiers of, of the African liberation movement, great friend of Kwame Nkrumah.  And we sat around in the evening listening as he related the, the liberation struggles.  And somebody asked him, he said, "Ross, when you all met in Manchester, England, in 1946, did anybody think that twelve years later, Kwame Nkrumah would be the prime minister [Ghana] and then Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure] following in Guinea and then Jomo Kenyatta in East Africa?"  He said, "If somebody would've told us in twelve years we would have won Ghana and, and Kwame would've been prime--we'd a put a straitjacket on him.  We could--we would not have believed it."  So I've seen changes like that in, in my lifetime.  And, and, and, and, therefore, with that kind of history in my--in my consciousness, I'm firm in the conviction that nothing is implacable, everything can be changed--and it--and it--and it--you never know where the change is coming from.  It, it--my--I'm a student of history.  One of the fascinating aspects of history is that the minutest act, incident can ignite the greatest movement.  Rosa Parks sits down, no, nobody would've ever thought and, and you got a whole movement created.  So we don't know where, where, where it comes from.  It may be this particular killing, the killing of these kids or this kid, it may be the situation out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with these police beating people.  We don't know that in some classroom even as we talk some kid is being groomed as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was being groomed.  We don't know what will unite it.  You don't know whether it would be somebody that usually--you know, the Bible talks about God, God loves to use foolish things of the world and the things that are not to confound the world.  And I have a saying, I think God has a sense of humor because he gets so many of his choices, disciples from the junkie--from societal junkie (laughter).  So, I don't know where it's coming from, but I'm, I'm hopeful that it is--it is on the horizon.  I mean, I'd live to see it, but I'm--that's the hope I have while I struggle with the concrete, stubborn reality.
Story_ID: 531736
Speaker 1: What is it you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, and I think about it the older I get.  I used to kind of get a little nervous when people would ask that.  Now, I think I would want to be remembered for, for, for the family, committing myself and my wife [Karen Smith Daughtry] to building a family in which all of the children would be educated in the fullest sense, pursuing careers where they make contributions and at the same time be satisfied, and, and, and would always be remembered that here was a man who, who tried to incorporate what they call family values and, and particularly as evidence in the children's life.  I think the second thing I'd like to be remembered for is, is, is, is I tried to cut away in the wilderness with a ministry and that was, as I said, when I--when I came out of the jail, rejected, jobless, and, and--but with a vision of, of what ministry should be, that a ministry should be always going deep in spirituality, always connecting to God, but at the same time, finding the application that addresses the least in society and, and, and, and within the context of African people.  And that's because that part of the human family have been so dehumanized, have been subjected to such unprecedented cruelty that, that if the Bible is consistent, then theologically, God has to be on the side of black people and, and Native Americans and oppressed people.  So, I, I, I, I would like to be remembered that he tried to, to, to bring that kind of ministry to focus, and I'd like to be remembered as somebody who was not afraid to take on the powers that be, who exhibited something of the Hebrew prophets of old, and they were known for their criticism of kings and people in power, that when he felt that a president was taking the nation in the wrong way, he was not afraid to go to Washington [D.C.] and stand in the White House, he was not afraid to go to the state houses.  He didn't confine himself to the pulpit and that when the wars came as the--as the Vietnam War and, and Iraq War, that he tried to warn the nation that was the wrong way to go.  And, and, and so those kind of issues I think I'd like to be remembered for having, having, having--I guess, the third thing from the all--the, the rest of it is, you know, when I stop to think, I visit my old hangouts now.  I was just there Saturday in Jersey City [New Jersey], the place from which I was arrested, and it's a--it's a small place where the gambling takes place, everything takes place there, the number writing.  You can openly play cards and--you know, on the tables.  And I go there, I try to get there about maybe once a month or so and I usually go back to prison--I got different prisoners that I visit.  And I sat in that place yester--Saturday, which my brother's buried over there and I go by and sit in the, the, the club, it's called, everybody in town know it, in the club, and I sat there, and on the wall, they have pictures of people who had come through there who are now gone.  And I sat there with the, the, the smoke was thick and, and, you know, liquor's around and, you know--you know the number slips is being passed and, and I sat there and just said, this is where I was, you know, relative few years ago.  I sat at that table all night long, smoke thick, cigarette hanging from the mouth, either head messed up with something, liquid or otherwise, and sat at that table, and if God had not extricated me, if God had not found a way to get me out of that situation, I'd be dead.  All my friends are gone.  And, and--I looked on that wall, and everybody was dead.  I think there are two people left, two guys that were sitting playing cards.  They were--they were teenagers when I was coming along.  And all of those guys are gone.  And if God had not saved me out of that situation and put me away in prison where I couldn't harm myself, I'd have been dead.  My life would've been messed up.  I don't--wouldn't have nothing on the canvas of history except that he lived a life that was destructive, caused his mama [Emmie Cheatham Williams] nothing but pain, sent his daddy [Alonzo Daughtry] to an early grave, and he's in an unmarked grave and good riddance.
Speaker 1: But God had different plans for you.
Speaker 2: But God had different plans for me.  I will always remember when I said, Lord, Jesus Christ, I don't even know if you're there, I don't know what I'm doing, but I do wanna make a commitment.  I wanna put my life in your hand and I want you to use me.  I made a mess of myself.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Good.
