Story_ID: 608662
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is France Albert Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis], F-R-A-N-C-E, just like the country, A-L-B-E-R-T, and my last name Davis, D-A-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name France?
Speaker 2: There is.  My delivery as a baby was by a midwife.  The midwife did the best she could to spell the name that was given to her, and it turned out that my name is France as a result of having been named Frank.  But, she didn't, couldn't quite figure it out.
Speaker 1: Oh really that's what happened?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your name was supposed to be Frank, but she--
Speaker 2: Right.  I was named for my first cousin's husband whose name was Frank Hatcher [ph.] and I was named for him.
Speaker 1: Misspelled Frank okay.  And so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 5, 1946, in Cooperstown [ph.], the community of Georgia, just outside of Gough, Georgia, which is all located in Burke County, the largest county in Georgia.
Speaker 1: G-O-- G-O-U-G-H, Gough.
Speaker 2: Gough, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Cough with a G.
Speaker 2: Okay in Burke County.
Speaker 1: Burke County.
Speaker 2: B-U-R-K-E (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) B-U-R-K-E.
Speaker 2: All right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm both a pastor of a church, Calvary Baptist in Salt Lake City [Utah] and a professor of communications and ethnic studies at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: Okay (pause) all right and what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is the 13th of March 2008.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're located in the sanctuary of the Calvary Baptist Church, which is located at 1090 South on State Street in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Story_ID: 608663
Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that the--that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food and it's fish, fried fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite color and that's blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is in spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I do not have a favorite vacation destination.  I'd like to go to Africa more.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "Yes I have a goodly heritage," is my favorite phrase or saying that comes from the Book of Psalms, Psalms 16 [Psalms 16:6] of the Bible.
Story_ID: 608664
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's [John Davis] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R, and of course her married name would have been Davis [Julia Cooper Davis].
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there, do you know if there was an attempt on the part of your grandmother [Scoatney Scott Cooper] to name her after Anna Julia Cooper?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure of how her name came about.
Speaker 1: There's a famous educator in the South, yeah. Anna Julia--
Speaker 2: Right, I, I know who that is, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born on September the 4th, 1907, in Burke County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so out in the rural.
Speaker 2: Out in the rural area on a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Her parents were farmers as were my parents.
Speaker 1: All right, okay now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  Can you trace them back to slavery days or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, we can trace them back.  In fact, I have a genealogical chart that has been completed that goes back to the days of slavery.  In fact, my mother's father and mother were both born in slavery and were small children when slavery ended.
Speaker 1: So, your grandparents on both sides were born, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandparents on both sides were born in slav- as slaves.  They were slaves when they were born.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that gives you an excellent opportunity to remember stories if they told stories about those days.  Did they have any stories about those?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, they were all deceased by the time I was born.  I'm, I'm part of my parents' second crop of children and they were all, all of my grandparents were deceased.
Speaker 1: Well there might be, might there be a story that your grandparents told your parents about what it was like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, there are a lot of those stories that my mother and father could tell that I, I remember.
Speaker 1: What are some of those?
Speaker 2: One of the stories that my mother told was that during the slavery that she heard from her father that during slavery his brother and he were separated and that's the last name Cooper is the master's name for my grandfather whose name was July [July Cooper].  His brother's last name was Cummings [ph.] because he was sold to a Cummings and so they were divided when they were small children, separated.
Speaker 1: So they took the last name after the master.
Speaker 2: Took the last name of the master's.
Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about how they were treated during slavery?
Speaker 2: None that I can recall my mother telling or father.
Speaker 1: And what, what's the family tradition about, or what, what happened after slavery did they, did they receive anything or?
Speaker 2: They received nothing.  Once they were set free, they were simply told on a given day and I'm not sure what day that they were now free.  And they were free either to stay on the plantations where they were working and work as sharecroppers or they could leave and fend for themselves.  My grandparents chose to remain and to work as sharecroppers and eventually both of my grandmothers were able to purchase land that our family still owns.
Story_ID: 608665
Speaker 1: Any stories about, about Reconstruction or what, you know what it was like in those days between the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the stories that my mother [Julia Cooper Davis] told us almost daily was about an activity with her family and the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], and there're two of those stories.  One of them is that her uncle's wife was walking and refused to step off, out of the way of some white ladies that was walking in the town of Waynesboro [Georgia] and that when she came home that evening that night the Ku Klux Klan showed up to get her.  Her husband interfered, who was my uncle, and they then took him down to the local African American Baptist church and put him inside, set the church in fire, and he was never seen again.  The other story was that my mother's father [July Cooper] got somehow in trouble with the Klan when she was just a small baby and as a result of that the Klan came and sat on their porch waiting for him to come home and he came home later in the evening, but before he came, he never did come home that night.  He always came home after dark, and so my grandmother [Scoatney Scott Cooper] sent one of the children, she had sixteen of them.  It was easier to send one out and not miss, that would not be missed out the back door to meet him and tell him not to come home and his life was saved because he never came home that night.  But the Klan was sitting on his porch, on their porch, my parents, my mother's grand- my mother's parents' porch waiting for him to come home.  And he didn't come home for several days.
Speaker 1: I suppose the Klan didn't have any idea how many children were really there anyway.
Speaker 2: They didn't have any idea how many children were there and they certainly wouldn't miss one.  There were just so many of them, and so they didn't miss that one.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's, that's cert- those stories certainly tell you something about the atmosphere--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in that part of Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 608666
Speaker 1: Now did your, your mother [Julia Cooper Davis] have a chance to go to school when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother went as far as the eighth grade in school.  And in those days, the eighth grade was about as high as an African American you could go in Burke County, Georgia.  She later became a school teacher just with an eighth grade completion of school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that kind of says something about the importance of having any kind of education in that environment I guess.
Speaker 2: Being able to read and write was the key, and if you knew how to do that then you could then teach others how to do it was what my mother used to say all of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Lots of stories about her growing up.  She talked about a brother of hers [Andrew Cooper] who before the Wright brothers [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright] invented the airplane made an airplane that had flapping wings.  She talked about how he took it up on the haystack and flew down and of course crashed and hurt himself badly.  She also talked about as the youngest child how she was treated with favor by all of her sisters and brothers and her parents [Scoatney Scott Cooper and July Cooper] kept her at home instead of her working in the fields.
Speaker 1: Is there a reason why they kept her home?
Speaker 2: Because she was the youngest and female, and so she stayed at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were trying to protect her I guess for some reason (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Protect her, right and keep her from that hard work that everybody else was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know the name of the school your mother attended?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the school she went to.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about the name of the school she taught in? Was it--?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the school she taught in either, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 608667
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My fa- father's full name was John, J-O-H-N, Hildery, H-I-L-D-E-R-Y, Davis [John Davis].
Speaker 1: Hildery Davis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in South Carolina, but moved to Georgia while still a small boy.
Speaker 1: Okay and about what year was he born?
Speaker 2: He was, was born in 1905, May 26th.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there, is Hildery like, is there a story behind--I haven't heard that name before?  Is there a story behind that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only story that I know about that name is that it--from him until now it's been a common family name.  I have a brother [James Davis] who was named that, and then nephews that were named Hildery, but before my father I don't know anything about the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's ancestors and I guess they would go back to South Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: They go back to South Carolina.  My father was born to a mother whose name was Lula McFadden [Lula Davis (ph.)], L-U-L-A, first name McFadden, M-C-F-A-D-D-E-N.  His father's name was Robert Cooper [ph.], and we know nothing about him except his name.  We do know, however, that my grandmother was born as a slave and when she was about six years old she was then set free as slavery came to an end.
Speaker 1: Ju- just a point your grand- your father's father--
Speaker 2: Was Robert Cooper.
Speaker 1: Is it Cooper or Davis?
Speaker 2: It's Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That's one of the family mysteries.
Speaker 1: Oh okay so he had the same last name as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same last name as my--
Speaker 1: --your mother [Julia Cooper Davis] had.
Speaker 2: --mother did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now this--
Speaker 2: He's in South Carolina, however, she's in Georgia.  His parents were owned by one slave master and gave them the name Cooper.  Hers was owned by others and gave them the name Cooper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They might have been related, and we are investigating now to see if we can find out if there's a connection.
Speaker 1: It's a good thing I asked, 'cause somebody might assume that you know you were juxtaposing the grandfathers or something but no (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: My grandfather on my mother's side was July [July Cooper].  My grandfather on my father's side was Robert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about what life was like in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Life for my father was very, very difficult.  His mother, the story is, was seldom seen in the, with a man in a personal kind of relationship.  She was a very business minded lady.  She ran the family as, and its work, did its work as a business.  She provided and took care of them visibly, and she was not, she did not have any formal education at all, but she knew how to do what my father called read and figure.  She knew math and, and letters.
Speaker 1: Could read and figure.
Story_ID: 608668
Speaker 1: Now are there any, is there a story as to why the family moved from South Carolina to Georgia?
Speaker 2: The, the, the best that we can tell is that they moved, they ran into some kind of conflict in South Carolina and as a result they ran to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We don't know any details about that, and my father [John Davis] was a person who would say we'll talk about that later and never got around to talking about it.
Speaker 1: That would be sensitive subject.
Speaker 2: Right a sensitive topic.
Speaker 1: And, and yeah depends on what was done--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and why, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father only had a third grade formal education.  He had to drop out of school at third grade to become the man of his mother's [Lula Davis (ph.)] house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he worked as a farmer from that day until he retired.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a pretty hard life I guess.
Speaker 2: He had a tough life, tough life.
Speaker 1: From age eight or so, third grade.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know for the rest of his life working on (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rest of his life working and not only working but providing not just for self but for other people until he died.  He always provided for lots of other people.
Speaker 1: Did he have older brothers that were working on the farm too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he was, he was the youngest, next to the youngest of the brothers, so he did, he had an older brother named Henry [ph.].
Speaker 1: How old was Henry?
Speaker 2: He would have been eight years, I believe, older than my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with a sixteen year old brother.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he drops out to work.
Story_ID: 608669
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents have told or that somebody else has told you about how your, how your parents met?
Speaker 2: How my parents met? No, I don't remember how they met.  I'd have to, I'll have to ask my sisters and find out.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: But they, they did meet in Burke County, Georgia.
Speaker 2: They met in Burke County, Georgia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I suspect they met at church because they went to the same church, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now when you think about--well tell us something about their personalities and what they were like and tell us who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother [Julia Cooper Davis] was very talkative.  She was always very social in terms of interactions.  She was a disciplinarian that taught her children.  She guided us by the use of proverbs and short sayings, what goes up must come down.  She was at home most of the time.  She was seldom in the fields working, always very outgoing toward people in the community.  My father [John Davis] on the other hand was rather reserved, quiet, hardworking, strong in terms of discipline.  He told you something to do only one time.  He seldom repeated himself in, in anything.  He was a great provider.  I never heard him use a curse word, but he was very firm in whatever he did say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both of my parents could look at you and you knew what to do in terms of their--that, what they called that look.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they both had that look.
Speaker 2: Both of them had that look.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And well who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I probably take after my father more than my mother.  My goals and efforts are put forth similar to what he did, work hard, make your way, and don't depend on anybody to help you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Take the help when it comes, but don't, don't expect it.
Story_ID: 608670
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is of my father [John Davis] reading to me in his broken third grade learning from the Book of Psalms, Psalms 23 on Sunday afternoon.  I also recall that we would never play baseball or any other kind of physical game that required running or exercising on Sundays.  And that's the first memory that I can recall is what we did on Sundays.  We got up early in the morning before day break.  We took care of the animals that were on our farm.  We then had breakfast, we had family prayer, we went to church, came home, had dinner, and then just sat around and talked for the rest of the day.
Speaker 1: Okay, you weren't allowed to do anything that you'd exert yourself.
Speaker 2: Nothing to exert yourself, it was work.  It was effort put forth, and my father was a firm believer that Sunday was a day of rest.
Story_ID: 608671
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was an absolute essential for us in our growing up.  We went to church every Sunday.  Now, remember that our churches in Georgia--during those days only met once a month.  So, we would go to our own church on second Sunday and we would go to somebody else's church every other Sunday during the month.  My father [John Davis] was the superintendent of Sunday school that the church that we were a member of, Roberson Grove [Roberson Grove Baptist Church, Waynesboro, Georgia], R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N Grove named for the location of the church and that it--Grove indicating it was among the trees.  So, we would go there and spend time, and as the superintendent of Sunday school oft times the only children who would be in Sunday school would be the Davis children.  And I shall always recall how my father would stand up and ask for a volunteer as if the house was filled with people, and then only his children were there to respond to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he felt he had to do right, right?
Speaker 2: Had to do, had to go through the process--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --instead of calling one of us by name and telling us to do it, he asked.
Speaker 1: Okay, then would he be prone to ask at home?
Speaker 2: Not at home, but he did it in public (laughter).
Story_ID: 608672
Speaker 1: At home he'd tell you what to do and he'd tell you a story most of the time and then you'd get up and go do what he wants you to do.
Speaker 2: Now go, go through that process.  How, how is the story?
Speaker 1: My father [John Davis] was a master storyteller and I'm hoping that the day will come when I can get there.  One story for example that I remember that my father told was that about two men who decided to go bird hunting and they went off into the woods and they saw a pretty bird and one said to the other, "There he is, shoot him."  The other one said, "No, you don't shoot pretty red birds."  And they went further and they found a pretty blue bird, and the other one said, "There he is, shoot him."  And he said, "You don't shoot a pretty blue bird."  They continued to walk and eventually both of them at the same time heard the pecking of a woodpecker and they both said to the other, "There he is, shoot him," and they both responded, "Never mind, you don't have to shoot him, just let him keep pecking; he'll kill himself."  That kind of story that my father told would cause people to understand a, it's, it's like the folktales it had at the end of it a message, just let him keep pecking he'll kill himself.
Speaker 2: Okay, just beating his head on the wood.
Speaker 1: Beating his head against the hard wood of the tree and eventually it will get him.
Story_ID: 608673
Speaker 1: Can you describe, now you grew up out in the rural area?
Speaker 2: I grew up out in the rural about three miles from the closest store--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was in Gough [Georgia].
Speaker 1: That's a long way from the store.
Speaker 2: It was a long ways, but it was also the distance that we walked to school.
Speaker 1: Three miles.
Speaker 2: Three miles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long does it take to walk three miles?
Speaker 2: Well, as children it took a long time because we played, we did a lot of things in between, but I'd say on the average about an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's an hour.  That makes it more reasonable sounding that you had an hour walk, okay.  What were some of the, what did your place look like that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: The place where I grew up, I was born and reared in a--I was actually born in my family's home.  It was a home that had slats boards laid on top of each other made out of board.  The windows were shutter windows, not glass windows.  The doors were solid wooden doors that were closed with a latch, not with a knob or a, and so we opened the door by pulling a string to lift the latch to open the door.  The house I lived up in was a three bedroom house with a kitchen, outdoor toilet facilities, outdoor open faced well during the beginning times.  Those three bedrooms in our house one was used by my mother [Julia Cooper Davis] and father [John Davis] and the other were used by all of my sisters and brothers and I and one was reserved for visitors.  And then we had a kitchen and in the kitchen as in the bedrooms was a fireplace, and the house was heated by wood from a fireplace.  When I was born, we had no electrical lights.  We lit our house with a kerosene lamp.  We had a bucket in the kitchen that kept water in it, and that's where we got a drink of water from or water for cooking or any other household goods.  When it was bathing time, we had to heat water on the wood stove to have warm water to take a bath.  We only took a bath on weekends, Saturday nights.  We washed our feet though every day because we had been working and walking in the dirt, so my parents insisted that we would wash our feet every day.  So, we'd heat enough water to wash feet Monday through Friday, and then on Saturday we'd heat enough to, for everybody to take a bath.  We sometimes took a bath in the same water that our brother, or the girls would take them in the same water as the girls would.  My mother did all of the cooking on a wooden stove that was fed with wood that we would chop out of, off of the farm in which we lived.  It was all dirt.  The roads into our community were all dirt, and in fact they were narrowed roads with one side of the road for one set of tires and the other side of the road and grass usually growing in the middle of the road.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were farmers.  We had animals.  We grew dirt crops, corn, cotton, wheat, sugarcane, and we as a family bought only sugar for the most part from a store.  Everything else that we ate we grew it on our farm in a truck patch or a garden.
Story_ID: 608674
Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Burke County, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up?  One of the smells that was common was that of the manure from the cows, from the mules, and from the hogs.  That smell I will always be able to recall it and remember it.  It stood out.  When the wind blew, it would, depending on which way the wind was blowing and where you were standing you knew where the barn was, you knew where the hog pens were, and so that's one kind of smell that we grew up with.  But at the same time, we also grew up with a very fresh kind of smell, the smell of flowers, the aroma from flowers, from crops that were growing.  The flowers from those gave forth various smells.  And we also lived near trees and so there was always the smell of trees and grass.  There was a pond on our land and during a particular time of year it would dry up and so you'd smell the dead fish and experience that.  In terms of sights, plenty, as far as the eye could see openness except for trees and crops that were growing and so it's no mountains around, just flat land for the most part used for dirt farming, open land.  I can think about the wet soil between my toes as I walk barefooted plowing behind a mule with a plow.  The sight of crops growing, the site of animals.  I had my first lesson in sex education from my father [John Davis] who said, "Come, the sow is about to have her pigs," and I went and watched the pigs be born.  I helped my father deliver a cow that was breeched in its birth, and he had to turn the calf around in order to deliver it.  I watched that happen.  I watched him breed animals so that we would have pigs or so we'd have cows, calves that would be born.  Also close around the house were always chickens.  They were flying around, flutter through the dirt, kicking up the dust.  They were laying their eggs here and there, living in a chicken house squawking and making the noises of chickens.  One of the fears that I had as I grew up was that a hawk, which was always looking for a bird or a chicken, for another kind of bird, I always thought that they might take me as well and so that was one of the fears that I had.  The roads in which--
Speaker 1: So the hawks would often come down to take the chickens, just pick them on up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would come down and grab the chickens and fly away with it and that would be their dinner or they'd take their claws and grab them with their claws and they'd still be alive and they'd fly off with them and we'd find the feathers later where they stopped and ate them.
Story_ID: 608675
Speaker 1: Okay you were saying the sounds.
Speaker 2: The roads that we traveled on were roads that were dirt, dirt when dry, but mud when wet and if you had a car there were cars regularly on those wet roads that would slip into the ditch trying to get where they were going.  Most of the people in our community [in Burke County, Georgia] traveled by wagon in my earliest days.  In fact, my father [John Davis] used to take us to school in a wagon, pulled by two mules and the sideboards were not boards at all, but were tin and that's the same wagon that he used to deliver his crops, cotton and corn and wheat to the various, the cotton gin or the marketplace for that and that's the way we would go to school whenever we had a ride to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of the smells, I mean you went through sights, sound, sounds, okay sounds.
Speaker 2: Smells, talked about smells.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sounds, sounds were of animals, seldom a car.  Never, never I can never recall a time that I heard a siren until I was a full grown man, but we could always hear a car that might be coming down the road and see the dust flaring up from that.  We could also hear the animals.  I still listen with disappointment for the sound of birds singing and animals making their various noise, noises, cows, chickens clucking.  We depended on the rooster's crow every morning as a wake up sound.  So, the sound of the rooster crowing was for us the alarm clock.
Speaker 1: Well how many brothers and sisters did, do you have?
Speaker 2: I have nine brothers and sisters.  One died young and now there are, there are only six of us left as of today.
Speaker 1: So now six left, okay.  And where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm next to the last.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, both of the two youngest are brothers and we both live here in Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah].  My younger brother name is Clarence [Clarence Davis].  He's two years younger than I am.
Story_ID: 608676
Speaker 1: Now what was your personality like growing up?  What did you like to do and what could you do out there for amusement out in the country?
Speaker 2: One of the real values of living in the open is that you could do anything you wanted for amusement.  You could, we made our own toys, however, oftentimes and so we would take whatever was round and use it for a ball.  We'd take whatever stick was available and use it for a bat.  We had a bicycle that we could ride.  When television became popular in the middle, the late 1950s, we had a black and white television.  The main entertainment though consisted of listening to the radio, the fights of Joe Louis and others on the radio or the ballgames of the Negro Leagues on the radio or the telling of stories by the older men, sitting around the older men as they told stories.  Those were our main sources for entertainment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any--
Speaker 2: I was a bookworm, however, and so I did a lot of reading and was always engaged in whatever was about learning.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite book from that period?
Speaker 2: I, my favorite book of that era in time is one that most African Americans don't care to remember today it was called 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman].
Speaker 1: Explain please and this is (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Little Black Sambo' was a book about a little boy who was named Sambo, and there was a bunch of tigers that came around and they were trying to catch him and they went in a circle and kept going in a circle and eventually turned into butter, so the bad situation turns into a good situation.
Speaker 1: So, the tigers turned into butter, okay.
Speaker 2: Right the tiger turns into butter and the boy then is able to go home and have something to eat, butter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Little Black Sambo.'
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's the name of the book.  It's comparable to the 'Dick and Jane' book that Toni Morrison talks about in her book, 'The Bluest Eye.'
Speaker 1: Okay now you said radio was pretty popular you said (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Radio was really popular.  Everybody had a radio and whenever the African Americans were on fighting, playing baseball, or doing anything else, singing people gathered around the radio and listened to those performances and got involved in them.  I think I got more tired boxing with Joe Louis and those early boxers than anything else that I did physically just shadow, shadow boxing.
Speaker 1: At the radio?
Speaker 2: At the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We'd tell him which hand to use and where to hit the other person.  We gave him instructions.  We coached from the sideline.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 608677
Speaker 1: Where did you start school, what--?
Speaker 2: First school that I went to was Gough, G-O-U-G-H Elementary School [Gough Elementary School] in Gough, Georgia.  I went there from the primer grade, which is equivalent to kindergarten, primer grade through the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we went to school initially, we walked from home three miles in order to get there and after about three years, four years, they in fact purchased buses, new buses for the white kids and gave us the old buses that the white kids had been using and we rode the bus to school.  Kids who were going to high school once they implemented the bus system, then were given an opportunity to go to a public high school in Waynesboro, Georgia, W-A-Y-N-E-S-B-O-R-O.
Speaker 1: Waynesboro okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I went to high school [Waynesboro High and Industrial School, Waynesboro, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now did you have any special teachers or mentors--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in grade school before we get to high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, there were three very special teachers that I still remember and one of which I stay in touch with.  The first one was named Mrs. Davis [ph.].  She was my first teacher.  I don't remember her first name, but she rescued me one night when they had a Halloween party.  I showed up with my family for the Halloween party, saw all of the different costumes and was afraid. She, from inside of the school building, heard me crying and rushed out and rescued me as a result of that.  She's the one who taught me how to read and how to write, Mrs. Davis.  Second teacher that I will always remember was a Mrs. Blaylock [ph.].  She was a heavyset, stately looking lady who had a special loving touch, and she would be firm in her directions to you and demand that you do your work, that you strive to be your best, but she would also do it with a special loving touch.  And the one teacher that I stay in touch with today is named Mrs. Pearl Ca- Carter Oliphant, P-E-A-R-L, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R was her maiden name, and her married name was Oliphant, O-L-I-P-H-A-N-T [Pearl Carter Oliphant].  She's still alive today, lives in Augusta, Georgia, and she and I talk from time to time and she's asked me to come do her funeral whenever she dies.  But, she was perhaps the prettiest teacher that I can remember.  I think I fell in love with her because of her beauty, but she was also an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in high school, now, now did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: No favorite subjects in grade school, just a lot of--whatever was required reading.  I never did like math.
Story_ID: 608678
Speaker 1: So what about high school?  Now you attended Waynesboro [Waynesboro High and Industrial School, Waynesboro, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I attended Waynesboro High, an industrial school, which was a school that was exclusively for African Americans during the separate but equal days and it majored in directing young African Americans into agriculture and home economics type work, the kind of thing that Booker T. Washington promoted at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  So, I was the leader in high school of the New and Future Farmers of America organization [Future Farmers of America; National FFA Organization].  We sponsored a sweetheart ball every year, and I went to that sweetheart ball.  It was a major dance activity, but I never learned how to dance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite course was English and I in fact wrote my class graduation poem when I graduated from Waynesboro High in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay wrote class--now were you involved in clubs and that sort of thing in school?
Speaker 2: The only club I was involved in was the honor society.  I was, because I lived fourteen miles away from the high school and had to be bused and my parents [Julia Cooper Davis and John Davis] didn't have vehicle to pick me up for afterschool clubs, I was never involved.  But I was involved in the Honor Society, National Honor Society and the local.
Speaker 1: Okay now Waynesboro this is an all-black school right?
Speaker 2: Waynesboro was an all-black school.  In fact Gough [Gough Elementary School, Gough, Georgia] was also.  In fact all of my school through my first college experience at Tuskegee was at all black schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any special teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, Mrs. Stenson [ph.], Mrs., I can't remember her first name.  Mrs. Stenson, Mrs. Blaylock--not Blaylock sorry Blakley, Blakley, B-L-A-K-L-E-Y, Blakley and let's see who else.  That's all I can think of at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you play any sports or anything in school?
Speaker 2: Didn't play any sports at all, but was the--the two clubs I was involved in was the New Farmers of America, that was a club as was the Honor Society, but that was the only extracurricular activities that I was involved in, in high school.
Story_ID: 608679
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were on the verge of graduation [from Waynesboro High and Industrial School, Waynesboro, Georgia] in '64 [1964], had you made any college plans?
Speaker 2: I had not made any college plans until near the within the last semester and I had not made any because I had been told that at best I would probably be a good farmer and so I hadn't made, made any plans.
Speaker 1: Even, even though you were--
Speaker 2: Even though I was an honor student--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they, they, the counselors, the advisors suggested that maybe I'd do well just to go home and help my dad [John Davis], and that's one of the reasons I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I majored in agricultural engineering when I went to Tuskegee so that I could become not just a farmer, but a skilled class farmer, taking them at their word.
Speaker 1: Okay now how did you get to Tuskegee?  What's the story about how you--?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee had a five year school program which required no money to go to school, but it required that you work full-time the first year and part-time the other years that you go to school part-time for five years and that you would graduate without having to have money.  My brother had gone to school there and that's how I knew about Tuskegee.  So I enrolled on the five year pro- program and went to Tuskegee.  My father gave me $27.50 and that's the last money that I ever got from my dad.  About half of that was used to buy a ticket on the Southeast Stages bus [Southeastern Stages, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] to get from Georgia to Tuskegee, Alabama, and the rest I used to buy a sandwich at various bus stations as we, as we rode.
Story_ID: 608680
Speaker 1: Okay now how'd you like Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?  Was it what you thought it was gonna be?
Speaker 2: It was more than--I had no idea what it was gonna look like or what it was gonna be like, so it was more than I'd expected.  However, because I was working full-time on campus and because I had no money from any other source I had to work a part-time job.  So, I didn't have a lot of time to invest in school work.  While there what I did do, however, was invest a lot of my time in the modern Civil Rights Movement.  I joined Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I actually made Dr. King and Malcolm X and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well how did that hap- happen.  Now you're there in '64 [1964], '65 [1965] this is on the cusp of all the trouble in Selma [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --where SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and the rest, all of them converged on Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, well--
Speaker 1: Well tell us how, how did you find out about it on campus?
Speaker 2: One of the other things that happened at colleges like Tuskegee is that they were always bringing in high profile African Americans, Mahalia Jackson, James Baldwin, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, those kinds of people.  But, in addition, they also brought in these people who were matchedly speakers.  So, they brought Malcolm in as, as a speaker, and Malcolm's wife was a graduate of a nursing school from Tuskegee and--
Speaker 1: So Betty Shabazz.
Speaker 2: Betty Shabazz.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And they also brought in Martin as a speaker.
Speaker 1: Now this is unusual on some level, but that Malcolm X because he was a controversial figure in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was in transition from the Nation of Islam at the time, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: In fact, I, I met him just about a month before he was assassinated.  So, he was moving toward the more--to his new movement as opposed to the Black Muslims.
Speaker 1: Yeah now what, tell us about how you met him and what is, what was your impressions of him?
Speaker 2: Of, I met both he and Dr. King as they spoke at convocations.  My impression was that there is absolutely nobody who could speak as well as Malcolm and then to hear Martin even then I believed that Malcolm was the better speaker.  He had a mastery of the English language having memorized the dictionary.  He could use words and the shades meaning of those words.  He held us on the edge of hard wooden bleachers while he spoke for two, two and a half hours and we would have sat there longer if he had gone on.  I was fortunate, however, to be able to interview him as a part of the Tuskegee newspaper staff as I also did with Dr. Martin Luther King, and so I got to not only meet them both as public figures delivering speeches, but also to talk to them on a one, not on a one to one, but as a part of the local student press and wrote articles about both of them and what they said in their speeches.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Yeah, both of them spoke at convocations at (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, both spoke at convocations.
Story_ID: 608681
Speaker 1: I had by the way met, not met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but I had been in Washington [D.C.] when the March on Washington, the 1963 March on Washington, and so I had seen Dr. King and that was by the way the first time that I really knew about the movement was in, I, I stumbled on that the summer before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you, you were still in high school [Waynesboro High and Industrial School, Waynesboro, Georgia].  How did you get a chance to go to the march?
Speaker 1: The summer of, my last summer before finishing high school 1963 my father [John Davis] allowed me to go to Asbury Park, New Jersey, to work for the summer.  I had a sister who lived in New Jersey and her boyfriend said that there was a job at the Penn Furniture, P-E-N-N Furniture Company [Penn Furniture Company] in Asbury Park, so my father allowed me to go and work for the summer.  At the end of the summer he said it's time to come home.  So, I took what money I had saved and headed home on the bus and got to Washington, D.C, and saw all of the outhouses and the buses and the trucks and cars and just crowds of people everywhere, and my sister who lived there, another sister, I asked her, "What was going on," and she says, "Well Dr. King and the March on Washington are here and tomorrow is the day that that's gonna happen," so I stayed around.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you got a chan- you heard I Have a Dream speech in person.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was a part of the crowd.  I oftentimes show the picture of that crowed to students and ask them if they can find me in the crowd, but I'm just in the crowd.
Speaker 2: Do you know where you are in the crowd?
Speaker 1: Yes, I was right near the water where the water is trying to keep cool.
Speaker 2: All right, right in front of the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] that moat there [Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah a lot of people said they had their feet in the water, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, so did I.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Had my feet in the water and that's what kept, I mean it was sweltering hot that day, I mean unimaginable heat and to have all those other boring speeches from politicians and union leaders and all of that.  I mean it was tough to stay out there until Dr. King spoke.
Speaker 2: Now did you, do you remember hearing that Dr. Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] had just passed away over in Ghana?
Speaker 1: I, I remember hearing that.  And by the way just last year I went to his house and saw his tomb in Ghana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 2007.
Speaker 2: That day. A. Philip Randolph spoke--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] John Lewis, I think--
Speaker 1: John Lewis, the AFL-CIO union leader [sic.].  Lots of different people spoke that day, congressman.  But, Dr. King was the electricity.  He was the, his speech unlike all of the others, was not so much content, but it was certainly moving.
Story_ID: 608682
Speaker 1: All right so fast forward to '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: So '64 [1964] I graduate from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --high school [Waynesboro High and Industrial School, Waynesboro, Georgia] and spend the summer working and then go to college.  And while at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I hear that there is this problem in Selma, Alabama, and as a student I got involved in the march from, forty mile march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama [Selma to Montgomery March].
Speaker 1: Now how did you first hear about what they call Blood Sunday, the massacre on the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] of civil rights workers by the Alabama state patrol [Alabama Department of Public Safety], I believe?
Speaker 2: Tus- Tuskegee's campus was buzz, was buzzing with all of the civil rights activities, not just that event, but all of the other things that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was doing and that civil rights workers in Mississippi was doing, so the campus was abuzz with that sort of talk and I heard about it just in a sitting around talking session.  And all of us who were in that session decided that because of what had happened on Bloody Sunday we were not there that day that would then become participants in the, the march from Selma to Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Okay so I know in 19--when was it, it was held in I think March of 1965?
Speaker 2: March 1965, right.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and so what was it like?  I mean how many, where, did you have a place to stay there with all the people crowding there from all over the country?
Speaker 2: We had no place to stay.  We slept beside the road.  The last night we slept at the Catholic church.  Headquarters allowed us to sleep on their facilities, but even then we slept outside.  So, there was no, no house, no building that we stayed in.  We were guarded by the Alabama National Guard that wore Confederate flags on their shoulders, by the way, but we just didn't quite feel safe and especially after the Bloody Sunday situation everybody was worried what's gonna be the next thing that they're going to do.  And these were the Alabama National Guards, although they had been federalized by the president of the United States [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], but we still were not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you remember the, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] call for black power march?
Speaker 2: I do.  I remember Stokely's call for black power.  I remember the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], that whole SNCC movement and what they were trying to do.  I remember hearing that Dr. King had a meeting with them I read about that historically since to try to get them to understand that nonviolence ought to be the approach that we take.  But, they were a powerful group.  They were an active group, and I actually met Stokely Carmichael and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you think about black power at the time when--
Speaker 2: Well I was one of those who was in favor of black power.  I was not nonviolently oriented.  I believed that if you spit on me, I ought to spit back.  If you called me a name, I ought to call you a name.  If you hit me, I ought to hit you back.  And it was, although I joined the Martin Luther King movement, I was not, they had to work with me to keep me from losing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so the march, y'all marched from Selma--
Speaker 2: Selma to Montgomery.
Speaker 1: --to Montgomery to the state capitol [Alabama State Capitol] and--
Speaker 2: To the state capitol right past the Ebenezer--not Ebenezer, the church that Dr. King first pastored.  I forget the name of it.
Speaker 1: Dexter Avenue [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Dexter Avenue.  Walked right past Dexter Avenue, which was right there nearby and up to the capitol.  Across in front of the capitol were these trailers, eighteen wheel flatbeds that were made into a stage and, and I stood right at the foot of the, at the flatbed of one of the trucks.
Story_ID: 608683
Speaker 1: Okay Selma, Alabama 1965, the march to Selma to Montgomery [Alabama].  Now you and I off camera were discussing the intersection right there where, I, I forget the name of the streets, but you got the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama], you go the capitol [Alabama State Capitol, Montgomery, Alabama] almost right across, it's like a block away or two blocks away.
Speaker 2: Just one block up--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --from the, the church.
Speaker 1: And right across--
Speaker 2: The justice building [Alabama Judicial Building, Montgomery, Alabama] is across the street behind.  His church is where today Morris Dees has his offices, and Morris Dees has been very active in the poverty movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Southern Anti-Poverty Law Center [sic. Southern Poverty Law Center, Montgomery, Alabama] I think yeah Morris Dees.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: A white lawyer--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who has been involved in the civil rights for many years.
Speaker 2: Very much involved.  He has been here in Utah doing some things.  That day of that particular march [Selma to Montgomery March] by the way as we walked past the church and we, we left the Catholic center where the Catholic church bishop's headquarters were and that last day it was just a short march from the edge of town into where the capitol building was.  We could see the curtains in the top of the building of the capitol building with people looking out, and a number of people thought that they actually saw Governor Wallace [George Wallace] looking out the window.  We don't know, but a lot of people talked about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there ever a time on the march when you were afraid when you thought that you all might be hurt?
Speaker 2: We were afraid most of the time.  We were afraid first of all whenever the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] showed up, and they showed up at various points.  But, we were also afraid because we didn't know what those Alabama National Guardsmen were going to do.  They had bayoneted guns and they were armed, but also we knew that on their shoulder they had a different flag and so we were never quite sure of that.  So, it was always kind of nervous, we were nervous.  But, as a student, one of the commitments that we made is that we don't have any vested interested.  If we get killed, we get killed.  If we get hurt, we don't have jobs.  We don't owe anybody anything, and it will be okay.  So, we were, we were ready to take that kind of risk.  One of my frustrations in 2008 with college students is that they don't seem to be willing to take much risk as we were during those times.
Speaker 1: Those are different times I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and different students.
Speaker 2: And I think things were also very clearly delineated back in those times.  Now things are a little fuzzy and maybe that's why.
Story_ID: 608684
Speaker 1: Now what happened in 1965?  Now you, you, you were at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tuskegee, at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: --just, just the one year right?
Speaker 2: Just one year.  At the end of that year because I had spent so much time in the movement and not going to class and not passing my courses, I received a letter from the dean, "Dear Mr. Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] thank you for coming you had great potential, but next year don't bother coming back."  And so I got suspended from school after that year there at Tuskegee.  I'd had a wonderful experience there, and so I was disappointed, but nothing I could do about it.
Speaker 1: Now there's some figures there that I've heard other people mention in the past and one is Robert Gomillion [sic. Charles G. Gomillion] you remember him?
Speaker 2: Um-hm I remember that name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was he like?
Speaker 2: I don't, don't know him as a person--
Speaker 1: You didn't have him as a--
Speaker 2: --just remember the name.
Speaker 1: He seemed to be somebody that was an activist professor involved in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Is there anybody there that you remember that, that was encouraging students?
Speaker 2: None, none of the professors.  It was mostly a student driven movement that I was a part of, but none of the professors.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right let's see so, so you decided to--now how did you--you went to the [U.S.] Air Force, which seems like a pretty bright move to make, but who did, did you have advice about, about what to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened after I was expelled from school I knew that the next thing that was likely to happen to me was to be drafted either--in, in those days they were drafting both for the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and for the [U.S.] Army, and I wanted no part of all of those.  I had heard all of the sad stories.  No advice directly, just the stories about crawling on the ground and getting shot up and being injured and so forth, and heard all of those stories about the Marines and the Ar- and the Army.  So, I by now have moved to Fort Lauderdale, Florida where I had started my preaching ministry as well.
Story_ID: 608685
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how did you get involved in the ministry?
Speaker 2: I was always in church, always, and I believed as I was searching for my place and for my future that God was calling me to do ministry, that that was the place that he could best use my talents and my skills, some of which had developed during the movement.  I had become a spokesperson and was able to, to speak to audiences and in part--
Speaker 1: Were you a member of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?  Did you join SCLC?
Speaker 2: I was a member of SCLC--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the Montgomery association [Montgomery Improvement Association] that was there.
Speaker 1: Improvement association yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I, I got--in April of 1966, I started my ministry and also in April I received my draft notice.  When I received my draft notice though, I had made a deal with the local Air Force recruiter that he would take me in the Air Force.  So, I got a draft notice one day, the next day I was already in San Antonio, Texas, for basic training in the United States Air Force.  Never heard anything else about the draft notice by the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you avoided--
Speaker 2: Avoided the draft by joining the Air Force, the draft to the [U.S.] Army or Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] to join the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like the Air Force?
Speaker 2: I liked the Air Force.  It was extremely hot in Texas where I did my basic and my technical training.  I trained as an aircraft mechanic and became a crew chief, was stationed at Nellis Air Force Base [Nevada] for a period of time and that was for additional training and development of skills as an aircraft mechanic and then was shipped overseas to Thailand in 1967.  I served in Thailand as a crew chief and as a shop manager for jet aircraft, the kind of aircraft that carried, the fighter aircraft that carried the bombs into Vietnam and other places.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you were enrolled in school there too in Thailand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) While in, in the Air Force and stationed in Thailand, the University of Maryland had a very special program that they implemented on military bases for Americans who were outside of the United States.  So, I enrolled at the University of Maryland, and that's what really turned me on to school again is those courses that I took at the University of Maryland during my time in Thailand.
Story_ID: 608686
Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to I think I didn't probably spend enough time talking about your license to preach in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any pastors who were like mentors to you down there that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, during, prior to, when I, when I came out of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], having been expelled, I went back home to Georgia and there I was again searching and one of the pastors who men- men- mentored me was Reverend J.R. Tarver [ph.], T-A-L-, T-A-R, Tarver, T-A-R-V-E-R.  Reverend Tarver he was the pastor of the Noah's Ark, Noah's, N-O-A-H'-S Ark, A-R-K Baptist Church [Noah's Ark Baptist Church, Keysville, Georgia] out in the rural part of Burke County [Georgia].  I sought him out.  I talked with him, and he told me and gave me suggestions about how to find myself.  Once I get to Florida then, there's the Reverend Houston, George H-O-U-S-T-O-N [George Houston] is his last name, and he was the pastor of the Bethel Baptist Church [Bethel Missionary Baptist Church] in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on 22nd Road.  He became my mentor and worked with me as I continued to search for myself and eventually announced that I believed I had been called for gospel preaching.  There at that church he scheduled me for a trial sermon.  I stood before the congregation on the floor and delivered a sermon, and the congregation agreed that they thought I had been called and they then issued me the first level license to preach the gospel as I had opportunity.
Story_ID: 608687
Speaker 1: So you stayed in the [U.S.] Air Force for quite a while right?
Speaker 2: I spent almost four years in the Air Force from April 1966 until February 1970 I was in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you, you got married while you were in the Air Force right?
Speaker 2: I got married afterwards.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: I met my wife, however, while in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful account by the way.  I was on my way to Thailand in the Air Force, stopped in Oakland, California, where my brother lived and went to church with his wife.  That Sunday while at church I stood up as a guest and introduced myself and told them I was on my way over the war zone and that if there was anybody who may want to communicate in writing with a single young lonely sailor, soldier that I would leave my address.  So, I left my address and my wife's [Willene Witt Davis] now mother was present, she took the address, took it home and gave it to her daughter who was not there and she then wrote to me and we wrote as pen pals while in Thailand.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right then, then were married shortly thereafter I guess in a few years.
Speaker 2: I was not married until 1974, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right but you met her in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right okay now it says in, says here that '68 [1968] to '70 [1970] you--
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], sorry, '73 [1973] I got married.
Story_ID: 608688
Speaker 1: Yeah from '68 [1968] to '70 [1970] you were stationed in Boise, Idaho?
Speaker 2: In Boise--when I came back from Thailand I was stationed at Mountain Home Air Force Base in Mountain Home, Idaho [sic. Elmore County, Idaho], which was fifty miles south of Boise, Idaho.  I lived in Idaho, in Boise and commuted back and forth to the [U.S.] Air Force base.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That was my last station of duty, and I was discharged from there, took a train from there to Portland, Oregon, from Portland, Oregon, down to Oakland, California, and that was the end of my military time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come out in 1970.
Speaker 2: Came out in February 1970.
Speaker 1: Right, okay and then you went to Oakland, right?
Speaker 2: Went to Oakland.  In fact what I did first was I went back to Georgia and considered going to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] for college.  I was determined it was time to go back to college and to take college serious, but when I got to Morehouse the amount of money that was being charged was more than I had, so I went back to California where essentially schooling was free for veterans with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  So, I enrolled in several schools at the same time there in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you finally, you finished a degree from Laney College [Oakland, California], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact what I did is I enrolled in five different colleges at the same time.  I enrolled in Laney College, in Merritt College [Oakland, California], the University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Bay Cities Bible Institute [Bay Cities Bible College, Berkeley, California], and Golden Gate Theological Seminary [Golden Gate Baptist Theological Seminary, Mill Valley, California].  So, I enrolled in all of those and I took a full load, had all of them at the same time, graduating from Laney College after a year and then from Merritt College and Berkeley at the same time in 1972.
Speaker 1: Now why did you do that?
Speaker 2: I was in a hurry trying to make up for lost time as I saw it.  I had been kicked out of school [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and had wasted, in, in one sense I'd wasted some of that time and so I took school serious.
Speaker 1: That's--I'll say so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The various courses of study that I took were all things that I believed would help me with ministry, so that I took arts and letters.  I took history.  I took rhetoric.  I took theological courses.
Speaker 1: Now you were ordained in '71 [1971], too right?
Speaker 2: Ordained in 1971 at the Center, C-E-N-T-E-R Street Baptist Church [Center Street Missionary Baptist Church] in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you an assistant pastor there or something, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was an assistant to a pastor, R.L. James [ph.], R.L. James of the Center Street Baptist Church and more specifically I was identified as the youth minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay all right okay you also attended Bay Cities Bible Institute.
Speaker 2: Bay Cities Bible Institute.  That was where I got a great deal of theological training.
Speaker 1: And at Merritt College you earned an A.A. in African American, Afro American studies.
Speaker 2: African American studies.  My favorite teacher was B.B. Kirika [ph.], B, initials B.B. and K-I-R-I-K-A.  She is from--
Speaker 1: K-I-R-I-K-A.
Speaker 2: K-A.  She was from--
Speaker 1: B.B. Kirika.
Speaker 2: --Kenya, Africa, and she taught me Swahili.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so Afro American studies now had you, had you been exposed to any Afro American studies or?
Speaker 2: I had been exposed to African American studies in a very limited way when I was in the public schools in Georgia.  My teachers would say, "Here's what the textbooks says, but in addition to that you need to know that here is something else.  [President] Abraham Lincoln did such and such in 1850, Frederick Douglass did something else, and that's not in the textbook."  So I wanted, I was eager to know who I was to, learned more about my own heritage, and Merritt College had a wonderful degree program in African American studies and it was one of the first that I ever ran across.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right yeah that's in the age when Afro American studies was fairly new.
Speaker 2: Just coming in.
Speaker 1: Still, still fairly new in '72 [1972] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Right.
Speaker 1: It had been around about four or five years I guess then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 608689
Speaker 1: How did you like the black community in Oakland [California]?  Now this is when the Black Panther Party was revved up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black Panthers were alive and well.  They were doing their biddings there.  Those were also during, that was also during the time period when they actually went to that courthouse and the big familiar scene of them carrying guns and all of that was in that same time period.  Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] was vibrant and alive and we bur- people, students were burning Berkeley down.  It was a place of excitement.  It was almost for me as exciting as Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] had been with the movement with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was a different kind of movement now.  It's a predominantly black community and people are standing up and demanding that white institutions respond to their needs and to treat them as full human beings, Berkeley to accept more African American students.
Story_ID: 608690
Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey?
Speaker 2: I knew D'Army Bailey well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: D'Army Bailey and the mayor's name was Wilder [sic. Warren Widener], I knew him.  They were all a part of the movement that I was a part of there in the Berkeley [California] area.  I understand that he's in Ohio now.
Speaker 1: D'Army?
Speaker 2: I think he's an attorney general [sic.].
Speaker 1: No, he's in Memphis.  He's in Memphis.
Speaker 2: He's in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Attorney general.
Speaker 1: He's, no I don't--he might be, but I didn't, I don't remember hearing that, but I know he, he's one of the founders of the civil rights museum (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --that's there in the--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --Lorraine Motel [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee], yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know back in those days he was one of the activists that was moving us students to do things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he became a city councilman down there too.
Speaker 2: Yes, he became a city councilman while I was there.
Speaker 1: And the only one that's ever been impeached I think.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the impeachment part.  I had left by then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right yeah he was, he was, he and another brother elected him, but he was impeached I think before he was there a year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 608691
Speaker 1: So '72 [1972] at age twenty-six.  Now you, okay so you earned a B.A. in rhetoric from University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: University of California.  B.A. in rhetoric was a degree in analysis of writing and speaking, and I was on the debate forensic team at Berkeley as well.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now how are your grades in all of these courses?  You're taking like--
Speaker 2: I got good grades in most of them.  Most of my grades were--
Speaker 1: Full loads at--
Speaker 2: --Bs and above, mostly A's.
Speaker 1: Full loads at four different colleges.
Speaker 2: I was totally committed to school, totally committed to school.  I didn't do anything Monday through Friday except school work.
Speaker 1: Monday through Friday, you mean you had some time off (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I had time out on Saturdays and Sundays, went to church and travelled (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm telling you they don't make students like you anymore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 608692
Speaker 1: Okay, so now what brought you to Salt Lake City [Utah] in 1972?
Speaker 2: One day there was an article published in a academic magazine about a crazy student at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] who was enrolled in multiple colleges and taking a full load.  The University of Utah's [Salt Lake City, Utah] communication department head, Dr. Rick Ricci [ph.] read the article, the university was under some federal pressure to diversify the University of Utah, to diversify and so he called me in the middle of the day, invited me to take a teaching fellow's job and to come and do further study while teaching in the communication department.  I decided that if he was, if he would call me in the middle of the day and offer me a job sight unseen based on an article that he read, then maybe I ought to take the job.  So, I came to Utah that year, 1972, and was a teaching fellow for one year at the university.  After one year as a teaching fellow, I was appointed instructor and I've continued to teach at the university until today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay and it says here you also taught courses at Westminster College.
Speaker 2: Westminster College here in Salt Lake City is another place that I taught courses.  In fact, we had a special program that we got funding from the United Methodist church to train African American ministers, and I was one of the two instructors for that particular program at Westminster College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Since then, I've also taught at the Salt Lake Theological Seminary, which is a new seminary for the training of ministers and religious leaders here in Salt Lake.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're qualified to teach radio and television announcing?
Speaker 2: Radio and television announcing.  I taught based on--
Speaker 1: Rhetoric.
Speaker 2: Rhetoric.  I taught journalism, the beginning.  I taught the history of journalism.  I taught racism courses, courses on the Civil Rights Movement.  What I teach now is the African American experience classes and courses in minorities and the media.
Story_ID: 608693
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972] while all this is going on you become associate pastor of a church too (laughter).
Speaker 2: I become associate pastor here at the Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah].  They have a pastor, his name is Reverend Henry Hudson [Henry L. Hudson], H-U-D-S-O-N, and I become his associate and find myself in a situation where I'm doing much of the work as the church because he's not in town quite a lot.
Speaker 1: Henry Hudson.
Speaker 2: Henry Hudson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's currently a pastor of the Williams Chapel Baptist Church in Oakland [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Henry Hudson, sorry.  Did I say William?
Speaker 1: No, you said Henry, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right so you were associate pas- minister here from '72 [1972] to '73 [1973] and--
Speaker 2: Right, '73 [1973] Reverend Hudson decided that he was going to leave.  He preached his farewell sermon, suggested to the congregation that they ask me to fill in until they could find somebody, and I became the interim pastor from that time in '73 [1973] until February of '74 [1974].  February of '74 [1974] the congregation called me to be their pastor of the congregation at Calvary Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so during this time you also got married too right in '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: I still got married in '73 [1973]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in September to Willene Witt [Willene Witt Davis], W-I-L-L-E-N-E, W-I-T-T, and we moved to Salt Lake City [Utah] after a brief time of honeymoon.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so in '74 [1974] you became the pastor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it says here from '74 [1974] to '80 [1980] you served as vice moderator and moderator for the Utah Idaho Baptist association [Utah Idaho Southern Baptist Convention].
Speaker 2: Yes.  The larger group beyond the local congregation is an association of churches.  It is a voluntary coming together for fellowship, education, and missionary purposes, and I was elected by the various constituents of those congregations to serve as the vice moderator first and then later as the moderator.  That is the head person in charge of the association of churches.
Story_ID: 608694
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Utah like for you, it's--you know, I know Utah is typified, I mean the majority of the people here are members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] and it wasn't until the late '70s [1970s] about the time that you came here that they started to, that they actually renounced--
Speaker 2: Had a revelation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, had a revelation--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: --that, I think at one time they believed blacks didn't have souls and there was a revelation about that that now--
Speaker 2: They believed they were cursed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they also believed that they should not hold the rights of the highest offices of priesthood in the LDS church.  And so when I came here, that was their history.  Now that has not always been their history.  In 1850, they did allow African Americans to hold priesthood and they accepted a few, but they soon did away with that as the reconstruction era ended.
Speaker 1: Now explain to us is priesthood in the LDS (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Priesthood in the LDS church means that you have direct access to God, that you are the go between, between God and the other people and so in the LDS church the man is the priest and he's responsible for getting the rest of his family into the presence of God.
Speaker 1: Okay, so most of the male members are in the priesthood?
Speaker 2: Right.  A majority of--they, they use the term eligible males, meaning if they don't have some problems or if they were not African American in the olden days then they could hold a priesthood.  It's based on the priesthood out of the Bible, the Aaronic and the Melchizedek priesthood that are two types of priesthood that are in the Bible.  Aaron was Moses' brother and Melchizedek had no origin and no ending that we know of, but so they were the two high priests, the, the, the top level of the priesthood.
Speaker 1: Melchizedek is he out of 'The Book of Mormon' ['The Book of Mormon: An Account Written by the Hand of Mormon upon Plates Taken from the Plates of Nephi,' Joseph Smith]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Well, it's in the Bible also Melchizedek.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But their priesthood system is based on 'The Book of Mormon.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so basically you really can't be a functioning man in the church unless you are a priest?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, just to be it all in perspective--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause somebody might think we're talking about a high lofty position--
Speaker 2: Right, no--
Speaker 1: --that you couldn't attain, but it's--.
Speaker 2: --all males once they're twelve years old are then if they are doing what their belief system tells them they ought to be doing, then they are eligible for that priesthood position.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, it's not--
Speaker 1: So it's like--
Speaker 2: It doesn't make, doesn't make you a pastor of a church as in the Catholic church or leader of any particular group.  It simply means that in your home you are the person that is looked to for spiritual direction.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard on and public television did a documentary I think the way they explained it it's analogist to being bar mitzvah-ed.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It's--
Speaker 1: So your manhood is then--
Speaker 2: --that movement from, movement from one stage in life at about twelve to another stage of life.
Speaker 1: So in essence a black member of the Church of the Latter-day Saints if he's not a priest he's considered a boy in so many ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think, I think that would fairly accurate up until 1978.
Speaker 1: Right, then they changed it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So there was a--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978] there was a revelation that came down, and they believe in modern day revelations from God that came down through the presidency of the LDS church which says that from this day forward all eligible males may hold a priesthood.  Prior to that, it was all eligible males except.
Story_ID: 608695
Speaker 1: Okay we were speaking off camera about the exception to the rule back in the day I think the servant of Joseph Smith who made it out here with Brigham Young--
Speaker 2: In the--
Speaker 1: Elijah--
Speaker 2: In the 1850s, Elijah Abel was an African American who came here and was, was a servant, but he also held the priesthood, which is the highest leveled and highest endowment that you can have as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  He helped to build a tabernacle.  He helped to build the temple.  He also ran a hotel downtown here in Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah], and just recently in response to the Olympics [2002 Winter Olympics] coming to Salt Lake the LDS community responded by marking his grave in the Salt Lake City cemetery and indicating that he actually held the priesthood.  After that at some point, they instituted this situation which said that African Americans because of their African heritage were cursed and were not therefore to hold the priesthood in the LDS church.  That continued until 1978 when a new revelation was handed down by the president of the church that declared from this day forward all eligible males may now hold the priesthood.  That priesthood position is something that all males hold once they reach a certain age and are in good standing within the organization.  It's not a position of authority or power as with the priest of a--
Speaker 1: As, as a clergy yeah.
Speaker 2: --Catholic church, right, not clergy.
Speaker 1: Now, now what do, now you were here in '72 [1972], but I remember just as a kid you know the I guess George Romney [George W. Romney] running for president and you know the, he was a Mormon--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as his son Mitt Romney is today--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it was raised--
Speaker 2: Had been governor of Michigan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was raised that he, you know, if he was true to his religion he didn't believe that black people were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --had souls and that sort of thing and should--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --and that was one of the strikes against him I guess on a level--
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed.
Speaker 1: --and there have been other politicians from Utah that have had similar pattern.
Speaker 2: That argument continued and again until 1778 and in some places still today we have had experiences where politicians have acted as if they believe that people of African descent were less than, that they were to be marginalized and have been treated as such.  I remind the local community that while we've had the official legal revelational change, we have still not gotten the attitudinal change that's required in order to bring people along so that they match what is the belief that there are still people who believe that African Americans are less than, although the revelation says they're now equal with.
Speaker 1: Of course the country is still wrestling with the issues even after the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still wrestle with it.  Take forty, take forty years maybe before from the date of the revelation before you'll see the significant change start to occur.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what he really did was tell people it ought to be you know like this now.
Speaker 2: Right, but he said it ought, it, it is and, and his word is supposed to be assumed to be the final word in that matter, but again people's attitudes still have to be adjusted.
Story_ID: 608696
Speaker 1: Okay, now how does, now as, as pastor of a Baptist church are, how does the presence of the Church of Latter-day Saints [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] affect what you do at all, if at all, you know I don't know?
Speaker 2: To be any kind of non-LDS church in Utah you are affected by the dominant church, which is LDS.  The dominant church owns the property.  They control the local political situations.  They've controlled the social life.  They even controlled the academic settings in many ways.  And so what one has to do is learn how to agree to disagree on certain theological principles in order to get done what you believe need to happen.  So as a Baptist we agree to disagree with them on their theological position and as we disagree with them then we can get about doing our own thing.  We don't get in an argument and a debate with them, because if you get into an argument and debate you're dominated and you'll likely lose.  We work together in terms of common interests, such as housing or of the needs of the poor or crisis situations like the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] storms.  We work together on those situations without the imposition of theological positions.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know you've written a history of the black church in, in Utah and I believe that Calvary [Calvary Baptist Church, Salt Lake City, Utah] is, is the second oldest black church in the state.
Speaker 2: Yes, my book is entitled 'Light in the Midst of Zion' ['Light in the Midst of Zion: A History of Black Baptists in Utah, 1892-1996,' France Davis], and it is the history of black Baptist churches in the State of Utah.  And in the book I document how Calvary is one year or so younger than the Trinity African Methodist Episcopal Church [Trinity A.M.E. Church, Salt Lake City, Utah], both of which are four or five years older than Utah is as a state.  Statehood was in 1896.  Calvary has been here since 1892.
Speaker 1: That's something I think most people wouldn't think of that, but yeah the state though was populated year, you know back in 1840s and 1850s with people wasn't a state until--
Speaker 2: Eighteen forty-seven [1847] is when the first group of pioneer settlers came in 1847.  Now interestingly though 1824 there was already African Americans here such as James Beckwourth as a fur trapper.  So, African Americans have been here just as they were in the United States of America before the Mayflower.  They were here in Utah before the Mormon pioneers came.
Speaker 1: Yeah, James Beckwourth now he's an interesting character, real, his adventures would fill, have filled a couple of books.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Most people still don't seem to understand who he was.  In fact, he was played in a movie by a white actor, and I used to know his name, but I can't think of it now (laughter), though a white actor actually played him in a movie where he's with Kit Carson and all the rest of them out, out in the West.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: But Beckwourth, yeah.
Speaker 2: He made a significant impact on this community before the settlers came in as a fur trapper, a rugged mountain man type.
Speaker 1: Scout for the [U.S.] Army and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 608697
Speaker 1: Now '77 [1977] you actually earned another degree, a B.S. in religion from Westminster College here in Salt Lake City [Utah].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Education, my parents [Julia Cooper Davis and John Davis] always said you have to go further in terms of education than we did, and you have to be twice as good as your majority counterpart is and so education has, was introduced to us by our parents as one of the tools for bringing about the kind of change and I pursued that and taking it serious and added an additional degree in 1977 from Westminster College in religion and philosophy.
Speaker 1: Now is Westminster a college, a Mormon college?
Speaker 2: Westminster College was a Presbyterian based college here in Salt Lake City.
Speaker 1: Okay, now at the same time now this is incredible at the same time you're, you're a student at Golden Gate Baptist Seminary [Golden Gate Baptist Theological Seminary] in Mill Valley, California it says--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and working on a master's degree in mass communications from the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah], which you got in, you, you received in 1978.
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Right.
Speaker 1: So is there a time during this period where you're not in school (laughter)?  Is there any time when you're not in school?
Speaker 2: Well no there's very little time up until that point that I'm, in fact no time between 1970 and 1978 that I am not in school, various schools, pursuing various types of degrees and interests and graduating.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 19--you become an instructor at the seminary or you're certified as a seminary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As an instructor right.
Speaker 1: --extension instructor.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means that I'm a, it's the same as an adjunct instructor at a regular university, but I was working here in Utah while the seminary was actually in, in California right outside of San Francisco.
Story_ID: 608698
Speaker 1: Okay, so from 1979 to 1981 you served as the secretary treasurer of the Salt Lake Ministerial Association.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now is that the association of black ministers?
Speaker 2: No, there's no association of black ministers as such, but that was the association of all of the non-LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] church pastors and ministers and as, and that organization was kind of a fellowship work together kind of movement among the pastors and ministers of churches, non-LDS churches.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 1981 it says here that you received a military citizen of the year award.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what was that, who presented that and what was it for?
Speaker 2: Fort Douglas army base here in Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah] by the university [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] was the place where the Buffalo Soldiers were stationed during the 1800s, and when I came here we did some research and studied about the Buffalo Soldiers and so it was the Fort Douglas Army post and their related entities that made that award.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do, do you work with or have you ever worked with [HistoryMaker] Paul Stewart of the museum of the American West, the black museum of the American West [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center] out in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: I, I know him, have never worked with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: I know who he is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right did you, did you ever work with William Loren Katz who wrote all the books?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked with Dr. Ronald Coleman [HistoryMaker Ronald Gerald Coleman] and Dr. Michael Clark [Michael J. Clark], both of whom were people writing and talking about these subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay and so the Buffalo Soldiers were stationed right, were stationed right out here.  There's a 9th Calvary [9th Cavalry Regiment] I believe right?
Speaker 2: The 9th Calvary and the 24th infantry [24th Infantry Regiment]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --were both stationed right here in Salt Lake City at Fort Douglas.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think Charles Young was out here.
Speaker 2: Charles Young was one, Allensworth [Allen Allensworth] was the chaplain and there's a whole African American town in California [Allensworth, California] named for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 608699
Speaker 1: I have a note here that says--oh did somebody actually, now you were involved in the, making Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday a holiday?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983] Congress passed the law and President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] signed the federal law making Martin Luther King holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], Martin Luther King's birthday a holiday on the federal side.  Utah was one of the states that decided that that federal law would not work for them, did not apply to them, and so we had to get a separate bill introduced in the state legislature here in Utah.  Senator Terry Williams was the only African American in the legislature at the time.  He sponsored the bill, I then took it as chair of a committee to educate and agitate on behalf of the passage of the bill and eventually had a debate with the Representative Robert Sykes [Robert B. Sykes], S-Y-K-E-S who was opposed to the bill.  I debated him on television, and at the end of the debate he volunteered to help sponsor the bill.
Speaker 1: So you convinced him?
Speaker 2: Convinced him in the debate that this is something worthwhile, that it's good for everybody.  And he sponsored it and the bill passed.  We brought Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] out, and she spoke to the legislature.
Speaker 1: Now what argument did you offer that would actually change the mind of someone that bent on stopping the bill?
Speaker 2: Well a number of their initial arguments against the holiday were erroneous.  They were arguing or not proving.  They were arguing that Martin Luther King was a womanizer, that he was a drunken, that he never did anything for Utah, that he never came to Utah and that it was an African American holiday.  So, those were their arguments.  I simply countered all of those.  I reminded them as far as Martin Luther King's coming to Utah that he was on the front page of their own newspaper right here in Salt Lake in Salt Lake City [Utah].  I also pointed out to them that what he did in, in the country was manifested more for white women in Utah than it was for African Americans.  They were the minority in Utah, white women, so I pointed that out.  I also argued with them that, they, they said that there was no holiday for Brigham Young and that if there was gonna be a holiday for anybody, there ought to be one for him.  And I suggested to them that we would exchange the holiday for a city called Brigham City that's in Utah and of course they wasn't about to do that, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you convinced Robert Sykes to back?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this--
Speaker 2: I saw him by the way just about a month ago, and he reminded me that, that it was that interactions with him that caused him to be the man that he is today.
Speaker 1: Okay and, but this activity was not without its dangers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Someone shot up your office I heard.
Speaker 2: Shot my office up.  I had seventeen bullet holes in my office.  I got threatened, threatening letters all of the time.  The worse one came to my home as well as to my office, and they promised to pour gasoline on me and take me out to the Great Salt Lake and drown me and if that didn't work they'd take me back to Africa.  So, it was not without danger.  My wife [Willene Witt Davis] and children [Carolyn Davis, Grace Davis and France Davis] were afraid.
Speaker 1: The last threat didn't seem so bad I mean to take you to Africa.
Speaker 2: Take you back to Africa (laughter).
Speaker 1: That would have been--
Speaker 2: That would have been good for me.  It would have been like throwing the rabbit in the briar patch (simultnaoeus).
Story_ID: 608700
Speaker 1: From 1996, '90 [1990] to '96 [1996] it says you were again the vice moderator and moderator for the Intermountain General Baptist Association.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I continued to be the leader of the area Baptist, but at the same time was a participating leader on the national scene as well at the National Baptist Convention USA, Incorporated [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's the group that was then, was Reverend Jackson still the--
Speaker 2: Reverend Ja- Reverend--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] is a part of that.  Reverend J.H. Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] was the president in those days.  Today Reverend William Shaw is the president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and now am I missing anything in the rest of the '80s [1980s] here 'cause now you were generally a pastor here and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we also got a street named Martin Luther King holiday, and I don't remember the exact date of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we got a street named for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  It was before 600 South Street, but now it's Martin Luther King Boulevard [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard].  That street is the main street into downtown Salt Lake City [Utah] when you exit off of any of the freeways.  And the particular street that we got named is the one that has the Trinity A.M.E. Church [Salt Lake City, Utah] on it, and it also has the Mignon Richmond Park [Salt Lake City, Utah].  That's a part named for the first African American female to graduate from college in the State of Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mignon Richmond.  Now when did she graduate from college?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty [1920], 1920s, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 608701
Speaker 1: All right now it says here that you received an M.M., a master's in ministry I guess from Northwest Nazarene University--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Nampa, Idaho.
Speaker 2: Nampa, Idaho.
Speaker 1: Yeah 1994.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right now that's, that's, okay so this is, how many, makes for two master's degrees, two bachelor's degrees--
Speaker 2: Two of each.
Speaker 1: --two A.A.'s right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Two associate degrees.
Speaker 2: Two associate's, two bachelor's, two master's.
Speaker 1: Okay and you became a part in 1996 of the South Africa preaching team for the National Baptist Convention's foreign mission [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Each year the National Baptist Convention that sponsors missions in South Africa, Malawi, Zambia, Lesotho, Swaziland send a team of preachers over for a month and they, their job is to preach every day and to review the work that we are doing there.  So, I was selected as one of seven from across the United States of America to represent our convention, to do the preaching and to assess what we were doing there.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?  Now this is close to when Nelson Mandela, he hadn't been out that long I guess.
Speaker 2: He had been out that long, but apartheid has now ended, and the new governments in South Africa are struggling with how do we make it real.  It's legally gone, but how do we cause people to realize that it's gone.  So, we were in the midst of that.  We had to be careful where we went, how we carried ourselves.  We had to be clearly identified as Americans as opposed to African blacks.  We would, we would have been treated quite differently in terms of that.  But, we have schools there.  We have hospitals there.  We also do farming and other kinds of work there, and so the government as well as the people were excited to have us come.  They met us every day singing, walking down the road just singing and rejoicing, "The American preachers are here, the American black preachers are here."
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you think about South Africa when you were there?
Speaker 2: South Africa represents the extremes of life.  On the one hand, there are few people with everything.  On the other hand, the majority of the people have nothing during those years.  In Soweto [South Africa] with the black township, the people were extremely poor making very little money and most unemployed.  In the South African downtown is where the rich folk lived who were mostly not African American, not African.
Speaker 1: Now were they, were they going through the Truth and Reconciliation Commission when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Truth and Reconciliation Commissions--during that time, the government was trying to reallocate land and decide how the powerless might have access to the resources, the minings, the mining resources and so forth.
Speaker 1: Did you have, as a Baptist minister what did you think about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission?
Speaker 2: I thought that it served a good purpose at the time.  I don't think it ever completed its work as least not to my satisfaction.
Speaker 1: What would you have--
Speaker 2: I would have wanted to see people held more accountable, perhaps having some penalty.  Maybe not prison but some other kind of penalty would I think have been suitable having treated others the way they had treated them for so long and now to simply get a slap on the hand I thought was minimal.
Speaker 1: So, yeah so crimes were revealed, but none punished.
Speaker 2: Crimes revealed, very few people had to suffer consequences as a result.
Story_ID: 608702
Speaker 1: Okay so, also from '96 [1996] to 2001 you were the assistant to the dean of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Right.  Now the assistant to the dean, and I, and I still am today assistant to the dean of the National Baptist Convention.  That's, I'm one of seven people in the United States of America Baptist ministers who've served in that role, and it is our job to provide training and education for church leaders and lay members for their church group, so they can better do their church work.  So we sponsor major conventions with fifty thousand people coming to learn how to better be an usher, how to better be a trustee, how to better be a deacon, better preach, those sorts of topics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm one of the assistants who organize and, and conduct those, that training.
Speaker 1: Okay, again in 1998 you were part of the South African preaching team.
Speaker 2: A second time I was invited, and this time we didn't go to all of the same places.  We lived in the bush while we were there this time as opposed to in a hotel as we did the first time and so it was a completely different kind of experience, living in the bush among the people every day having to be careful about eating and drinking water and so forth.  But, it was an exciting and an eye opening experience.  I came back convinced that I should never complain again about anything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, that's a revelation type of, yeah, situation.
Story_ID: 608703
Speaker 1: Now in '97 [1997] you wrote 'Light in the Midst of Zion: A History of Black Baptists in Utah, 1892 to 1996' [France Davis].
Speaker 2: When I came to Utah in 1972, I searched for historic records about the Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah].  I couldn't find them.  There were scatterings and bits and pieces here and there, but nothing concise and, and inclusive in terms of our history.  So I, I set about trying to bring together the history of Calvary initially, Calvary Baptist Church initially.   But then I noticed that there was a direct connection between the Calvary Baptist Church and all of the other predominantly African American Baptist churches in the State of Utah and that that connection was a mother-children kind of relationship, Calvary being the first, the mother church and the off, the others are the offsprings, if you will, of this church.  So, I began to search.  I did climb, crawl through attics.  I read old newspapers, microfiche, and microfilm and I talked to people and interviewed older people to find out what the history had been and then wrote it and put it in a book and published it.  It sold out four different times, the number of books that were published.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of generalize for us what that history is here of the black Baptist?
Speaker 2: That hist- the history of African American Baptist in Utah starts in 1892 and comes up until today.  It is a history of struggle, but also a history of determination.  It's a history about a people who decided that in spite of the obstacles against them, they're gonna make it anyway and they're gonna make it spiritually as well as otherwise.  In other words, the history of African American Baptist is also the history of blacks in Utah, so that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is started in Utah in 1919 by the Calvary Baptist Church.  The Alexandre Dumas Literary Society is started by the African American Baptist church.  The OIC movement, Opportunities Industrialization Centers, is started by the Calvary Baptist Church.  So whatever is happening economically, educationally, politically, socially, and religiously in this community for African Americans it is around the African American churches and the Baptist churches in particular.
Speaker 1: It's interesting the Alexandre Dumas Literary Society--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --suggest that there was a deeper knowledge of black history then, now that's a fact that a lot of people don't know.
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Speaker 1: Alexandre Dumas is well known, but very few people realize that he was--
Speaker 2: They don't know his African heritage, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  So they had a deeper understanding of--
Speaker 2: And we're talking late 1800s and early 1900s that these people who are here have that awareness and start that literary society to teach others how to read and write and to read different books including Dumas' own works.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so there's a rich history here and that book's available.  In '97 [1997], I mean in 2007 rather, I'm sorry, you started working on your own autobiography ['France Davis: An American Story Told,' France Davis and Nayra Atiya], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 608704
Speaker 1: All right so one of your, a member of your conger- congregation Nayra Atiya.
Speaker 2: Nayra Atiya.
Speaker 1: Atiya.
Speaker 2: Nayra's mother and father were movers and shakers in this community.  Her father started the Middle East Center in the section of the library at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].  He died and then after he died her mother took sick and Nayra was living in New York [New York], moved to Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah] to take care of her mother.  She was here for a short period of time and discovered that her mother had other assistants, other people to help her in her sickness.  And because she felt she had extra time, she approached me about writing my autobiography, my biography.  And as a professional writer, which she is, and with my having some limited writing experience, the two of us embarked upon that task and got it done.
Speaker 1: Okay, the title of the book is?
Speaker 2: 'Light in the Midst of Zion' ['Light in the Midst of Zion: A History of Black Baptists in Utah, 1892-1996,' France Davis] is the title of the book.  Zion is a term that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints used to describe Utah.  Utah is their Jerusalem, their Zion, and so it's 'Light in the Midst of Zion.'  So, it's kind of a play on the image that African Americans are cursed, as opposed to being cursed they are the ones that are making the difference in this community.
Speaker 1: Now that's the Baptist history book right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now your, your biography though is titled?
Speaker 2: My biography, I'm sorry, is entitled, 'France Davis: An American Story Told' [France Davis and Nayra Atiya].  'France Davis:  An American Story Told.'  And it is the story of my own early days up until currently, all of my different experiences and the record of that including a whole section of photographs that document some of those experiences that I've had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a book of stories, though.  The chapters are very short.  The sections of the book are easy to read, and it's hard to put the book down, it's been my experience as you read it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 2005 you, you enrolled in a doctorate of ministry program.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you still, still involved it?
Speaker 2: No, I did not complete that.  In fact, the school that I enrolled in discontinued the doctors of ministers program, so I never did finish it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you're gonna get it right?
Speaker 2: I hope to do that.
Speaker 1: You're gonna get it right?
Speaker 2: That's my goal, that's my goal.
Speaker 1: I thought you would.  Well back to the book for a second.  Now how is the book received by people?
Speaker 2: The book has been widely received.  It's won the nonfiction of the year award last year, and the first printing has sold out.  It has been now reprinted by the University of Utah Press [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well received though.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Lots of reviews.  And there's a new review coming out shortly in the Utah historic magazine [Utah Preservation] about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Ms. Atiya is, she's an Egyptian, native Egyptian.
Speaker 2: She's born and spent her early days in Egypt.  She is an Egyptian by birth and is currently living here in Salt Lake City.
Story_ID: 608705
Speaker 1: Just raised the question too is how diverse is your church?  Is it, it's a black church traditionally, but are there other people, I guess there are  other people that go to church here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah] was started as an African American church, and it is by worship style African American in terms of its style of worship aiming for the head and the heart, but it is a very mixed congregation.  About 75 percent of the congregation would be African American and the other 25 percent would be whites, Native Americans, Hispanics, and people from other countries.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting mix and there'd be very few places where you'd find that mix.
Speaker 2: This, this may well be the most integrated congregation in the State of Utah and maybe in other states in the area as well.  It may be more integrated than most of those.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and how big is the congregation?
Speaker 2: Congregation is about 850 to 900 people that are members of the Calvary congregation in 2008.
Speaker 1: And what are some of your programs here at Calvary?
Speaker 2: We do a great deal of specialized programs that are aimed for children, so we have a preschool reading and math program.  It is computerized, music based, and we invite students to come, young people, eighteen months old and up to come from four until eight [o'clock] Monday through Friday and Saturday to learn how to read and to learn math.  We also have a full-time, play a full-time role with a full-time staff person doing education about risky behavior related to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], how to live with AIDS, how to live with the person that has AIDS, how to avoid getting AIDS, that kind of educational program.  We also have a full program of athletics, basketball, volleyball, football, Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], Cub Scouts.  We operate the only African American Boy Scout troop in the State of Utah, for example.  In addition to what we--and, and then we have mentoring programs for our boys, mentoring programs for girls.  We have a scholarship program for kids who are going to go on to higher education, whether that's technical or college, and we provide all of our young people with a scholarship who go on to higher education.  We pattern that after by the way Dr. Sullivan's [Leon Sullivan] 1036 program where we ask everybody to give us ten dollars a month for thirty-six months and then we invest that money and use it for scholarships for higher education.  On the opposite end, we of- offer a lot of programs for the elderly.  We have a social network for the elderly who can come together and socialize, eat, sew, do arts and crafts, play games, just socialize with other elderly people during the week.  We have a food program where we feed the elderly as well as the hungry and the homeless.  For our elderly, we provide field trips to places of entertainment, the zoo, the fair, the circus, those kinds of places for the elderly.  So, our focus is on those two groups, the young and the elderly and in between we do things then for young married couples, for singles, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the people of working class, I mean the age where they're in the prime of life basically the philosophy is they provide for the young and for the old.
Speaker 2: Right, provide for the young and the old and in the providing for the young and the old, then they get their needs met as well.  For example, we operate a housing complex here for the elderly, elderly and physically handicapped.  We subsidize and provide them with housing.  Well, we try to match them, each of those people, who are most, most of whom are alone and don't have family members and don't have anybody visit them, we try to match them with a young person that's working that can stop by or call and say hello that sort of thing.  So, we try to put them all together, working together.
Story_ID: 608706
Speaker 1: Now what is your philosophy of, of religion?
Speaker 2: My philosophy for religion is that first and foremost we ought to do what we can to ensure that everybody is spiritually at their highest potential.  That's the first and foremost to be spiritually at your highest potential, to be saved, to be, to live the abundant life spiritually.  But in addition to that, second to that, is we believe that whatever causes people to hurt, whatever causes people to hurt, churches, religion, faith has a role to play to alleviate that hurt.  If a person is hungry, if a person is homeless, if a person is, is without education, without a social network that the religious community has a responsibility to provide those wherever people are hurting.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any, are there any particular theologians that you admire more than others?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  My major mentor was Dr. Howard Thurman.  Dr. Howard Thurman started the church for all people, fellowship for all people [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples] in San Francisco [California].  He believed that you ought to get your heart and mind in sync, and he was my, one of my mentors.  Dr. James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone] who is still alive has written books on black theology.  Dr. Henry Mitchell [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell] is one who has informed us about how preaching ought to be done.  Dr. L.K. Curry, Lacy Curry is my current most common mentor.  Who else, well that's just some.
Speaker 1: Okay that's, that's a good, good collection.
Story_ID: 608707
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I think if I could I'd probably get all of my education completed up front before going out to try to do.  It's difficult to raise a family, to work, to go to school, and to try to be a leader in a community all at the same time.  So, I'd probably just refocus a bit and go ahead and finish the doctorate and then go to work as opposed to going to work and finishing it a little bit at a time.  Now there is the advantage of having experience to help you if you do it as I've been doing it, but I think I'd do that different.
Story_ID: 608708
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the Utah as well as the national community of African Americans is that we will be able to become economically self-sufficient.  That we will be able to provide and be producers as opposed to just consumers.  Some of us are on the road toward that, but more of us need to be doing that economically.  Secondly, I believe that all of us, that every African American needs the opportunity and the resources to get as much formal education as is possible, to go to college, to go to trade school, whatever is their choice, but to get as much of that as possible so that they can then function in society.  And then thirdly I'm convinced that the African American community needs to continue to pursue more adequate political involvement, representation is part of that, but policy and decision making, participating in policy and decision making.  And then fourthly I'm convinced that it is only when we put the fourth wheel on that wagon, which is the spiritual one, will any of us reach our fullest potential.  So, there's the economic, there's the educational, the political, and the spiritual wheels on the automobile that African Americans drive and if any one of those is flat, then the car won't, won't get where it ought to be.
Story_ID: 608709
Speaker 1: Now when you look at everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would consider my legacy in Utah as one of being moderate, one who will listen to anybody and consider the alternatives and then help to make decisions that are for the good of everybody.  That's my legacy in Utah, trying to make everybody to be somebody, everybody to think of themselves as having value and worth and to do that through a spiritual setting.  The Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah] is my legacy here in Utah.  Now my legacy nationally would be one of an activist leader who sought to change the legal aspects of the law so that we could then work on the attitudinal situation with human beings.
Story_ID: 608710
Speaker 1: Now well tell us about your family now.  Now you have children right?
Speaker 2: I have a wife [Willene Witt Davis] and two daughters and a son.  My wife has been for the most part a stay at home wife.  She supported me in what I do and been the person to help ensure that our children had somebody to come home to and not be latchkey children.  Our oldest daughter [Carolyn Davis] has been working for the State of Utah as a fraud investigator.  She's a graduate of the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].  My second daughter [Grace Davis] has been a schoolteacher, a policeman, a federal security agent, and is currently just finished a master's degree in crime scene investigations, 'CSI,' that popular TV program.  And our son [France Davis], who is the youngest, has just finished medical school and he is scheduled to take the boards exam to practice medicine.  He wants in neonatology as a medical practitioner, and he'll take that test in early April.  We also have a grandson that's twenty-one years old, and he has been a student at the University of Utah pursuing a degree either in computer, computers or in architecture and I'm not sure which he's agreed upon yet.  But, he's a student at the University of Utah.
Story_ID: 608711
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked or that you think we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Maybe we ought to say something about the church congregation.  This congregation, the Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah], is very, very actively involved in the entire community.  So whatever is going on in the community, we are having a voice in that.  We participate in the educational process.  We're meeting currently, for example, with all of the superintendents.  We sponsor scholarships.  We are engaged in the political process, and we are up on the hill helping legislators to make better decisions and trying to get more people elected to political office.  We are also engaged in economic development, trying to do our part to encourage business, small businesses and we're doing that as a congregation under my leadership through the individuals who have particular skills and interests in order to do that.  And that's what I think is community is that when it's not just one person doing everything, but it's when everybody as a community is coming together, each doing their part toward the ultimate goal of community for all.
Story_ID: 608712
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a man who took a position and was what he said he was.  Who took a position and was what he said he was.  That what he taught others, that's what he tried to show others how to be.  He was an example, a model, a mentor for others of what the teachings was that he taught.
Speaker 1: All right thank you very much for sharing with us.
Story_ID: 608713
Speaker 1: This is France Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] bending over his bicycle at his barracks in Thailand 1967.
Speaker 2: On the left is France Davis with the Reverend James Hubbard [James S. Hubbard] at the St. Paul Baptist Church 1968 in Boise, Idaho.
Speaker 1: From left to right is my nephew, Mark Davis.  That's me in the military uniform, France Davis, my nephew down below.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture is in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  This is my nephew down, the small boy at the bottom.  His name is Barney [ph.].  I'm in the military uniform with the cap on.  My brother, Clarence [Clarence Davis], is squatting down with the girl on his shoulders.  The girl on his shoulders is my niece Janice [ph.].  My sister Willa Mae [Willie Davis Allen] is the next one with the white bag, and my father John Davis.  We are in front of my brother's apartment in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Speaker 2: This is the house in which I was born in Burke County [Georgia] in Cooperstown [ph.].  It's a wooden house where I was born and grew up.
Speaker 1: France Davis standing in front of barracks in the [U.S.] military 1966 in Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada.
Speaker 2: This is France Davis as a small boy, probably about thirteen years old in Georgia wearing a plaid shirt.
Speaker 1: This is France Davis as a very small boy, probably five, six years old wearing my pilot hat.
Speaker 2: This is my father John H. Davis.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my immediate family.  On the end with the white blouse is my daughter Grace [Grace Davis].  I'm standing with the black shirt on, my wife with the blue blouse on.  My son is standing in the back.  My daughter, my oldest daughter, Carolyn [Carolyn Davis], with the black sleeves and the gray vest and her son Cedric [Cedric Davis].  This picture was taken about fifteen years ago, so it would have been 1997.
Speaker 2: This is a picture in Thailand.  I'm on the beach with the Shampaugh [ph.] family.  The Shampaugh family and the man with the beige shirt on was our driver, '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: This is a current picture of my wife Willene [Willene Witt Davis] and standing and myself, 2008.
Speaker 2: This is a double exposure picture of me in the bed in Augusta, Georgia, after having been burned in 1980 over 30 percent of my body.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Ronald Coleman [HistoryMaker Ronald Gerald Coleman] seated on the left and I'm the one on the right.  We're here in Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah], and the two of us are professors at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: Okay this is Reverend France Davis receiving an honorary doctorate degree from the University of Utah.
Speaker 1: This is the rear side of the Gough Elementary [Gough Elementary School, Gough, Georgia] four room school building that I attended.
Speaker 2: This is a current 2006 picture of the north end, the front end of that same school building, Gough Elementary four room school.
Speaker 1: This picture of the Cooper's family graveyard located in Cooperstown.
Speaker 2: This is the little store next door to the church in our community near Cooperstown.
Speaker 1: This is a barbecue pit that was made by my brick mason, Uncle Andrew Cooper, who also was the one that built the airplane.
Speaker 2: This is a picture about 2005 of the Reverend Davis taking a laughing moment.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Mrs. Julia Cooper Davis, my mother.
Speaker 2: The Reverend France Davis about 1981 shortly after having recuperated from burns.
Speaker 1: My sister Daisy [Daisy Davis Richardson] on the left, I'm in the middle, France Davis, my brother Joseph [Joseph Davis] on the end.  We're standing beside my father's 1941 Chevrolet automobile in front of the garage.
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, Lula McFadden [Lula Davis (ph.)], my father's mother, the only picture that anybody knows of, of her.
Speaker 1: On the left hand side is my grandfather, July Cooper, in the middle is my mother at fourteen years old, Julia Cooper, and on the right side is my grandmother, Scoatney Cooper [Scoatney Scott Cooper].
Speaker 2: This is the only picture that survived the burning of the Roberson Grove Baptist Church [Waynesboro, Georgia], and it has one woman in it my grandmother, Scoatney Cooper.  And the man standing off to himself is my grandfather, July.
Speaker 1: This is my first cousin Lulu Hatcher [ph.], H-A-T-C-H-E-R who named me.
Speaker 2: This is France Davis as a small boy dressed up and ready to go to elementary school graduation.
Speaker 1: This is a picture in 1973 when I got married.  The small boy on the left hand side is Raymond Jenkins [ph.].  The tall lady, first bridesmaid is my sister-in-law Frances [ph.], the best man, Roy Robinson [ph.].  The small boy down front is my nephew, Joseph [ph.].  The girl in front is my wife's niece, Sheleta [ph.].  The, my wife is in the middle, I'm next to her, her sis- her cousin, Mary [ph.], and my brother, Joseph, on the end.  The little girl looking up is Carolyn.
Speaker 2: A picture of the Reverend France Davis when he first came to Salt Lake in 1972 or so.
Speaker 1: This is also an early picture of when I first came to Salt Lake City with lots of hair.
Speaker 2: Me in theological seminary at the American Baptist Theological Seminary branch in Las Vegas, Nevada, on January the 19th, 1967.  I'm on the left, Reverend Smith [ph.], Reverend Robeson [ph.] is on the end, and I can't remember the one in the middle.
Speaker 1: This is my family, my wife in red Willene, my daughter, Grace, in the green, myself in the gray, my daughter Carolyn in the white, my son Cedric, my son France, II [France Davis], in the blue, and my grandson, Cedric, in the gray sweater.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, Willene, with the yellow, myself in the middle, my oldest daughter, Carolyn, and we are dressed up and at the Calvary Baptist Church's facility.
Speaker 1: This is the current facility of the Calvary Baptist Church in Salt Lake City, Utah, forty-seven thousand square feet, built in, moved into 2001.
Speaker 2: Of my young family, my wife Willene with the eye glasses, my daughter Grace, the baby, myself in the middle, and our daughter Carolyn on the end.
Speaker 1: This is a newspaper clipping about a speech that I delivered after having written my autobiographical account, and it was in 2007.
Speaker 2: This is my book entitled 'Light in the Midst of Zion' ['Light in the Midst of Zion: A History of Black Baptists in Utah, 1892-1996,' France Davis] with my picture on the front cover, 'A History of Black Baptists in Utah.'
Speaker 1: This is a recent publication of my manual for ministers training with my picture on the bottom and across in the middle.
Speaker 2: This is a copy of the book entitled 'France Davis:  An American Story Told,' which Nayra Atiya and I co-wrote.  It is my autobiographical account.
