Story_ID: 640937
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	My name is Erroll B. Davis, Jr.  That's E-R-R-O-L-L, middle initial B, last name Davis, traditional spelling, D-A-V-I-S, and I'm a junior [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 1: All right, and is here a story behind your name at all?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, there's a very interesting story behind my name.  I am of course named after my father [Erroll Davis, Sr.], so the interesting part is about his name.  When families used to have a lot of children, they would tend to name at least one of them after the doctor.  And my father was delivered by a Dr. Erroll Brown.  And the reason why the story is somewhat more interesting is that is the same doctor who delivered Erroll Garner.  And they were both named after Dr. Erroll Brown.  In fact, I went to the same high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School] as Erroll Garner and also had the same music teacher.  I, of course, did not excel quite as much as he did in music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting story.  That is a good story.  And what, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	My date of birth is August 5th, 1944, in Pittsburgh, PA [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2:  	I am presently superintendent of the Atlanta public school system [Atlanta Public Schools].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I am in the eighteenth month of a ninety day assignment that I was asked to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, and you've been the chancellor of the Georgia public--I mean Georgia colleges and universities.
Speaker 2:  	Prior to this assignment, for five and a half years I was chancellor of the University System of Georgia, which, of course, is the oversight body for the thirty-five public colleges and universities in the State of Georgia, the--from--ranging from the very large, such as the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], to the very small two year colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to point that out too.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Today is December 17th, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	We are presently in the superintendent's conference room in the Center for Leadership and Learning [Atlanta, Georgia], which is the headquarters for the Atlanta public school system.
Story_ID: 640938
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only take a short ans- they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food, and what is it?
Speaker 2:  	I would have to say my favorite food is probably smothered pork chops.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	I really don't have a favorite color, probably green, the color of new money, I would have to substitute.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	I enjoy the fall.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	I enjoy traveling, and I always enjoy where I am, but I always enjoy getting back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	One of my most often used expressions is that, all problems are leadership problems.
Story_ID: 640939
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separately from your father's [Erroll Davis, Sr.] side, so we can--and then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	My mother's full name is Eleanor Margaret Davis, and her maiden name was Boykin, B-O-Y-K-I-N [Eleanor Boykin Davis].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	Her place of birth is LaGrange, Georgia.  I believe that her date was February 24th, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  First of all, how far back can you trace them, and, and what were some of the things they were doing?
Speaker 2:  	I can only go back to my great-grandfather on my mother's side.  His name was Dolar Boykin [ph.], and he was a farmer in LaGrange, Georgia, where he had I believe--let's see, John [Davis' maternal uncle, John Boykin, Jr.], Will [Davis' maternal uncle, Wilburn Boykin, Sr.], and--four sons and one daughter, my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so this is your, your grandfather.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I'm sorry--my grand- yeah, my (laughter)--you're correct.  My grandfather had four sons and one daughter.  I don't know how many sons my great-grandfather had.  I know of--(clears throat)--pardon me--at least three sons.  I'm not sure he had any daughters.  And I only had contact with my great uncles when I was a child.  And I've certainly lost track of their families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is your great-grandfather Doler Boykin?
Speaker 2:  	Right, my great-grandfather is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2:  	--Doler Boykin.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather?
Speaker 2:  	Is John.
Speaker 1: Okay, John.
Speaker 2:  	John Augustus Boykin [John Boykin, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, we got--
Speaker 2:  	There's an interesting story behind that one as well.
Speaker 1: Tell it.
Speaker 2:  	When I first came here and visited the University of West Georgia over in Carrollton [Georgia], which is slightly north of LaGrange, I was given a notebook.  And that notebook contained my grandfather's either grade or middle school graduation certificate, a marriage license with my grandmother, who was, her name was Salima, S-A-L-I-M-A, Malone Boykin [Salima Malone Boykin], and some discussion about the area.  But there was also a large picture of a Confederate Army officer from that area named John Augustus Boykin.  And we do not know whether my great-grandfather was a slave or his parents certainly would have been.  And I don't know whether they were the property of a John Augustus Boykin or not, but there was a, a rather terrifying looking Confederate Army officer right from the LaGrange area called John Augustus Boykin.
Speaker 1: And his photo was with the, the papers?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, there was a photo with the material that was given to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we can almost--there's a relationship there I would guess, but I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I, I--that's what they have assumed.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 640940
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, your [maternal] great-grandfather [Dolar Boykin (ph.)]--it makes sense.  I mean, he, he was probably born, you know, around the time of the Civil War, I would guess.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I met my great-grandfather when I came to Georgia in 1953.  And my assumption is my grandfather [John Boykin, Sr.] was in his fifties at that point.  So, my great-grandfather probably would not had been a slave.  He probably would have been born 18--between 1870 and 1880.  But certainly his parents would have been.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, all right, and, all right, so your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] was born around the turn of--I mean your grandfather was born around the turn of the century (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	My, I know my grandmother [Salima Malone Boykin] was born in 1898, and I would assume my grandfather was somewhere in that timeframe, give or take three or, three or four years on either--probably before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that would put, put them in the early twenties when your mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] was born, so yeah.  Okay, all right, so, are there any stories from your grandfather about, about growing in, in LaGrange [Georgia]?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, but there were references to LaGrange in the book, 'The Warmth of Other Suns' [Isabel Wilkerson], which I found truly an interesting book, as it chronicled the Great Migration of African Americans from the South to the North and then back.  And my grandfather brought his family to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in the late '30s [1930s] or early '40s [1940s] and to make a better life for his family.  He left the farm.  He left his father on the farm.  And I don't know whether any of his brothers were still there or not.  But the, the family really is a microcosm of the book, 'The Warmth of Other Suns,' because at least one of the other brothers went to the Detroit [Michigan] area, and my grandfather went to Pittsburgh of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At now what, what, what section of Pittsburgh did he settle in?
Speaker 2:  	I believe they first lived in the East Liberty section of Pittsburgh, which his in the East End or the--and then when I was a very young child, moved to the Homewood-Brushton area [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], where I spent just about the entirety of my formative years.  I believe we moved when I was probably two or three years old from East Liberty, from Eva Street in East Liberty to Idlewild Street.
Story_ID: 640941
Speaker 1: Any stories about your [maternal] grandmother?  And your grandmother's name was?
Speaker 2:  	Salima [Salima Malone Boykin].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 2:  	S-A-L-I-M-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and her maiden name was--
Speaker 2:  	Malone.  Her last name was Malone.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And was she from the, the LaGrange [Georgia] area too?
Speaker 2:  	She must have been.  These people didn't venture very far.  I don't have her school certificate that I remember, so I have to assume she was in the immediate area, either with--probably within twenty miles, which is usually a mule ride or a horse ride or went to the same church, (cough) pardon me.
Speaker 1: Now is, is there a story behind her name, Salima?
Speaker 2:  	I have no story behind that one.
Speaker 1: It's sort of an exotic name in some ways.  I don't know if it's a biblical name or--
Speaker 2:  	I, I don't know.  My uncles all had interesting names.  My Uncle John was the oldest boy, and he was John Augustus Boykin, Jr. [John Boykin, Jr.].  My mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] was second.  My Uncle Homer Dolar Boykin [Homer Boykin] was named after, of course, my great-grandfather [Dolar Boykin (ph.)].  He was third.  And then there was Wilburn Tinsley Boykin [Wilburn Boykin, Sr.], and I have no idea where the Tinsley came from.  And the baby was Edward Judson Boykin [Edward Boykin], and I don't know where those names come--came from, but they all sounded very alliterative to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, those, okay, those are on your--those are your mother's brothers?
Speaker 2:  	Those are my mother's brothers, yeah.
Story_ID: 640942
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] have a chance to go to school or finish school in, in LaGrange [Georgia] or in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	My mother went through grade school and high school and then spent a semester at Hampton Institute then, which is, which is Hampton University now, in Hampton Roads, Virginia [sic. Hampton, Virginia], and became amazingly homesick and went back home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was her as- was, was she aspiring to be a teacher or so forth and--
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea what she aspired to be.  I think she spent one semester in college, and that was enough for her.
Story_ID: 640943
Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side, and then we'll try to put them together.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my father's name is the same as mine--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2:  	--Erroll B. Davis [Erroll Davis, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	He was born in North Carolina I believe in 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know what part of North Carolina?
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't; no, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did his family migrate to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] earlier?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know when and how.  I know less about his side of the family.  I knew he had at least three brothers, two of whom lived in Pittsburgh, one of whom I had a very close relationship with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And then there was a third brother that lived in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, how far can you trace his family back, your father's side?
Speaker 2:  	I, I really can't trace his very far at all.  I knew my grandmother, his mother, but she was elderly when I was a child.  And I, I always viewed her as sort of an older woman.  And I wasn't--I, I didn't spend a lot of time with her.  We lived with my mother's parents [Salima Malone Boykin and John Boykin, Sr.], and, and so obviously had a much closer bond to them.  But she was a widow for a second time by the time I knew her as a child, and she had a different last name at that point.  Her last name was Jackson [Sally Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm--something is puzzling me here, and maybe I'm just can't--now your father's name is Erroll Davis too, right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now was he named by the doctor, Erroll--
Speaker 2:  	Well, he was named after--
Speaker 1: --Erroll, Erroll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) Dr. Erroll Brown--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--as, as was Erroll Garner.  And what I should have added earlier--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2:  	--is that both are buried in Homewood Cemetery [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and is probably no more--their graves are probably no more than a chip shot apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But was Erroll Garner born in North Carolina too?
Speaker 2:  	I have--I don't really know Erroll Garner's background, but you know, the, that's an interesting point because if they're both named after him, and if my father was born in North Carolina, then he would have to have been there.  So, I guess he was (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But at least this is--you may be unraveling an urban myth as well, but this is at least what I was told as a child, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the name is spelled exactly like Erroll Garner, and--
Speaker 2:  	Well, you know, the other (unclear) is my father may had been born in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: And his family was--
Speaker 2:  	I know his family was from North Carolina, so he may well have been born in Pittsburgh.  I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That, that, that would make sense.  I was wondering, you know.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yeah, that's a good point.  I never thought--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640944
Speaker 1: So your dad [Erroll Davis, Sr.] went to school in Pitt-Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and everything until (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: And what, what did--did he finish high school and go on to college?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, he finished high school, and he actually went to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for a while.  And he actually started playing football before he tells me was kicked off the team literally in the rear end by the coach, Jock Sutherland [John Bain "Jock" Sutherland], at that time, because he wanted to play quarterback, and they were not gonna have any part of a black quarterback in the late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s] at the University of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: By Jock Sutherland, huh?  That's his--Pitts--
Speaker 2:  	And I haven't researched--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--that one either to see whether that's an urban myth or not, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, it's the stories we want.  And you know, the stories at least give you some- somewhere to go with the research.  So Sutherland, I guess he was coach at--well, the Pitt- Pittsburgh football team was a pretty well known football team in, yeah, in the, back in the day, you know--
Speaker 2:  	I, I--
Speaker 1: --still are.
Speaker 2:  	--I don't know what their notoriety was during that period of time.  Certainly, there had been periods where they have, particularly when Coach Johnny Majors [John T. Majors] was there, where they had in--they had great national prominence.  And I, I forget the running back who subsequently went to Dallas [Dallas Cowboys]--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2:  	--was at the University of Pittsburgh as--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know his--Tony Dorsett, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Tony Dorsett--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--who became (pronunciation) Tony Dorsett.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's--
Speaker 2:  	Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --an interesting story (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: I, I observed the same thing.  He was Dorsett--until he--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, until he went to--
Speaker 1: --got a big contract.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's Dorsett, you know.  But yes, and you know, and there's another.  In the era before him it was Mike Ditka, you know, who--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, sure, sure
Speaker 1: --was a big star.  But, so your father wanted to be quarterback.  Now, where did he go to high school?
Speaker 2:  	He went to Peabody High School in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And did he play quarterback there?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.  He must have, yeah.
Speaker 1: He must have been good to, you know, even be on the--have a chance--
Speaker 2:  	Well, I don't know whether he was--he got a scholarship or whether he was just a walk-on or what.  I, I, I really don't have a, a--I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--I didn't spend a lot of time talking about that with my father, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so Peabody High School in Pittsburgh.  Now, so, so did your dad, he--so he didn't, he didn't finish college, but he did--
Speaker 2:  	No, no, he did not.
Speaker 1: So he had some experience in college at--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: --yeah, at University of Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 640945
Speaker 1: And what was his, his aspiration?  What was he trying to be?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I think there was, as I look back on conversations, there certainly was the kind of anger you saw in people of his generation who felt that because of the constraints of society they were not able to reach their full intellectual and economic potential.  He did a variety of things in life.  He was a--sold life insurance for North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company for a long period of time.  Then he became the national advertising manager for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], which is a very famous black paper published in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  He, later in life, he left that to open a gas station, which he tried to turn into a tire and battery company, with limited success as well.  (Unclear)--he was, he was an Esso dealer, which has now morphed into Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], of course.  He later in life was a state legislator and then ran a local newspaper, a little weekly shopper type newspaper, coupled with a PR [public relations] kind of firm.  And so the--he, he had to hustle his entire life.  Sometimes things were better than others, but again, we never, we never missed meals; we never went hungry; we never went unclothed; and we certainly never went unloved or uncared for.  And so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--as I look back, we were probably middle to lower middle class but with good values and intact families.  I lived with--my [maternal] grandmother [Salima Malone Boykin] and grandfather [John Boykin, Sr.] owned the home, but they only stayed there on the weekends because they were domestics and spent time with--they stayed onsite with their employer during the week.  And so, my mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] and father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] lived in the house, as did one uncle and one aunt, my sister [Diana Davis Ward] and I, and one, one or two at the time unwed uncles.  So I sort of remember bunking with them on the third floor of the house.
Story_ID: 640946
Speaker 1: Now, I remember reading that your [maternal] grandfather [John Boykin, Sr.] was a chauffeur?
Speaker 2:  	My grandfather was a chauffeur.  He worked for E.L. Wiegand [Edwin L. Wiegand], W-I-E-G-A-N-D.  Wiegand had invented the resistance electric heating units on stoves.  And so, as you might expect, that was a lucrative-- Chromalox or heating units.  And so, they had a very interesting relationship.  It reminds me of 'Driving Miss Daisy.' He was with them for so long that when Mrs. Wiegand died, it was almost as if he was the only friend that Mr. Wiegand had.  And when he subsequently died they--he took care of them in terms of providing an endowment for the rest of their lives, as opposed to--as well as providing a contribution to their church, a significant contribution as well, probably in the couple of hundred thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a--
Speaker 2:  Yeah, it was--so this is really a lifelong kind of a partnership that ran--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, it was a very, very lifelong partnership, from the early '40s [1940s] all the way probably, I remember, you know, through the '50s [1950s] and perhaps early six--sometime in the '60s [1960s].  I'm not sure when they died, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your, your, your grandmother [Salima Malone Boykin] was the, was the housekeeper.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, she was the housekeeper and the cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Interestingly, the, their first job as domestic and cook was for Perle Mesta.  If you remember, Perle Mesta is the Washington [D.C.] hostess with the mostest, the Mesta Machine Company [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, do spell--
Speaker 2:  	Had a--
Speaker 1: --Mesta?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2:  	M-E-S-T-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	The Mesta Machine Company had its, I believe, its origins in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], or if not, had large manufacturing there.  And the Mestas lived there.  And my grandmother and grandfather had just come from the South, and they were not quite ready for primetime, and so the Mestas had to let them go.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  They kind of--okay.  There's a whole cul- culture I guess you have to learn to serve rich peop- rich people.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And not everybody can probably just do it just as a--
Speaker 2:  	Right, and they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	And I think part of it's probably was the cooking as well.  My mother--my grandmother was a great southern cook, but I'm not sure that that was amenable to northern palates.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is there a story behind--did she have a story about that growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, no they just--that was their first job, and it didn't last that long (laughter).
Story_ID: 640947
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Eleanor Boykin Davis and Erroll Davis, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea how my parents met, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But about--I guess they--did they--about when do you think they got together?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my dau- my sister [Diana Davis Ward] was born in July 31st, 1943, and things tended to move quickly back in those days.  And so I would suspect they met in '41 [1941] or '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, okay, '41 [1941] or '42 [1942], and now, when you think about their personalities and their proclivities, their temperaments, how they walked, how they talked, how they looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I probably want to take after my mother the most but probably do take after my father the most.  He was very, very intelligent, which in many ways contributed to, a bit to his anger.  And we spent our entire lives, I would like to say, debating, but it was probably arguing.  We had a, I don't want to say a love-hate relationship, but he was sort of--it, it was--he, he espoused a view, for example, that men did not kiss, and so he would reluctantly hug.  He's not very, he was not very emotional, and my mother was the exact opposite.  And so, she would, you know, hug and kiss and cuddle.  But he didn't think those were appropriate emotions for men, to the point I remember I, I was saying to myself when I had my son [Christopher Davis] that I was gonna hug him and kiss him for his entire life, which I do.  And my, my son and I are very emotional and affectionate towards each other.  But he was, he was a bright guy.  We'd argue about things incessantly.  And we--he sort of cured me of having a temper, because when we would work at the gas station, I would storm out and walk home.  And home was probably five miles away.  And having after doing this three, four, five times, I decided, you know, this is probably not the best use of emotions if it's gonna result in a five mile walk all the time, you know, a couple of hour walk.  And so, I learned to control my temper a bit, if not my aggression, however.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But he was similar, I guess, had a similar personality, you're saying.  You think (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I think so, unfortunately (laughter).
Speaker 1: Only that he was the father, and you were the son.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: You probably caught the brunt, yeah.
Story_ID: 640948
Speaker 1: Okay, you were talking about your, your parents' traits and you know, and, and how you--and who you took after and that sort of thing.  But any, anything else more about that?  I mean, 'cause we're--I, I guess they'll be pop, popping up through your growing up story anyway, but--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you--
Speaker 2:  	I mean, my--I was a mama's boy, although mama [Eleanor Boykin Davis] would spank me often.  And I had--there was this shrub or bush or something in the backyard where you sort of pop a little green branch off then.  Then you'd strip the leaves off of it, and that would be a switch.  And you had to go get your own switch if you get a spanking.  My father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] seldom spanked me, but when he did it was memorable (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Your experience is not unlike a lot of people from that era.  Do you, do you spank your own children?
Speaker 2:  	I have never spanked my child, although my wife [Elaine Davis] did (laughter).
Story_ID: 640949
Speaker 1: Now, tell, tell us about your brothers and sisters.  Can you name your siblings with--and insert yourself into the--?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  I had only one sister [Diana Davis Ward].  She was a year and five days older than I.  She was the apple of my father's eye.  But he was the ultimate male protective chauvinist.  As an example, at one point in life she had a curfew, and I did not, and she was a year and five days older.  So she had to be in the house before I did.  And we both had to be there before dark, let me say that.  We would go to bed at probably 7:30, and it'd be in the summertime.  And it would be, you know, certainly light outside.  There'd be other kids playing, but my parents [Eleanor Boykin Davis and Erroll Davis, Sr.] were pretty strict that way.  But I used to just hang out outside the house and wave to her because she had to be inside and I didn't.  But she took care of me for the longest time in school.  She was very protective of me until I became physically bigger than she, although I never was large in school.
Story_ID: 640950
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe--now, you were in two different neighborhoods, I guess.  I mean, or you, you grew up mostly in Home- Homewood, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I grew up entirely in Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I have no--I have a very faint, if anything, recollection of East Liberty [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And it was just, as I said, I think we moved when I was two years old or three years old, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now what's the relationship of Homewood?  Is, is, is, is Homewood like near or, or part of the Hill, or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, no, no, they were completely opposite--
Speaker 1: Complete, okay.
Speaker 2:  	--directions.  The Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] abuts downtown.  As you go further from downtown, you'll go through Oakland [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], other communities.  Then you'll get to East Liberty.  As you move further east, you'll get to Homewood.  So you're moving further out, and then you move out of the city into Wilkinsburg [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--and Penn Hills [Pennsylvania], which are separate municipalities.
Speaker 1: Homewood I've heard of before is the home of the, the Homewood Grays [sic.], right, the baseball team.
Speaker 2:  	No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: It's not?
Speaker 2:  	You're thinking of Homestead.
Speaker 1: Homestead, oh, that's--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, Homestead [Pennsylvania] is a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Homestead--
Speaker 2:  	--separate city.
Speaker 1: --okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	It was a mill town (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--on the, I think on the Monongahela River.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	In fact, our gas station was in a place called Swissvale [Pennsylvania], which looked--which is on high ground over top of Homestead.  But Homestead is the home of the Homestead Grays.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not Homewood.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm roun- I'm wrong.  So, well, tell us about Homewood, and was it primarily a black neighborhood or--
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	When I--it, it was a changing neighborhood.  When we moved in most of our neighbors were, in fact, Caucasian, older, German or Italian descent.  When I started high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and we had juniors highs, and so you--high school was a three year experience, when I started  high school, the student body was 60 percent white, 40 percent black.  When I graduated three years later, it was 60 percent black, 40 percent white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And so it was a very rapidly changing neighborhood as I got to my latter part, or middle part of my teens.
Story_ID: 640951
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: can you describe the house and the neighborhood you lived in, and what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Well, we lived in a detached house.  It was three stories and a basement.  One of the memories was the coal truck coming with a large conveyor belt, which would take coal from the street and move it to the, a side window into the basement until we ultimately replaced the furnace, which we had affectionately named Big Frank, with a small gas burning unit.  And those units, of course, ultimately put the coal companies out of business.  The houses were close to each other, but you could--there was space between them, such that I could straddle both walls and climb up three stories, just put my feet and hands out on the walls and just go up three stories, which, of course, would cause my mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] great pain to see me doing that.  We had a one car detached garage in the back because there was an alley.  You entered the garage from the alley in the back.  Very rarely do communities have alleys these days.  But there was an alley in the back, and it was paved, because I remember I would ride my bicycle up it.  It was a very safe neighborhood, very little crime, or at least I was oblivious to it as, as a youth, and it was just a pleasant place.  It was an era where you behaved yourself.  You didn't talk back to neighbors because you knew that they would tell your parents.  If a neighbor told you to watch your language or to stop doing something, you'd stop doing that, which is certainly radically different than today's society.  So, some of the things that I didn't notice, I think about now, the, the segregation in swimming pools, in movie theaters was more by habit it seemed.  Like, if you were black you'd sit up in the balcony.  Nobody told you to sit up there, but you'd go up there.  There weren't any signs that said do that.  There were certain swimming pools in areas of the city where if you went there you knew there would be a fight.  So you just didn't go there.  You didn't think about doing that because all you wanted to do was swim.  And so you would go to Highland Park in East Liberty [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  You would go to other places, but you wouldn't go to Wilkinsburg [Pennsylvania], which abutted Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] because that was primarily an all-white community.  And so, it, it's interesting; your--the parents who were usually immigrants from the South didn't really talk about those things.  And, because they moved for, here for better education, which you were getting, and a better economic life, which they were getting as well.  And so they didn't fixate a lot on issues of segregation; they didn't grate a lot about it.  But it wasn't until they raised my generation and imbued us with a concept of equality that our generation became angrier than their generation.  And in retrospect, they should have been much angrier than we were because we had a lot more opportunities than they did.  But it was a point of we want every opportunity that everyone else has.  And so, it was an idyllic childhood, however.  I'm not sure it was 'Mayberry R.F.D.' or anything like that, but again, it's--it was pretty trouble free childhood.
Story_ID: 640952
Speaker 1: Now your, your dad [Erroll Davis, Sr.], and I, I guess your mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] too, were they, were they members of civil rights organizations like NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or--
Speaker 2:  	Not, not to my knowledge.  I know my, my grandfather was a Republican.  I remember him voting for Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], and I remember the (unclear) like, I, matter of fact, I remember last years of the Truman [President Henry S. Truman] presidency.  But--which ended in '52 [1952] I, I think.  And my father was a Democrat.  But they didn't--the only political movement that I at all remember was one of these international world friendship force things that my father dragged us all to, one meeting of that, and that didn't amount to anything.  But, but--
Speaker 1: International--I'm sorry--international world friendship thing?
Speaker 2:  	Well, you know, one of these international organizations to build understanding between cultures, different cultures.  And so we went to a meeting.  And I think there were people from the, the Pacific, Pacific Island region in there and perhaps some South Americans as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2:  	But people were very busy trying to make money and scrape out an existence, and they really didn't have a lot of time to become involved in movements.
Story_ID: 640953
Speaker 1: Your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] was really an entrepreneur it sounds like, doing--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, he had to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trying a lot of different--
Speaker 2:  	I describe him more as a hustler than an entrepreneur.  I mean, he tried to do whatever he could to feed his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the insurance takes you--you have to hit the street, knock on doors, and interact with people and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, back in those days, you know, the premiums were small, and you had to go out and collect them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a lot--I mean it's lot of walking and, and you know, people--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, and, and he--
Speaker 1: --and psychology involved in it.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he I think transitioned out of that probably in the early '50s [1950s] or late '40s [1940s], so I, I really--my uncle stayed in it, my Uncle Homer [Homer Boykin] stayed in it and at one point became the branch manager for Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] for--
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2:  	--North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: North Carolina Mutual, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	They were headquartered in Durham, Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina.  And I think the Hugh [ph.] and Asa Spaulding, I think, were the founders of that company [sic.], you know--
Speaker 1: Right, I think you're right.
Story_ID: 640954
Speaker 1: Well, growing up, what did you like to do?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I, I was a very active child.  I played all the sports.  Baseball was probably the one I did best at because of my size.  And I skipped two half grades because in the classrooms where I went they were not classrooms, and they had multiple grades in them.  And you--fourth grade, for example, you would start, start 4B; 4A would be the second half of the semester.  And there might be three grades, A--3A, a 4B, and a 4A in one classroom.  The teacher would be teaching those.  And after a while, the teacher discovered that I could do the work of the highest groups, so they just put me in the highest group, and I'd skip some of the others.  I know I skipped the latter half of the third grade, and I skipped a half of another grade.  And the reason why I remember the third grade is I skipped learning cursive, so I never learned how to write in cursive; I always printed.  I can write in cursive, but it's not a pretty sight.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, that's an interesting school system.  So in one classroom you might have the accelerated students and the slow students.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, they had three half grades.  I mean, they just had three different, three--like, they might have a 3A, a 3B, and a 4--3B, 3A, and a 4B in one classroom.  There just weren't that many children.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's interesting 'cause, you know, now where I grew up we had like separate classrooms for all these.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so the Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--the population wasn't that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, I, I don't know.  I'm--that's what I'm--I, I wouldn't think that that would be a teaching methodology.  I just assumed that just put enough kids in a classroom so that you can afford a teacher.
Story_ID: 640955
Speaker 1: Did you work when you--well, you worked with your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.], right, on different things?
Speaker 2:  	I have always worked.  I started selling papers.  And I would go to the distribution point, and I would get five newspapers, and I would try to sell those five.  And I was so naive that when I didn't sell them, I bought them myself.  I didn't realize you could turn them back in.  And at--when I first started you made one and a quarter cent on a paper.  And that evolved to having paper routes, after that, which taught me a lot, because you also had to collect on your paper route.  And so I had to deal with people who didn't want to pay the paperboy.  But it enabled me to have a little money.  It enabled me to buy a bicycle so that I could move through my paper route more quickly.  And I always did odd jobs.  I would--I remember washing windows in Squirrel Hill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which is a Jewish part of the city.  For twenty-five cents an hour I would, I would wash windows.  When I was in college, I initially worked in my uncle's restaurant, as did my sister [Diana Davis Ward] when she was in town. And I washed dishes from midnight to six a.m., which can put a real damper on, on Saturday evenings, on your, on your college social life, when you're, when you're working Saturday night from midnight to six a.m. or eight a.m. Sunday morning.  And then I started working in the Data Center [Data Storage Systems Center] at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which essentially was my first high powered, professional job, working in the Data Center.  And that was a wonderful experience.  I probably was a little ill equipped.  But they did give me a chance there, and I became the computer jock for Herb Simon [Herbert A. Simon], the Nobel laureate.  And he used to ride, ride me home my first year.  I was a commuting student.  And it was no more than a couple of miles from Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to the Carnegie campus.  And I got to know Dr. Simon well.  I remember one day he said to me on the way home that he felt that he was born before the machines were ready for him.  And I thought that that was the most arrogant thing that I had ever heard.  But, in retrospect, he was perfectly correct, because later in life he stayed at Carnegie Mellon for his entire career.  He was on the board as the faculty representative at the time I was chairman of the board at Carnegie Mellon.  And this was sort of life come full circle for me, that there was the Nobel laureate.  Who used to--who, for whom I used to work, and now I'm the chair of the board.  And I'm on the telephone with him having frank and candid, almost argumentative, discussions before I catch myself by saying this person has forgotten more than you'll ever know, and so be careful, because he was just a wonderfully bright man.  And he taught every course, and he would always teach freshmen.  And he would, he had an amazing capacity for languages.  He could teach, teach languages.  He, of course, would teach economics, or psychology, or computational linguistics, an area where I had an interest.  And it was a wonderful and exciting time for me, both for undergraduate as well as graduate school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What did Dr. Simon win the Nobel Prize for?
Speaker 2:  	I believe in economics [Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Or, it might be artificial intelligence; I'm not sure.  He and Allen Newell were really the founders or the pioneers of artificial intelligence.
Story_ID: 640956
Speaker 1: We--I've got you all the way through college [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] here, but we've got to go back (laughter)--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --back to--now, where, where, where did you start grade school?  Where, where did you start, or, or--
Speaker 2:  	I went to Bellmore --
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)..
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) Grade School [Bellmore Grade School (ph.)].  It was very interesting because if you remember, my sister [Diana Davis Ward] was a year and five days older than I.  And I remember going with my mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] and my sister to register her for kindergarten.  And to this day, I remember the clerk saying to my mother, "What about him?"  And my mother said, "Well, he just turned four."  And she said, "We have plenty of room.  We can take him."  And of course, this was a great shock to me on the spot, and I said, "No, no, no."  And my mother, of course, was more than happy to get rid of little Dennis the menace for kindergarten, and so I started kindergarten at age four.  The problem, of course, is you cannot go to first grade until you're six, and so I had to spend two years in kindergarten.  I attribute that to, partially to my success, because--in life--because if you think of the dynamic on the first day of kindergarten, it's kids being separated from their mothers and their families for the first time.  The preschool and pre-K was, that, that wasn't existent when I was a child.  And so, for, for most children this was just a traumatic experience.  They're--they don't want their parents, their mother really, to go.  They're clinging to their legs.  They're crying.  They're screaming.  And there's one kid in the class who's calm, and he knows everything, and he's running the place, and that's me.  And so this was my first leadership experience, in kindergarten, because I've been there before.  Trust me, I know what's going on here.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, now that's your age group too, and here you are, the suave leader of the kindergarteners (unclear) and able to, you know, show everybody else the ropes.  That, that, that has to be an interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, it was, it was a very impact- I believe, experience for me to spend two years there.  But it also motivated me to--'cause my sister, of course, had moved on.  And so I eventually have skipped twice and caught up with her, and so we graduated at the same time.  I think that was part of my motivation as well, to catch back up with my sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, in, in grade school was there any particular subject that you were drawn to more than the others?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember grade school.  I assume I got good grades.  I got good grades most of the time everywhere.  I remember being bored most of the time with school because it wasn't that stimulating because, again, I just, I, I wasn't challenged very much until I got to high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And even in high school I had to really wake up and then force myself a bit to be challenged, because it was by that time some apathy about--study had set in as well.  And I remember at the end of the ninth grade one of--an African American teacher took me aside and read me the riot act about not living up to my potential.  And I think I had three Bs in the ninth grade, and all the rest were A's.  And I think the rest of my high school career I got one more B, and everything else was an A.
Story_ID: 640957
Speaker 1: So what do you attribute--now, what were you interested in if it wasn't schoolwork?  Would--did you have something else that you liked to do at home or--?
Speaker 2:  	Well, no.  I was young to begin with.  I was sixteen when I graduated from high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and so I was immature.  And I was always surrounded by people who were physically larger than I was as well.  I think I weighed a hundred and twenty-five pounds when I graduated from high school, a hundred and thirty-five when I graduated from college [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I was not a very big kid at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any--well, that one African American teacher that pulled you aside in high school, I guess he would be a special person with--would, would he be considered like a mentor or, or--
Speaker 2:  	It was a she.
Speaker 1: She?  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I don't know whether I would consider her a mentor, but I remember when I was president of Wisconsin Power and Light [Wisconsin Power and Light Company], I went back to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to give a speech, and she was stunningly in the audience.  And it wasn't a huge audience, probably fifty or a hundred people.  And I thanked her very publicly for setting me on the straight and narrow path.  By that point, she had been a principal and then an assistant of schools as well.  So she had achieved as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she just wasn't talking the talk.  She actually was doing it herself too.
Speaker 2:  	Yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was moving on up, you know, fulfilling her own potential.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Story_ID: 640958
Speaker 1: Now your, your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] at one time, you said he was a salesman for the Courier, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did--what, what, what publications came into your house, and what did you pay attention to growing up?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember any periodical publications.  I was a voracious reader.  I would go to the library and get seven books out every week, and I'd read a book a day.  And I would--I remember on the landing between the first floor and the second floor where the steps made a turn, we had a little tiny table with a lamp on it.  I would just curl up on the land, and I'd read all the time.  And I would read Black Stallion novels [Walter Farley].  I remember them, 'Son of the Black Stallion,' the 'Son of the Black Stallion,' 'Black Stallion's Filly' ['The Black Stallion's Filly'].  I remember those.  I'd read Tarzan novels, Edgar Rice Burroughs novels.  I'm trying to remember others, which don't come to mind right now, but I read and I read and I read.
Speaker 1: I would guess Jack London's novels and stuff like that.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--Jack London novels--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--did read those.
Speaker 1: All right, so you read things that most people would prescribe for boys to read in those days.  And we, we--now were you a Boy Scout at all?
Speaker 2:  	I was a Cub Scout.
Speaker 1: Cub, okay.
Speaker 2:  	I did that.  My mother [Eleanor Boykin Davis] was a den mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you didn't go on to become a Boy Scout.
Speaker 2:  	I did not go on to become a Boy Scout.  My uncle was a scout leader.  Both of them that lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] were scout leaders, but I just was distracted I guess by other things, was not that interested in moving on to Boy Scouting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you play Little League baseball?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  I was an avid Little League baseball player.  I was a shortstop and a catcher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was--
Speaker 2:  	--played catcher in high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What was the name of your team?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: You (laughter), you're--did, did it change every year, or, or there, was it--
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't, team Changed--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2:  	--every year.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) named after the pro teams, Little League--
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea.
Speaker 1: You have no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) The, the only thing I remember about ball was actually fast pitch men's softball, because the Pittsburgh Dons played at Homewood field.  And every Friday night was a Don night, coming out and have a Don good time.  I remember that.  And they would pass the hat.  But that was always fun to go to fast pitch softball games.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I would play on that same field, baseball, Little League baseball in Homewood field.
Speaker 1: Now did you--did, did, did your parents restrict television watching and that sort of thing or--
Speaker 2:  	Well, you have to understand that I was born in 1944.  We got our first television in 1949, this black and white DuMont.  And I had very little interest in sitting in a house watching this fuzzy black and white thing.  I wanted to be outside playing.
Speaker 1: How, how big was the screen?  Was it, it--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I think it was seventeen inch--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's big--
Speaker 2:  	--diagonal.
Speaker 1: That's a big one for those days.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yeah.  'Cause I remember the Zenith [Zenith Radio Corporation; Zenith Electronics LLC], Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation], and DuMont [Allen B. DuMont Laboratories], none of which exists today in the TV--
Speaker 1: Right, DuMont--yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--business or the makers of the TVs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bruce DuMont is a public--was a public television host in Chicago [Illinois], of the DuMont family, and he helped found the Museum of Broadcast Communications [Chicago, Illinois].  I just thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) But I remember 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	I remember it being a Howdy Doody time.  On Saturday mornings I'd always go to the movies.  And there were two movie theaters in Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] right next to each other.  One would show black and white movies, and it costs fifteen cents to get into.  The other would show color movies, and it would cost twenty-five cents to get in that one.  And I would always have a quarter.  I'd be given a quarter to go to the movies.  And so the question is, could I get two boxes of five cent candy or one box, depending upon which movie I went to.  And of course, there were the serials, which would bring you back the next week, every week, because you'd always go off the cliff.  And we--it would look like they were gonna--the heroes were going to be killed, and then next week you had to figure out how they jumped out of the car right before it went off the cliff.  They always did.  But I remember the color movies were often about Hawaii, with Jon Hall, was in them.  And I, I enjoyed going to the movies.  And there would be the periodic once a month, the seventeen cartoon shows where you'd go in, you'd see seventeen color cartoons, you know.
Story_ID: 640959
Speaker 1: There was middle school, right?  So what, what was the name of your middle school?
Speaker 2:  	Well, we had grade schools and then junior high schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junior high school, okay.  So what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2:  	I went to junior high school at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  They had West- junior high and high school there.  I got redistrict out of Bellmore into Bennett [Bennett School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] while I was still in elementary school.  And Bennett was subsequently torn down I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so Westinghouse.  So the high school was there, and the junior high school was at--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the same, same building.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So, so Westinghouse is a pretty big high school, or--
Speaker 2:  	My graduating class was less than two hundred people.  And so you have to figure--and remember, there's only three grades in the high school at that point in time, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grades.  And so you, you figure there's probably seven hundred kids in the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had a small high--by high school standards for those days.  Now you were like what we would consider baby boom generation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, I was a, I'm a war baby.
Speaker 1: War baby, okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I'm not a, I'm not a--
Speaker 1: Well, there may be somewhat--
Speaker 2:  	--post-war baby boomer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Those are the people (clears throat) from after V- V-E [Victory in Europe Day] and V-J Day [Victory over Japan Day], and so that we're talking '45 [1945], '46 [1946] for the start of the baby boomers, so.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a dramatic difference I guess--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --in.  You're born in '44 [1944], just before--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --the boom.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I'm born--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--when all the men are off at war [World War II, WWII] you see.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  I never thought of that before, but I guess that's right.  The men weren't around, so.
Story_ID: 640960
Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite teacher in junior high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  I fell in love with my seventh grade teacher.  Her name was Dorothy L. Madgett [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And she was my homeroom teacher.  She was just beautiful, or at least I think she was.  I remember her.  She was a very young teacher in, in retrospect because some of the teachers I had in high school are still alive now and in their eighties.  So they were probably just fifteen years, ten to fifteen years older than we were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did she teach?  She, she's a homeroom teacher, but she was--
Speaker 2:  	She was a homeroom teacher, but I think she taught English or social studies.  I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see, did you have a favorite subject by the time you got to junior high school?
Speaker 2:  	I was always inquisitive and was interested in how things worked.  So by this point, I was sort of gravitating towards math and science--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--but, which those are subjects I always did well in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you participate in science fairs and that sort of thing, this--
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember doing things like that.  I do remember (clears throat) going to the Westinghouse Research Center [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] on Saturday mornings.  And this may be high school activity versus junior high activity.  But Westinghouse ran what's called a Saturday morning science academy, where you would come, and the researchers would essentially give lectures on the difference between, for example, polymers and monomers, or a, the theory of a notion of limits.  I learned about those things when I was in high school, and they stimulated me really to want a, a career in math and science at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At the high school level, then did you take the highest level math and science?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they offer calculus?
Speaker 2:  	Calculus was not offered--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--at that time in my high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did you take physics and chemistry?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes, I took physics and chemistry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were there any high school level teachers that were, you know, like, that you were particularly close to or impressed by.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I remember my physics teacher was named Isaac Wade [ph.].  And interestingly, his son is a mirror image of him.  It is eerie, because his son is the manager at the Hyatt here in town.  Or, I want to make sure 'cause it might be the Marriott.  But I ran into him.  And unbeknownst to me that he was here.  And, and I looked at him, and I said, "You're Isaac Wade."  And this is last year.  And this is a man who I last saw when I was in high school.  And it was almost as if he had been cloned, and this person was in front of me.  And I mean, that was his father, you know.  This is amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's always a big kick to be right about something like that--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you look at somebody, you say, "I know who you are," you know--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it's--yeah.  That, that, that sound--that's really something, here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Story_ID: 640961
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in--I, I know you worked, but, but you--were you involved in any clubs or groups or, or, or student government or any of that kind of thing in high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	I was involved in student government.  I also was--I founded a fraternity, which Phi Delta Omicron [ph.], which still exists to this day.
Speaker 1: Phi Delta Omicron.
Speaker 2:  	Omicron.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the purpose of this fraternity?
Speaker 2:  	I guess in, in lieu of a gang--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--we formed a fraternity, but it was just my friends and, and I.  And we got our little green caps with--and then another group formed, and they got sport coats, which we couldn't afford, called the Kappas [ph.].  But we never had any fights or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I, I can't remember any fights in high school.
Speaker 1: Did you sponsor social functions?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, we had, just had parties and things like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sounds awful formal for a high school group, Phi Delta Omicron (laughter).  Why were the, those particular Greek letters--
Speaker 2:  	I have no--
Speaker 1: --chosen?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea why the letters or the names, you know, was chosen, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So that wasn't--now you were one of the founders, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: But, but you just didn't, you all didn't discuss (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, we just wanted to have something to identify us as a group and that this was a prestigious group of young men.  And so, I'm not sure how prestigious it was, but, so we formed a fraternity.
Speaker 1: So, so you're on student coun- council?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember exactly what I did.  I know I was not class president.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	But my--I, I think my wife was secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	She, she, Chris [Elaine Davis], wasn't my wife then, but you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now had, had your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.]--now, at this stage in high school, was your father, had, had he founded the gas station at this time?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  By this point--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--I was working in the gas station.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It sounds like it was like a, you know, kind of a tumultuous, you know, business, working with your dad, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, it was, it was.  It--you know, we'd argue all the time.  I'd storm out all the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you argue about politics or philosophy or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I have no idea what we'd argue about.
Speaker 1: --or service or what?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea what we'd argue about.  We'd just argue.
Story_ID: 640962
Speaker 1: Now, at what point did your father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] run for the state legislature [Pennsylvania General Assembly]?
Speaker 2:  	He did that after I had left town.  And I left town when I was twenty.  I graduated from college [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] at twenty and left town, so he did it after that.  I, I have the dates, but I'm not, I, I don't remember them right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I mean, I was twenty years old in 1964.  I graduated in June.  I was sixty--okay, I left in June of '65 [1965].  I was still twenty at that point, about to turn twenty-one, but I was still twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually--
Speaker 2:  	So it after that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you actually graduated from high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in, in 19--
Speaker 2:  	I graduated in high school in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]?  Okay, all right, '61 [1961].  So this is--you were in high school--
Speaker 2:  	Fifty-one years ago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you were in high school when the, the Kennedy/Nixon election--
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: --was going on?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, for the Kennedy/Nixon--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2:  	--election I was a sophomore.  No.  Yeah, that was 1960 election, 'cause I remember I was a sophomore.  I remember I was in linear algebra class when they announced that the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been shot.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's '63 [1963] when he was shot, yeah.  I was talking about the election, him and Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) The Nixon--
Speaker 1: --in '60 [1960].
Speaker 2:  	--Nixon/Kennedy was '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2:  	That was the election.
Speaker 1: That's the election.  And he was shot in 1963, November--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --twenty-third [sic. November 22, 1963] I think, yeah, '63 [1963].  Yeah, so you were probably in--
Speaker 2:  	(Unclear) was it '63 [1963] or '62 [1962]?  'Cause I was a sophomore; I remember that.
Speaker 1: It was '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause in '62 [1962] was Cuban Missile Crisis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --about the same time--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --a year, yeah.  But, so okay, so when you--now did you graduate with honors from high school?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I was third in the class in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, did you have a role during the graduation or anything?
Speaker 2:  	I have no--I don't remember.  The only thing I remember, graduation, was that there was this trumpet player named Louis Mazotti [ph.], and he had a solo, and he couldn't hit the high note in his solo.  And I saw he took it down an octave, and I did notice that.  That's the one thing I remember, that, you know, he, he panicked and couldn't hit the high note.  He hit, he hit a correct note, but it was an octave lower.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	The only thing I remember about graduation, you know.
Story_ID: 640963
Speaker 1: Now, did you get good counseling advice in high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	Not r- I can't remember it, other than the teachers saying you gotta live up to your potential.  I, I don't think we went--I certainly didn't go on any college hunting trips.  I don't know that I got anything that I didn't go out and get myself with respect to colleges.  I know I applied to (background noise)--hm?
Speaker 1: Not me either.
Speaker 2:  	I know I applied to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Carnegie [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I had an MIT interview I remember in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and I think either Union [ph.] or Case [Case School of Applied Science; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio].  And I got in to everywhere except for MIT, which is an interesting story, because I went and did reasonably well at Carnegie.  When I wanted to I got good grades, when I wasn't off exploring other things.  But, not everyone gets into MIT, of course.  But when I got out of Carnegie, and it was time to go to graduate school, I again applied to Carnegie, University of Pittsburgh, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and MIT.  Carnegie said we will give you a full ride, a full scholarship, to graduate school.  University of Pittsburgh said we will give you a full ride and a teaching fellowship so you can make money by teaching.  The University of Chicago said we will give you a full ride, and we will give you a living stipend so you do not have to work.  And MIT turned me down again, and which was, in retrospect, really great, because I think I got a better education in business school in Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  But the other irony is that at one point I was working for Xerox [Xerox Corporation], and Xerox believed that their best recruiters were their young executives.  And I was sent out recruiting, and guess what school I got assigned?  MIT (laughter).  And so, my message to them was that you wouldn't let me in, but I'm here now to hire your (laughter) graduates.
Speaker 1: That's interesting and ironic.  So, now, so you went to Carnegie Mellon for undergraduate school.  Did you get, did you have any financial help?
Speaker 2:  	I did not initially.  Tuition, when I started at a prestigious--it wasn't nearly as prestigious then--but at a private school was four hundred dollars a year.  And I believe my father [Erroll Davis, Sr.] gave me five hundred dollars my first year and said, "This is it; this all I can do for your four years of college."  And so, after that, it was a mixture of scholarships and loans, which I--has took me a number of years to pay off, but I certainly paid them all off, my National Defense Loans [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program].  And I also joined ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] because that paid you money as well on a monthly basis--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--so.
Speaker 1: So I didn't realize your father was a veteran.  Was, was he a veteran?
Speaker 2:  	No, my father was not a veteran.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they gave you a National Defense Loan?
Speaker 2:  	You--that, National Defense Loans were the loans you got then, and you know, it was to build up our national defense, engineering and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] wanted to put Sputnik and man on the moon.  So, it--you didn't have to have any [U.S.] military association--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--to get a National Defense Loan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1961 you graduated and you--in the fall of 1961 you started at Carnegie Mellon.
Speaker 2:  	Right, although it was Carnegie Institute of Technology then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Carnegie Institute.
Speaker 2:  	I, I can't get out of high school without mentioning that I met my wife [Elaine Davis] in seventh grade, and we started going together and did constantly from seventh through twelfth--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2:  	--grades.
Story_ID: 640964
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  You met your wife in the seventh grade.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	My wife is 5'1", and I have pictures of us out on a date on Easter where she's taller than I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2:  	I was little in high school [Westinghouse Junior Senior High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (laughter).  I didn't grow until after high school.  Actually, I was growing my last year in college [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, 'cause girls are, are always taller than boys--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --pretty, pretty, pretty much at that age, at twelve.  So, now what, what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2:  	Elaine [Elaine Davis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Traditional spelling, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was it about her that you liked?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, who knows what makes twelve year olds attracted to each other.  I was sort of a dorky kid with glasses but very bright, so I would help her with her homework, you know.
Speaker 1: Or, a better question would be like--
Speaker 2:  	What attracted her and me (laughter)--her to me (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: No, no, I wasn't gonna ask that, but, but like, how--you know, why do you think it endured, you know, so long?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea why it endured.  We went together constantly, with little if any breakup, from seventh through twelfth grades.  And then we broke up for college and graduate school for six years, which was really a, a good thing, because it allowed us to date others and to make comparisons.  And then after graduate school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] when I went into the [U.S.] Army and we got back together right after that, and we were married in 1968--July 13th, '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 640965
Speaker 1: Now at Carnegie [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] what, what was you- what did you decide to major in?
Speaker 2:  	I started as a physicist.  And like most people who start as physicists, I changed after my first year but for dairy--very different reasons than most people.  Most people find it too hard or don't like the physics.  I didn't find it that hard.  I loved the physics.  I did well my first year.  In fact, I became a Mellon scholar for--I achieved a Mellon scholar status.  But I knew I didn't have a lot of money.  And also knew that it would take me eight years to get a Ph.D. before I'd make any money.  And so I was very interested in the making of money.  And so I changed at the end of my freshman year from physics to electrical engineering.  And by the time I--be- because the engineers made a lot more money right away than the physicists did.  With a bachelor's degree in physics, I could probably have gone at that time to teach physics in high school or be somebody's lab assistant, which didn't strike me as--neither which I wanted to do at the time, and so I decided to be an electrical engineer.  But by the time I got to my senior year, before my senior year, I decided I didn't want to be an electrical engineer either.  I wanted to go into business, but I couldn't afford to start over in college to major in economics or business or accounting.  And so I said I'll finish, and I'll grit my teeth, and I hope I don't lose interest.  And I actually had a very good year my senior year, and then I went off to business school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, any, any stories about Carnegie Mellon at--were there many other black students at--
Speaker 2:  	I was the only African American in my class in electrical engineering.  And I think there was only one other, who was a year or two ahead of me in the electrical engineering program.  So I think there were only two African Americans in the entire program at that point in time.  And the other interesting thing at college is that this is back in the dawn of computers, dawning of the computer age, where you could walk inside of an 8K [kilobyte] memory unit.  And right now you can't see 8K, it's so small, you know, for your fingertip.  And I got jobs in the--got a job in the Data Center [Data Storage Systems Center] working, I think after my freshman year or pra- maybe after my sophomore year when I worked in the Data Center at Carnegie with brilliant people.
Speaker 1: Now this is when you worked for Dr. Simon [Herbert A. Simon], right, the--
Speaker 2:  	I worked for Dr. Simon.  I worked with Allen Newell, with Alan Perlis.  These are gi- intellectual giants.  It was an exciting time.  And I was, I mean, I was just a certified engineering nerd.  I'd go into the Data Center on Friday evening or Friday midday, and I, I'd venture out for hot dogs but really wouldn't come out of there, bathe, or go back home until Sunday night, yeah, 'cause we were just working, working, working.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is, that's intense.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A lot of people we interview in en- in engineering and physics and sort of--they work like that, and then (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 640966
Speaker 1:  	Yeah engine- people ask me, at this stage in my life, what, what's the hardest thing you've ever done?  And I tell them, bar none, getting an undergraduate electrical engineering degree was the hardest thing I've ever done in life, the intellect- the constant intellectual challenges of that, the, the enormity of the physics and the mathematics that you had to, to overcome.  As I look at--I had been a packrat until I moved into a condo, and so I had all my blue books and things from [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I carted the ra- carted them around with me forever.  And I'd look at some of the things that I had written, and I--it was just, it's beyond my ken now.  I just don't even begin to understand, understand it, I mean, courses like magneto hydrodynamics, fluid flows, electric currents under fluid flows.  I mean, the, these are tough courses, yeah, but they're doable.  You have to keep telling yourself somebody else did it; you can do it.
Speaker 2: So you were--I, I take it you made good grades in it.
Speaker 1:  	I made reasonable grades because I wasn't--I've never been fixated on grades.  I've really--I, I was the ultimate college student.  I wanted to learn things.  And so, and that carried over into graduate school.  For example, you had to take, at Chicago, a math course where they taught you calculus.  Well, I didn't need to take a calculus course as an electrical engineer.  And so, I had friends who went in as engineers who took the course so they could get a good grade.  And I said you know, that's waste of my time.  And I went over into--I said I'm at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm gonna go take a math course over in the econ department with the PhD students.  And I took econometric modeling with Henri Theil, the great Dutch econometrician, because I wanted--it was hard as hell.  But I wanted to learn, and I wanted to be exposed, and I didn't really care that much about the grades.  But, you know, and, and I think that ultimately that's why I was there, to learn, to focus on learning, not focus on getting high test scores.  And I, I didn't, I mean, I didn't fail things; I didn't do poorly, but my average for all of college was probably a little less than three.
Story_ID: 640967
Speaker 1: And when, when you were in college, were, were, like, some of the, some of the civil rights barriers in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] breaking down then?  It seems like that's the time when they were break- breaking down everywhere.
Speaker 2:  	The answer is--I, I forget what year the March on Washington--
Speaker 1: That's '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah--was.  But you have to understand that engineers are the most apolitical of people.  We're--had little interest in those types of things.  I believed in serving the individual focus, on accomplishment, and liberty, as, as opposed to some sort of group focus on social issues.  Social issues were not high on my agenda at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But you were aware of that, all these things going on around--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I was aware, certainly.
Speaker 1: --and--yeah.  And so, so you were--you graduated in--
Speaker 2:  	Sixty-five [1965] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) sixty-five [1965].  And now, you lived at home, right, during this period of time?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I lived at home for the first year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And the last three, I lived in the fraternity house.  And it was essentially a Jewish fraternity.  And at one point, I was president of that.  And the vice president was a white kid from Mississippi, so we got written up nationally over that, you know, as well, so.
Speaker 1: That is interesting (laughter).  Now what was the name of the fraternity?
Speaker 2:  	Beta Sigma Rho [Beta Sigma Rho Fraternity]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--which is now been absorbed by Pi Lambda Phi [Pi Lambda Phi Fraternity], you know.  So Beta Sigs do not exist, although we have our periodic reunions, to which I attend.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, anything significant happen on campus [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] while you were there that you--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I was very active on campus.  I was a chief justice of the court system, president of my fraternity, freshmen camp counselor.  I was a--played a lot of flag football.  So I had, had a great time, had to work--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--Saturday nights in, in the Data Center [Data Storage Systems Center] to get money.  But it was a good time of life for me.
Story_ID: 640968
Speaker 1: So you, you decided--you, you already told, told us that you decided to go to business school.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the M.B.A. was a fairly new thing in, in 1967, so.  So, University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] offered you the best (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) They gave me the best deal.
Speaker 1: --yeah, deal, so.  Okay, so, so you moved to Chicago [Illinois] in '67 [1967] that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I moved to Chicago and started in the fall of '67 [1967].  I had an apartment with one of my fraternity brothers from Beta Sig [Beta Sigma Rho Fraternity], named Steve Kessler.  Our apartment was at 53rd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], right across the street from Muhammad Mosque No., I believe 1 or 2 or 3 [Temple No. 2, Chicago, Illinois].  And all I know is a young Muhammad Ali would come in and out all the time as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the ma- a mosque was actually over there at that--I, I didn't realize that.  I know that--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Elijah Muhammad's house was at 48th [Street] and Greenwood [sic. Woodlawn Avenue] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, 47th [Street], 48th.
Speaker 1: 47th?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and all--this is all in the Hyde Park neighborhood of Chicago.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 640969
Speaker 1: University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], now, now, during this M.B.A. process, did you just pretty much stick close to Hyde Park, or did you venture out into the Chicago [Illinois] neighborhoods?
Speaker 2:  	I--University of Chicago was really the first time I got a better sense of what being an African American meant.  I was becoming a little bit more socially conscious.  And then I had a, a friend, who still remains a friend, who would take me out into the community.  And so, for some things you had to go out, like to get a haircut and to send--
Speaker 1: Because?  Because?
Speaker 2:  	Because, well, there wasn't anywhere on campus where--I don't know whether they would cut my hair or not.  I, I doubt whether at anywhere on campus they would have refused to cut my hair.  But to understand--to be in a barbershop where they knew how to cut your hair, we'd go out in the community and going further south into the 60s and to just sit in these barbershops in Chicago and listen to the old men talk about women, it was just, it was--you could make a TV reality show out of this.  And to go out in the night life, I started to do that with my friend from Washington, D.C.  That was my roommate.  And so, it--I got a good education there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know it was a lot of jazz on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in those days.  And it's not there now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, this was more rhythm and blues, Al Green and [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, and places and acts like that.  And I'd listen to WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] on the radio, to [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann, the Blues Man.  And so this was all sort of new to me.  It was exciting to me as well.  But meantime I was studying and doing well in graduate school as well.
Story_ID: 640970
Speaker 1: So, now, were there any particular--did--was there--did you have an advisor, I guess, in the business department there?
Speaker 2:  	No, I didn't, but I had truly great professors who were giants in their field, such as Sidney Davidson.  I wanted, in my naivete, to waive accounting, which I just thought seemed boring and dull.  And, and after a while, after going back and forth, they finally said, "Look, son, you are going to take accounting."  And so I took accounting, and I found it trivially easy, because they were solving for the concept of an unknown, and that's what engineers do every day of their life, except there's a lot of dog work and rules and steps to get to these.  And I just aced every exam, every, every homework because it was just trivially easy.  But the one thing I do remember is that Dr. Davidson called me in after one exam, and he said, "You've got this entire section 100 percent wrong on the test."  And I said, "What, what are you talking about?"  And he said, "Well, your answers are all wrong."  And I looked at them, and I said, "Oh, my God, I misread the instructions.  I thought it meant this."  And he said, "That's what I was afraid of.  I thought that I had done something wrong 'cause you're such a good student."  And he said, "And I could see how you could interpret it that way.  So I'm just gonna give you a quick quiz on the spot."  So he gave me a quick verbal quiz, and I aced them, and so he gave me like an A plus in the course.  But I never forgot that, because he knew I was such a student that I wouldn't screw up, other than the directions not being good, and he took that upon himself.  But then he says to me after the course, he said, "You know, Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.], this was too easy for you, and you obviously are walking around here with this I'm a hotshot attitude.  So I'll tell you what: how would you like to make even more money by being a grader for me the next semester?"  And I said, "Sure, no problem; I'll do that."  And I learned more accounting being a grader, looking at how people could go wrong than I did from sitting in a lecture listening to how it should be done, because once they told me how it should be done I would do it.  That way I would apply rules, solve for unknowns, but it was just stunning to me the mistakes that people could make and misapplying the rules.  And I had fun caustically correcting them and saying such things as, "Congratulations, you just proved two plus two equal five."  And we had a, had a good time.  But I'll never forget him.  He is a great man, a great professor.  And a lot--and I went through life and went through there with a, I think, a, an unmerited and unwant- unwarranted degree of insouciance and arrogance.  I remember having a course with Gene Fama [Eugene Fama], who is the father of random walk theory of the stock market.  But he was a full professor at University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], and he was probably not even thirty years old at that point in time a full professor.  And we played basketball together.  And I remember one question on one exam where he said you know, list the contributions of Pierce [ph.], Arrow [Kenneth Arrow], couple of other people, and Fama to capital asset pricing theory.  And I said you know, how arrogant, to give a course and have somebody list your contributions on their--I mean, he was right.  But at that point I remember writing the answer, was that I felt that Fama's contributions were really nothing more than sophisticated mathematical reformulations of somebody else's theories.  You know, that sort of set him off, but we got a kick out of that as, as well.  And so, I had a great time.  I mean, things that people take for gospel in business education and in M.B.A. programs were, in fact, being invented in the middle '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 640971
Speaker 1: I mean, it was an exciting time.  Modigliani and Miller, Franco Modigliani had gone off by this time to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but Merton Miller was still on campus [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  Milton Friedman was still on campus.  George Stigler was still there.  I mean, these are just intellectual giants, and they were--and it was just exciting to be at their feet.  I, I had a course in Bayesian statistics from Harry Roberts, and we had no books because he was inventing it.  And he would come in with mimeograph sheets of paper.  And it was, "Here's what I thought I figured out last night.  What do you think?"  And I would take perverse pleasure in picking it apart.  And, but you know, these guys were just giants, and they were challenging you to challenge them.  And I, of course, just take those kind of challenges.  And they were humble.  I always--it's always fascinating to me through all the people who get an Ed.D. or a Ph.D. to call themselves doctors, you know, doctor so and so, and put on their card Dr., Dr. Smith, but these guys never used the term.  It was always I had a class with Mr. Friedman, Mr. Miller; professor was a term that they would use.  They would never call themselves doctor.  And I learned a lot from that, that they were so secure in what they've done that they didn't need to refer to themselves as doctor so and so or doctor so and so.  It was, you know, they wrote I'm Mr., Mr. Friedman.  Milton Friedman was Mr. Friedman or Professor Friedman, not Dr. Friedman.  It was a great time, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's interesting when you compare that with ministers who call themselves doctor--
Speaker 1:  	Right.
Speaker 2: --with a, maybe a bible school degree, some, some with a bible school degree.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, if you're an M.D. or a dentist it's okay, but other than that, it's just a gree- a degree you've earned.
Story_ID: 640972
Speaker 1: Is there any particular--now, did you have to do, like, some sort of a capstone cour- I mean project?
Speaker 2:  	Well, you didn't--there was certainly a capstone course in terms of you'd integrate it all you'd learned and used it in a business game.  And at the time, Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] was really in the forefront of computer modeling, as, as opposed to the case study method that was being used at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And so, we had a much more mathematical education, and so there's a course on policy.  But I also did an independent study in finance, again, with my roommate, Steve Kessler, and interesting story there, it was with a young professor named Bob Hamada [Robert S. Hamada].  And Bob ultimately became dean of the business school.  And I ran into Bob in London [England].  He was in a seat behind me in a play, in the play 'Copenhagen' [Michael Frayn], which is a play about Niels Bohr and Heisenberg [Werner Heisenberg] and Niels Bohr's wife [Margrethe Norlund], who's also an eminent physicist.  And I was just od'ing on this play because they were mentioning things that I knew about, such as Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.  And right behind me there was Bob Hamada, and I hadn't seen him since graduate school.  And I, of course, had followed his career, and he, and he was dean in the business school at that time.  And so, there's been a previous dean, Snyder [Ted Snyder], I think who's, who was there for ten years, and so this must be in twelve--probably fifteen years ago in, in London I ran into Bob Hamada.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so this is a--I was asking you about, like, a, a thesis or a capstone course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It was an independent study.  I didn't have to write a thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, when you, you finished your M.B.A. in 19, what, sixty--
Speaker 2:  	Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in Chicago [Illinois] when, then when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago and--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and lived on the West Side, I think, which is far away from where, where, where you were.
Speaker 2:  	Right, that was far away from where I was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	In many ways it was far away.  Hyde Park was sort of a little Camelot carved out of the South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2:  	And it was, when we were there, it was the heyday of the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation].  They would take over from 61st Street going south, the might Blackstone Nation.  But they were never any problems.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have any, you, you never had any encounters with the gangs and that--
Speaker 2:  	No, no--
Speaker 1: --that sort of thing in those days.
Speaker 2:  	--no.
Speaker 1: That was sort of a cultural heyday in Chicago.  A lot was going on.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Students miss a lot of that if they're studying, and particularly business students.
Story_ID: 640973
Speaker 1: So, in '67 [1967] you graduate, and this is in the spring I guess.  And, and so did you enter the [U.S.] Army at, at this point?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: You didn't, okay.
Speaker 2:  	I went through the normal recruiting cycle, got a lot of job offers.  I was an IBM fellow in graduate school.  IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] paid for me.  I only worked for them one summer in graduate school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], the summer between--after my first and before my second year.  I had an opportunity to work the first summer before I went in, but I stayed at Carnegie [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and worked there.  I was more comfortable doing that.  But I accepted a job at ARCO [Atlantic Richfield Company] in Los Angeles [California].  And so I jumped into the, to the car, my powder blue Dodge Dart, and drove from Chicago [Illinois] to Los Angeles to take my job at ARCO on [U.S.] Route 66.  And I was kept awake by the melodious voice of Abba Eban during the UN [United Nations] debates of the Six-Day War in the Sinai [Sinai Peninsula, Egypt], because that's exactly how--why I was traveling, during that, which, again, is another story.  Because when I went into the [U.S.] military, I was--and I'll, I'll get you to the assignment in a minute.  But one of my, my ultimate assignment was in the Tank-automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank-automotive and Armaments Command] in Warren, Michigan.  And I was the--one of my other duties as assigned was the, as command briefing officer.  And so I briefed General Abraham Tall [ph.], who led the tank charge in the Sinai, as well as William Mes- Westmoreland [William Westmoreland], who was the commander in Vietnam [Vietnam War], who was a retiring commander as well as Creighton Abrams, the man who succeeded him.  And so I was briefing all of these guys at the Tank-automotive Command in Warren, Michigan.  But, I'm gonna go back.
Speaker 1: So this is while you were still at University of Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no.  This is--I, I went--I left in May to go to ARCO in Los Angeles.  I stayed in a house with two other guys in Hollywood Hills right off of Mulholland Drive.  And I was a young M.B.A. at ARCO making good money.  Life was good.  It was the age of the dawning of Aquarius.  The 5th Dimension would come to parties that we were--we were same age then.  Their, their record had just dropped, and so they, they were taking off but were still normal people just yet.  And so I had--it was just a matter of waiting for my orders.  And my orders came late summer, and I didn't like my first set of orders.  It was to go to the 82nd Airborne Division, which at that point was not in Vietnam but was one of the strategic reserves, according to President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] that would be deployed.  It, of course, was subsequently deployed.  And I was working on some cool stuff that I wanted to continue working on at ARCO.  I was doing some linear programming things at the time.  And ARCO, of course, is a big defense supplier.  And so I said could you just tell them to give me thirty more days so I can finish this work, and so they said sure.
Story_ID: 640974
Speaker 1: And so the--I got a second set of orders that had me this time being an artillery training officer at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  But by this time, it's sort of September or October, and the thought of being at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, training people on artillery in the middle of the winter didn't do a lot for me either.  But I had to go first to Aberdeen, Maryland, for ordnance officer basic training, which was about three months.  And so, at--I said well, I'll figure this out.  And during the three months, one day the office of personnel operations came up from Washington [D.C.] to up to Aberdeen for career day to talk about careers in the [U.S.] military.  Well, in college I had been, of course, four years ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], but I had been Pershing rifles [National Society of Pershing Rifles], scabbard and blade [National Society of Scabbard and Blade], all of the honors societies for military.  And so I went into the interview, and I said, "Listen, I am," as we said back then, "STRAC [strictly according to regulations]."  I said, "I got nails in my mess kit and sand in my canteen, and I'm good to go."  I said, "But I have a problem."  I said, "I just got an electrical engineering degree from Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I just got an M.B.A. in finance with a minor in operations research."  I said, "And this is the biggest logistical mess in the world," the U.S. military, "and you guys want me to be an artillery training officer."  And I said--and you know, and the guy appropriately said you know, "Son, we're at war, and we have," you know, "we have to keep the needs of the military foremost."  And I said, "I appreciate that, and I will go wherever you send me, and I will serve."  I said, "But, we're here talking about careers, and I'm hard pressed to commit to a career where I don't get to use anything I've learned and worked really hard doing over the last six years."  I said, "So I'm gonna go anywhere.  I'm gonna serve honorably."  I said, "But I just--we're gonna talk careers, this is what I would need to make this a career."  And so three weeks later I had another set of orders.  I'm now going not to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, but to the Tank-automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank-automotive and Armaments Command] in Warren, Michigan, and my MOS [military occupational specialty] has been changed from artillery training officer to management science officer.  And here, this is a, a Tank-automotive Command is essentially a civilian installation run by military officers.  And so now, at age twenty-one, I get to manage large numbers of the department of army civilians and do--and I'm doing a lot of mathematical studies, statistical studies.  I'm in an office with three other lieutenants.  And, and my orders here say that I'm to be here for a year and in country, which is Vietnam for a year.  And my option to that was three years in Germany.  But the trick was it was three years from your port call, and your port call could take up to a year.  And so I said you know, essentially four years versus two years, I'm going for the two.  I'll do the year here and the year in Vietnam.  My year there, as I said, I was doing a lot of statistical studies and a lot of interesting things for them.  I was learning a lot, learning how to manage and not manage people, and I was the command briefing officer.  I knew there was a war [Vietnam War] going on because I had to knock on doors, tell people their kids were dead.  I had to go to military funerals.  That's, again, these were other duties as assigned.  But after the year, my time was up.  It's time to go to Vietnam.  By this time I'm married.  And I got called into the commanding general's office.  And I'm still interested in a military career as well at this point.  And the general said--he thanked me for the contributions I had made, and he appreciated it.  I'd done an outstanding job.  I'd gotten [U.S.] Army commendation medals for system design and as well as the, the standard medals you get for showing up every day.  And he said, "I, I need to tell you that I've contacted the Pentagon, that I'm not letting you go, and I need for you to stay here for another year because you're too valuable to me."  And so I had mixed emotions.  I certainly in some ways felt good that I could stay with my wife [Elaine Davis] and finish my year, but I also knew he had just (unclear) my military career, because if you don't punch your, your combat ticket, you know, you don't have a military career.  And that was my combat ticket, not that people salivate for it, but you know, it's a necessary ticket for a military career.  And so he changed my career on, on the spot.  And so I finished my two, and then I looked for a job.  For the last time in life, I looked for a job, and this was 1969.
Story_ID: 640975
Speaker 1: And ever since 1969 jobs have looked for me.  I have, you know, have never filled out an application or, or sought a job since 1969.  And it was--I--with Ford Motor Company, and I, I had some other offers.  But my wife [Elaine Davis] by that time was halfway through graduate school, and so I stayed while she finished graduate school at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	And we had our first kid there in 1972, in Detroit [Michigan], my son, Christopher [Christopher Davis], who's now forty.
Speaker 2: Okay, in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1:  	Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1:  	Or six--(unclear) yeah, yeah, '72 [1972].  No, wait, wait a minute; he's forty.  Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970] was, was a--you're sure it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) I was, I--well, yes, let's say--I'm, I'm out of graduate school at '67 [1967].  I'm out of the [U.S.] Army at '69 [1969], in 1969, and so my son's born in 1972 in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	So I'm working at Ford.
Speaker 2: In Detroit, okay, all right.
Speaker 1:  	And at Ford I have the, the--it was, it's, it was interesting working at Ford finance.  It was in many ways prestigious, but it was sort of in many ways trivially easy dog work, 'cause they didn't like errors at all.  And the Ford finance staff was only filled with graduates from prestigious M.B.A. schools, Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], MIT [Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and people who had been stars out in operations who'd come to finance staff.  So it was an environment of incredibly bright people, and I didn't feel as if I stuck out, although I was certainly competitive there, but it was hard work.
Story_ID: 640976
Speaker 1: And they would rotate you, oh, every six months to a year to a new job.  I mean, masses of people would be moving every six months.  And so, I was recruited by Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  A headhunter called me--did I want to go work at Xerox.  And so, the, the offer they made was much more attractive than what I was doing, but I had one of those seminal moments that everyone dreams about when you leave a job.  The--I'd--my boss had come into my office.  I had already accepted the job at Xerox and hadn't told anybody yet.  They told me not to tell anybody because it was pending the outcome of a physical.  Well, I knew I was gonna pass it.  I was in great shape.  But I'm conservative, so I'm not telling anyone.  And my boss came and said, "Well, we want you to go to a new job to work for So and So," whom I didn't particularly care for.  And so I knew I was never going to that job.  And so I knew I was gonna hear any moment, any day from Xerox, so I would just give my notice.  And I said, "Well, what if I don't want to go to that job?"  And he said in the finest Ford [Ford Motor Company] fashion, "Well, we think it's in your career interest to go to that job."  And so I said, "Okay, when are you expecting me to report to this job?"  And so, again, in the finest Ford fashion, he says, "This afternoon," to the new job.  I--this is a series of dominoes which I don't, didn't want to start and mess up because I know that I was going to this job.  This person that was there was going to another, and I mean, they have it all worked out, and I didn't just want to screw it up.  And, and so I said, "Well, can I have a little time to think about this?"  And he says, "Yeah, you can have lunch."  And so by this time I'm a little irritated with this guy, and so I called the people at Xerox.  I said, "Listen, here's what's gonna happen: all this transfer domino effect, I really don't want to be a bad guy and then go to a new job, then quit the first afternoon on it.  So, could you tell me whether I passed the physical or not?"  "I don't know yet."  I said, "Listen, find out, get back to me, okay?"  So he said, "All right."  So he calls me back in about twenty minutes.  He said, "You passed; you're good to go."  I said, "Great."  And so, I walk into my boss's office.  It's, it's one o'clock now.  And he said, "Well?"  I said, "Well, you know, I've thought about it.  And your view is it's in my best career interest to go this job.  I've decided it's in my best career interest to leave the company, and so I'm leaving.  I'm giving you my notice.  I'm not going to the new job, and I'm leaving."  And he's just stunned at this point.  And I walked out, didn't tell him anything else.  And of course, the scuttlebutt then that becomes on the floor: they told me to go to a new job; I told them to shove it.  I mean, I never use that kind of language, but you know, now I'm an urban legend on, on the floor for telling them to take the job and shove it.  And so finally, I said to them, "Listen, I've already accepted; I've got another job," and then they, the, the proverbial, "Well, we'll give you everything you've always wanted.  We'll give you this second level supervisor's job.  We'll make you a plant controller."  You know, "We think really highly of you."  And you know, and I came with, "Well, if you think that highly of me you should have told me in advance."  But listen, you come into life with your word, and--I mean with nothing.  The only thing you ever have is your word.  I gave it to these people.  "I'm leaving.  And you know what, if you had given me this two weeks ago I wouldn't be leaving.  But I'm leaving now 'cause I told them I was going, and my word is my bond."  And so I left.
Story_ID: 640977
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) This is 1973 I go to Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  I'm working in the corporate headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut.  I'm living in Trumbull, Connecticut.  And the cost of living is just stunning there compared with Detroit [Michigan].  Detroit I had a 2400 square foot colonial, for which, which cost me twenty-five thousand dollars.  And I moved to Connecticut, and a similar size house about as far out as I wanted to commute, in a community called Trumbull, was fifty-six thousand dollars.  So I'm real--a real sticker shock at this point.  And so I manage to muddle through it.  And I was there for about two years in Connecticut, and then they transferred me to Rochester [New York].
Speaker 1: Now what was your title at Xerox?
Speaker 2:  	I was--I don't remember.  I didn't have people working for me, or maybe one.  I'm not sure.  But I got transferred up to Rochester, where I was a supervisor of some sort up there, 'cause I went from the strategic planning area to the controller's area in Rochester.  And I had a number of people working for me up there, probably a handful of young professionals at that point.  And I stayed there, and I enjoyed that; I enjoyed Xerox.  I stayed there until 1978, when I got another call from a headhunter, which said, "How would you like to be chief financial officer of a New York Stock Exchange listed company?"  And this sounded good to me because I thought it would be a long while before I became chief financial officer at Xerox.  And so it turned out to be a midwestern utility company called Wisconsin Power and Light [Wisconsin Power and Light Company], and so I went there.
Story_ID: 640978
Speaker 1: Where is Wisconsin Power and Light [Wisconsin Power and Light Company]?
Speaker 2:  	In Madison, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Madison, okay.
Speaker 2:  	And so I went there in 1978.  By the early '90s [1990s], I had become--I don't--'91 [1991] or '92 [1992]--president and chief operating officer and then subsequently CEO of the company.  In 1995, we have formed a holding company by then, but by this time there was a lot of--I was getting tired of this because I'd done it for a long time.  And then we decided to put together a three way merger with two other companies.  And the last three way merger in the utility industry was tried in the early '30s [1930s] when three water companies did it.  And I did this against the advice of all of our investment bankers who said you should do them sequentially.  And I said no, we're doing this simultaneously, which turned out to be the best idea because you always had three people making a decision.  And you'll get a decision with three people, and you don't get hung up as you would with two people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--negotiating.  And so--
Speaker 1: So it was, it was Wisconsin Power and Light--
Speaker 2:  	Well, by that time it's WPL Holdings [WPL Holdings, Inc.].  We had morphed--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--into a holding company and bought some non-utility things, such as an environmental company, such as a, an energy company down here in Atlanta [Georgia], A and C Intercom [ph.], for example.  So we had a number of non-utility ventures--
Speaker 1: Okay, so dub--
Speaker 2:  	--going.
Speaker 1: --WPL Holdings merged--
Speaker 2:  	Holdings, yeah.
Speaker 1: --merged with another--
Speaker 2:  	With, with Interstate Power [Interstate Power Company; Interstate Power and Light Company], which was headquartered in Dubuque, Iowa and IES Industries [IES Industries, Inc.], which was a holding company for Iowa Electric [Iowa Electric Light and Power Company], which was headquartered in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Story_ID: 640979
Speaker 1:  	And so that merger took twenty-seven months to pull off.  We had a hostile attempt in the middle, by MidAmerican power [MidAmerican Energy Company], to break it up and so the proverbial dueling ads in The Wall Street Journal at, at ten thousand dollars a day and flying in the corporate plane to speak to large investors to get them to vote our way, which they subsequently did vote our way.  And so--oh, god, I think this was in nine--I'm trying to remember when we--I think it came into being in 1998, I think, and I became CEO.  And this was essentially a new job for me because the board was six, six, three, and only six were from my old company [WPL Holdings, Inc.], and I was one of them.  And so I had a, essentially a fourteen person board, only five of whom had any--knew me or had great confidence in me.  And so it was like going to a new job.  And so I did that, had a good time, had businesses all over the world, China, New Zealand, Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and I lived on airplanes.  And, and I took great pride in building a great leadership team, but it was a team that I woke up one day and said you know, I'm sitting on these guys.  They're gonna leave; they're gonna go elsewhere.  I had two guys that were really ready right behind me.  So I said you know, I've been doing this long enough.  I've been a CEO for fifteen years, made New York Stock Exchange listed company. I've probably made all the money I need in life to make, and so why don't you just retire and let these younger guys take over, which is what I did.  I was sixty-one, and I announced--the board wanted me to do this over a two year period, where the first year I would step down as, as CEO--excuse me--as president and just let my successor be president and chief operating office, and I'd be chairman and CEO.  Then the second year, he would be president and CEO, and I'd just be chairman.  And that transition worked, except I got tired after six months of just being chair, because I was making as much as I was making before, and I wasn't doing anything.  And I said you know, there's no reason for me being paid billions of dollars to do nothing except run board meetings and put the agenda together, so I'm outta here.  And so, however, because of this two year announcement of this two year plan, people had been putting things in front of me and for my--here's what you should do next.  For example, I was offered a professorship at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with appointments in engineering and public policy, electrical and computer engineering and computer science.  And I was asked to look at the presidency of their Carnegie Museum system in Pittsburgh [Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh], which has a large art museum, a large natural history museum, the Andy Warhol Museum [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and a science center, because again, people saw that I was successful in putting together disparate cultures through this three way merger.  And so entities that had multiple cultures that needed to be integrated and work better, people were talking to me about that.  And so, and then I had some outreach from a headhunter here [Atlanta, Georgia] for the chancellor's job at the university system [University System of Georgia].  And so that one looked interesting, and so I responded to that one, and finally wound up getting that job.  And I worked that job for five and a half--
Speaker 2: That's, that's at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) years.
Speaker 2: --Carnegie Mellon [sic.]?
Speaker 1:  	The chancellor's job, yeah.
Story_ID: 640980
Speaker 1: Chancellor's job at--?
Speaker 2:  	At the University System of Georgia.  So we--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--I moved the family--
Speaker 1: Now, now, now let, let me, let me--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --put some breaks on here.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: We want to go back a little bit--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --and like, what was the name of the Alliant Energy [Alliant Energy Corporation], is that the name of the--
Speaker 2:  	Alliant Energy, yes, the, the three way merger re--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--resulted in the formation of Alliant Energy.  The actually, the first thing we had was Alliant.  And we did all the searches, and it turned out that some telephone company in Nebraska had Alliant Energy and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so that's Alliant with a T?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, A-L-L-I-A-N-T--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--Alliant Energy.
Speaker 1: So, so what is it now?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, it's Alliant Energy.  So, we moved from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--Alliant to Alliant Energy.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --okay, all right (laughter) (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	After we had the big Alliant announcement, we had to say oops, sorry; it's Alliant Energy and not Alliant, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And, let's see, so, during your time you, you were the--
Speaker 2:  	I started off as president and CEO.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And one of the, the--
Speaker 1: This is '98 [1998], right?
Speaker 2:  	--the two other presidents were chairman and vice chairman of the board.  And then finally, after about two years they retired, and I became chairman, president, and CEO, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started in '98 [1998] though with a new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I think it was '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so were there any major challenges or, you know, after you got the--I mean how were you able to get them to work together?
Speaker 1:  	Well, I had an excellent personnel organization, headed by really a brilliant woman named Pam Wagner [ph.].  And she hit on the idea that we, we had three separate cultures and that we shouldn't be picking between the cultures.  We should pick the culture we want to have and work towards that to get all three of these companies and people together talking about the culture that they wanted.  And that's--and she facilitated that process, and that's what we wound up doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what, what, what tip--what was the--what, what features typified the culture of the company that you put together?
Speaker 1:  	Well, the--one of the things we focused on then, and I focus on today, is ethics and integrity.  When you have large traveling crews out on their own, it's important that that--and the history was, of course, they had to be paid, and you had to give the crew chiefs bags of money and cash to pay the workers.  And we did not want any inappropriate activity one way or another, and so it put high value on integrity.  We tried, again, to put value on respect for the individual.  And a- again, these are the kinds of things that I'm still trying to do here at the Atlanta Public Schools.  But again, you sit down with a group of people, and you ask them what they want, what they'd like to see in the workplace.  Certainly, they're gonna want to have fun.  They're gonna want to be recognized.  They're gonna want to have--want their jobs to have meaning, and, and they want adequately compensated.  And they really just want respected.
Story_ID: 640981
Speaker 1: You don't have to name the company, but what, what were--or, or--well, let me just say--well, let me ask you this way: what, what were some of the practices that most of--I mean the, the aggregate of the three--when, when, when it came, came, came together, what practices did they want to eliminate, say?
Speaker 2:  	Well, that was interesting because there were some structural differences.  Interstate [Interstate Power Company; Interstate Power and Light Company] was a smaller company.  And so it's managers were much more broad based general managers than ours, because we have a large company [WPL Holdings, Inc.].  And you did specific things, and you move from one specific job to another.  And in, in a small company that person might be doing all three of those but can't do it in a large company.  The other thing was that the--and IES Industries [IES Industries, Inc.] was headed by a chap named Lee Liu, who was a Chinese born national, whose father was in the Kuomintang government, and had to flee Mao Tse-tung, and they fled to the wrong place for--to Formosa.  And then he had actually turned against Chiang Kai-shek, and Chiang Kai-shek, of course, went to the island of Formosa.  And so they then had to leave there, and they wound up in Brazil.  And so you have a Chinese national learning to speak Portuguese, who's now immigrating to the United States and ultimately didn't have enough capital to be a farmer, which he really wanted to be.  And so he went to work for the utility and worked himself up there.  But he brought with him a spirit of Chinese entrepreneurialism.  And you know, Americans are fond of saying: stick to your knitting; do what you know what to do best.  And you know, Chinese view is: if there's an opportunity for money to be made, we will make it.  And so, not only we, would we build electrical infrastructure and gas infrastructure and water infrastructure, if we had to build a port, we would do that too.  I mean, that's the way he would look at things.  And so I was probably much more conservative.  I wanted to do non-utility things but only by leveraging what we knew how to do, such as, for example, we knew how to engineer wind farms and how to permit.  And we had an environmental company that knew how to permit.  And so I started a business on providing infrastructure and engineering support to other utilities who were building wind farms.  And that was successful, as opposed to owning and running the wind farm itself, which I wasn't that interested in making the capital investments to do.  And we got in trouble with telecommunications ventures.  We made a very astute investment of a couple hundred million dollars in a company called McLeod Telecommunications [McLeodUSA, Inc.; McLeodUSA Telecommunications Services, LLC], and it was the darling and the hot stock.  And our investment of a couple of hundred million went up to over a billion dollars.  And the downside was that we were a restricted investor and couldn't sell our stock.  And so the question is how do we monetize this value on our balance sheets?  So we borrowed against it.  And so what happened was, then the stock tanks and the billion dollars disappears from your balance sheet, but the billion dollars or half a billion dollars of debt doesn't disappear.  And so now you have a balance sheet that's out of whack.  And so it took me a couple of years to work through getting a balance sheet back in whack, selling some assets, divesting some businesses, paying down debt, cutting dividends, which is always popular among particularly retired shareowners.  And so that, that was an interesting few years after that, yeah.
Story_ID: 640982
Speaker 1: I knew there was a lot more to this story than what you were (laughter) telling.  But that's, that's a, you know.  So, this is--we use a--I, I think I read that the, that the, Alliant had--Alliant Energy [Alliant Energy Corporation] had assets of, of eight point something billion dollars or something that, that you were managing.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's (unclear) so this is--is there any other African American in the country managing an organization that large?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, today?
Speaker 1: I mean in those days.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, back in those days, no.  I am fond of saying to people, you know, I was here before Reggie Lewis [Reginald Lewis] was there.  I certainly was here before Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], before the fellow who's running McDonald's [Donald Thompson], and before--I said but, you know, I wasn't there because I wanted to be first.  I was there because it was a job they asked me to do.  And I was just fortunate enough to be in the right place at the right time and hopefully did a reasonable job for people.  But I don't know that there's been an African American head of a major utility company or a major energy company since.  I know there wasn't when I was there.  But, again, I had a great time.  I was an energy spokesperson, testifying in front of [U.S.] Congress on issues such as utility holding company formations.  I was the head of the energy organ- the, the association of electrical energy companies, the EEI, Edison Electric Institute.  I was chair of that board for a year.  I was on the Electric Power Research Institute board.  In fact, I'm still on it the Electric Power Research Institute board.  And so, I had a wonderful time.  I was quite active in the industry and had good support and recognition from my peers.  And it, it was a good run.  I, I enjoyed it.  But I tend not to look back either.  I just move forward.  And it was time to do some public service things.  And I--the university system [University System of Georgia] was a challenge, which I did for five and half years, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you started that in two thousand and--?
Speaker 2:  	Six [2006].
Speaker 1: Six [2006]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640983
Speaker 1: Yeah, chancellor of University of Georgia System [sic. University System of Georgia], now this position, I don't know what happened before.  I don't have a note about it, but this position was well publicized.  I think your picture is in Jet magazine at least and maybe--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, the--
Speaker 1: --probably other publications and people--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I don't know whether I ever made Jet as--when I was at Alliant Energy [Alliant Energy Corporation], Ebony did a spread on my wife [Elaine Davis] and, and me one time.  But you know, I, I think my wife ticked them off once by--they wanted to profile me in a little speaking of or something column and she tried to suggest to them that they needed to get a better perspective on where I had been, what I had done.  And so they agreed and did a profile, then never mentioned me again in life (laughter), you know, so.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2:  	You ain't careful, you get what you ask for, you know.
Speaker 1: So, so how did your no- your name come to the attention of the State of Georgia?
Speaker 2:  	That, that too is a story.  I was on the Board of Regents in the University of Wisconsin System, and I was chair of the education committee.  And the chief academic officer for the system was a fellow named Steve Portch [Stephen R. Portch].  And Steve was interviewed and subsequently got the job here as chancellor, and I was one of Steve's references.  And so I met a number of people who were interviewing Steve and who were on the Board of Regents in, in Georgia at that point.  And so, in fact, when this inquiry came to me, would you be interested in being chancellor, I said, "No, I would not.  In fact, I have already sent you one chancellor.  What more do you want from me?"  The note came back, actually we would like you.  Because it didn't--the inquiry came as do I know anyone who's interested.  It wasn't directly to me.  And it was sort of--subsequently, I found out they were recruiting me.  And so the chancellor who was here had retired, and they had put another one in place.  But the one who was here before, who was from Wisconsin, was highly revered, did a wonderful job, and in fact, he was the one that was pushing me with the Board of Regents for this job.
Story_ID: 640984
Speaker 1: Now, this is another kind of puzzling aspect to the outline here.  Did--what's your--did, did you have an association with BP [BP P.L.C.] at all?
Speaker 2:  	I was on the Amoco board--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--for a long period of time.  And Amoco [Amoco Corporation] then was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--purchased by BP.  And I was one of the board members that moved to the BP board, and I resigned from--I was on there for I guess almost ten years.  And I resigned about three weeks before the accident, the big oil spill.  And so I can't say I knew there was gonna be an oil spill, but I, I had re- subsequently resigned.  I had knee surgery, and it was getting a little tough to do the transatlantic flights.  And I was subsequently--candidly, getting a little tired as well of making that trip.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did, did you have to testify or anything or, or address your--the oil spill at all--
Speaker 2:  	Oh no.
Speaker 1: --after you--okay.
Speaker 2:  	As I said, I was off.  I was named in some initial suits and got some initial filings, but that's the extent of it.  I mean, I haven't participated in any discussion with anybody--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--on it.
Story_ID: 640985
Speaker 1:  	Well, my challenge at the university system was to get the system to act more like a system instead of a confederation of schools.  And so that's essentially what I tried to do, to get some consistent thrusts and goals across all schools, get people to understand that we wanted them to work together before the present president, Mike Adams [Michael F. Adams], as well as Wayne Clough [G. Wayne Clough] over at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  There was a time when the Georgia and Georgia Tech presidents wouldn't--couldn't stand to be in the same room with each other.  And one of them would leave the room if the other one came in.  And to me that didn't seem like the best approach for, for running a system.  And so, I also tried to identify problem areas and assign presidents to solve those problems across all schools, which is a sort of what I call a functional leadership skill that was never in their training to do.  These--most of them were excellent managers in line operations when I have the power to hire and fire you.  But when I want to get consistent performance to a standard across schools, and I have to work through other presidents to do that, a number of them felt, felt very challenged by that assignment.  But it was good for them anyway, and I think they're better because of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Yeah, so it's thirty-five schools in the system, you were saying.
Speaker 1:  	There were then.  They're in the process of consolidating the three or four of them now, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And does, does that, though, that number thirty-five include schools that get--are there schools that are not official state schools that get funding from the--
Speaker 1:  	No.  The university system is separate from the technical college system, which is separate from also private university system.  And so what you had was thirty-five institutions.  You had a number of research institution, I believe four of them, Georgia, Georgia Tech, Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], and the medical college [Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia], and hospital complex [Augusta University Medical Center, Augusta, Georgia] over there.  And then you had a number of four year comprehensive universities, Georgia Southern [Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, Georgia], Valdosta State [Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia], Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], Kennesaw [Kennesaw State University, Marietta, Georgia], Southern Poly [Southern Polytechnic College of Engineering and Engineering Technology, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia].  And then you had two year colleges which did offer limited bachelor's degrees based on the needs of the local area.  For instance, you go up to Dalton [Dalton State College, Dalton, Georgia], and they'll be carpet industry up there.  There might have been a four year program for someone who needed to be a plant engineer or something like that but very limited.  And then you had just the pure two year schools like Georgia Perimeter College [Perimeter College, Atlanta, Georgia].  It only offers two year degrees.  But there are three different sectors and leaders for each of those sectors.  I did the research sector, but they--then the sector heads would all report in to me as well.  So it was an interesting time.  I mean, it's a big operation.  It was $6 billion annual budget, forty thousand employees, three hundred thousand plus students, and so, it was a challenge.
Story_ID: 640986
Speaker 1: Now, sir, are there any historical black colleges [historically black colleges and universities] in, in the, the, the system [University System of Georgia]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, there are three: Fort Valley [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], and Albany State [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia].  Atlanta Metropolitan College [Atlanta Metropolitan State College, Atlanta, Georgia] is not a traditional--it's not an HBCU, but it's been traditionally all-black institution here at south--the southern part of the city (yawn).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, so, so you were there from 2006 until 2010, right, or--
Speaker 2:  	No, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two thousand eleven [2011]?
Speaker 2:  	--I finished on June 30th, 2011, and I started this job [with Atlanta Public Schools] on July 1 (laughter), 2011.
Story_ID: 640987
Speaker 1: Tell us about how you came to be superintendent of schools in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2:  	Well, I became the superintendent [of Atlanta Public Schools] because I was asked by the mayor [Kasim Reed] would I help out for about a ninety day period because a superintendent search was underway.  And the previous superintendent was leaving, and they just wanted me to be here for ninety days.  And I said fine, no problem.  Would that I was retiring; I wasn't doing anything, and you know, anybody would agree to do something for ninety days.  And about the third day on the job, the major cheat scandal broke.  The searches fell apart.  The system is in chaos.  It's on probation because of board dysfunctionality.  It has--I've got to remove almost two hundred educators.  I've got to open schools on time, hire forty out of almost a hundred principals that I have to replace in the short term, or I says [sic] all within a month of time.  And so the ninety days just went right by the board and then just turned into a year; then it turned into two years, because I'm still just trying to fix things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, explain this cheating scandal, and what, what was it all about?
Speaker 2:  	Well, we have in the state called a CRCT exam.  It's a high stakes test.  It's called, jeez, Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests.  And it's given to third graders, I think fifth, and eighth.  There's three cohorts we look at.  But essentially, this says how you're doing. And you do it across math, reading, social studies, and science, and you get a score.  And the score gets published everywhere.  People were being evaluated on the scores they were turning out, and they cheated.  The money was being paid to high achieving schools.  And they got high achievement through cheating instead of through real achievement by the students.  And so, you know, I took immediately two hundred people out of their jobs, put them on administrative leave, to the extent that they were entitled to hearing.  To the extent that they were at will employees, I fired them.  And so--
Story_ID: 640988
Speaker 1: How was the scandal uncovered?  I mean who, who uncovered this?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, the--this is the result of an investigation by--well, there was some sense that there was cheating going on, and an internal investigation was launched with the support of the business community and outside resources.  And it was coming up everything is sort of fine, and maybe there's one or two, or there's a problem.  And the governor [Nathan Deal] said you know, that's not my understanding it's by--and I think they literally sort of thumbed their nose--thumbed their noses (yawns) (unclear) at the governor, and which is something that you really don't want to do.  So the governor sent in two special investigators.  He deputized them.  They brought in literally--I for--I don't know--over a hundred or so GBI, Georgia Bureau of Investigation sworn agents, and then they took sworn testimony, which the other investigations could not take, in terms of they had no ability to get--and so, then, special prosecutors came out with the, this report on I think July the 5th or 6th that portrayed the largest cheating scandal in American educational history in this system, and it was just devastating.  And I now have to read the eight hundred page report in its entirety.  I can't delegate it because I've been advised that some of my direct reports are named in here.  And so, instead of parceling it out and saying you tell me what's in this chapter and make a recommendation, I had to--I got this thing on Wednesday, and I had to read eight hundred pages and come up with recommendations for a special board meeting on Monday.  So, you know, I was--I didn't get much sleep, let me put it that way.  But I, I took people out of their job.  I made ethics training mandatory.  I put in triggers for changes in test scores, and on and on.  And so, we're still implementing.
Speaker 1: So how, how--I guess, where did it start, and how deep down did it go? In terms of--
Speaker 2:  	Well, it's--
Speaker 1: --those who--
Speaker 2:  	--it's--some schools have (yawns) (unclear)--the principals participated in cheating parties where they would change scores [on the Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests].  And you know, this was in all through the grade in middle schools.  And the high schools did not have this, but they have an end of course test, which they deal with.
Speaker 1: So what was at stake what--where, where--I guess, if a school does not meet a certain standard of education for the students, the school--
Speaker 2:  	No, no, that was in the--
Speaker 1: --would, would--
Speaker 2:  	--No Child Left Behind Act [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--there were things at stake.  But here, it's a matter of how do you compare with every other school in this subject and your grade level across the state.  Also, do I earn my two thousand end bonus incentive for--
Speaker 1: So there's a bonus incentive for having higher scores?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes, they, they get monetary rewards for doing well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--for doing what you're supposed to be doing.
Speaker 1: I'm asking these kind of questions 'cause not everybody knows about how this works or, or even suspects how it works.  But that's--
Speaker 2:  	And we're still--we're down to our last handful of people in hearings.  All our cer- certificated employees had the right to hearing, and a good percentage of them decided to have hearings.
Speaker 1: Now were the poorest performing schools the ones perpetrating this?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But--okay.
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, so anything they--and the motivation was financial basically, I mean--?
Speaker 2:  	Well, financial and reputational.
Story_ID: 640989
Speaker 1: I don't want to be known as the worst performing school, because with the rise of charter schools, people will take kids out of my school, and pretty soon they'll close it.  And so I have to demonstrate to parents that they should send their kids here.  They'll get good education and good grades here, even though there is not a lot of integrity in that process.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, you said it's taken a, a year to, and you're still not quite at the, at the--finished with this investigation?
Speaker 1:  	Well, the--one of the reasons this has taken so long is that the special prosecutors turned their evidence over to the district attorney.  They didn't turn their evidence over to us.  And so the only evidence we've ever had is that which the district attorney has seen fit to share.  And that sharing has been a lot slower than we would have liked, but I respect that he's trying to put together criminal cases and conspiracy cases.  So they're not giving out a lot of information, particularly at the admin level or in this office, as opposed to, well, we're not gonna bother with some people at this school, so you can have the information related to such and such school.
Speaker 2: So the, the perpetrators of these, of this cheating [on the Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests] face two forms of jeopardy I guess.  They, they can lose their job, or, or be penalized in Atlanta Public Schools, or face criminal prosecution too, or both.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, there's three, actually, avenues.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	One, of course, is our administrative reviews here at APS.  The second is the Professional Standards Commission [Georgia Professional Standards Commission], our licensing body; they can get their license revoked.  And in fact, they've revoked some licenses before we get to hearing our own administrative hearings.  And we say well, you know, you're not gonna have a license.  I can't put you in a classroom without a license anyway.  Even if it is under appeal, I can't take the risk of the appeal being sustained and me having to take you out of the classroom.  And so, my need to serve children with a stable teacher is greater than your need to be placed in the classroom.  And the third avenue is the criminal avenue.  When you falsify official documents it's criminal.  When you order somebody to destroy evidence it's criminal, for example.  And so we have all three, three avenues working, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	--although the district attorney has yet to file anything or make any charge.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  All right, so this is--but, I guess the scandal side, what, what are--what things are you trying to do with the Atlanta public school system to bring it up to where--
Speaker 1:  	Well--
Speaker 2: --it needs to be?
Speaker 1:  	--we spend a lot of time here putting an effective teacher in every classroom.  And then we surround that effective teacher with some of the worst systems imaginable, registration systems that don't work, scheduling systems that don't work, inconsistently and sometimes inappropriately applied discipline systems, et cetera.  And so, what we have is a plan that says I'm gonna get these operational things working; I'm going to hire and train and retrain great people, that's a second.  The third is I'm gonna put in more rigorous curriculum around the Common Core [Common Core State Standards Initiative].  And this is all this three tiers should lead to improve student achievement, higher graduation rates, lower dropout rates, et cetera.
Story_ID: 640990
Speaker 1: I was told by someone recently that, that your interim position could end almost immediately if they found--they find an appropriate superintendent or candidate, you know, to--
Speaker 2:  	Well, let me say that there is no ongoing search.  They're talking about an RFP [request for proposal] process, but there isn't ongoing search.  My--I've been here now for eighteen months.  My contract, the present contract, says they could have given me ninety days notice.  The challenge to the school board is school board elections are in November of next year.  So do you try and get a superintendent to come here when, essentially, four of the nine have already declared that they're not going to be here?  And so do I take that risk with my family?  I don't think so.  Or, do you right away suggest that the new board should hire a superintendent?  That's a little tough on a new board that doesn't know anything about the system.  And so timing is not good for either a, a search or for a new superintendent through any mechanism probably until sometime in 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you, you're pretty sure you'll be around through 2014.
Speaker 2:  	No, I didn't say that.
Speaker 1: Okay, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) (Laughter) I said--I didn't not say that.  I have--essentially, I'm going to have two years from January, and that will make it, you know, three and a half years if I finish that.  The half life of the average urban superintendent is 2.9 years.  It's, it's these are horribly tough, tiring jobs; they really are.  And you often say to yourself, you know, the kids' problems seem solvable, if I could just stop dealing with the adults.  Adult issues, they just get you in trouble all the time, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what, what do you think is the biggest issue in Atlanta Public Schools right now in terms of the poor community in the black community?
Speaker 2:  	Well, we've had, from my perspective, not enough coherency of curriculum.  We've had so many different educational models.  And then we did not have a management control system.  We essentially told someone go create, go multiply, go be--go do something.  I'll be back in three years, and we'll check, see whether he made any progress.  If he made great progress, you can stay.  You can get a bonus.  If you haven't, you have to leave.  And so, these people are out here in fear of their jobs, and so they're manufacturing results instead of achieving results.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that's a major problem in--
Speaker 2:  	Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--the--that's one of the problems.  Problem, the problem we have is lack of controls, lack of an ethic that says everyone has a commitment to excellence, lack of customer focus and customer service.  There are a lot of challenges that this system has.  Financial is not the top problem here.  We still have money in the bank.  We still have some flexibility, not as much as I would like, and it's certainly going down and not up.  But, you know, we have to put trained professionals in every position.  We have a lot of great people here, highly trained, but there are also a lot of people that are inept.  And you know, we would be better off without their services, to be frank with you.
Story_ID: 640991
Speaker 1: So what are, what's the alternatives, an early retirement or something for some, or, or the--
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I shouldn't say we'd be better off, because when something goes wrong, my first impulse is not to say, who did it?  I always say, why did it happen?  And the question I will ask is: was the person trained to do this?  Did we give them the resources that they needed to do this?  Did we give them understanding of our expectations and our values before they set off to do this?  And usually and one of those answers is no.  And then I say it's on us; it's not necessarily on the person.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, Arne Duncan has been the secretary of education since 2008 I guess.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He was a superintendent of Chicago schools [Chicago Public Schools].
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What kind of a tone has the federal government set in terms--I mean does, does any of that reverberate down?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, sure.  I mean the Race to the Top has provided an opportunity for us to try a number of things here in this state, and so I'm appreciative of that initiative.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what does Race to the Top really involve?
Speaker 2:  	Well, the Race to the Top sets out monies for states to implement programs which are gonna increase student achievement.  You have to define all of it in advance, of course.  It's a very time consuming, laborious application process, but I think the state as a whole got two hundred and forty million [dollars] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, does Atlanta [Georgia]--well, I've heard criticisms in other cities that a lot of money that comes down is used for capital development and not necessarily for, you know, improving the programs in the schools.  You have, you got a lot of new buildings in some cities, and--
Speaker 2:  	Well, yeah--
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2:  	--yeah, we're fortunate here because we have what's called SPLOST funding, Special Purpose Local Area Sales Taxes [sic. Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax], for our capital programs.  And so, you pay one cent of the, of sales tax here, and it goes to building.  And so we have more than adequate funds for building, maintaining and rebuilding facilities because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--so, okay, so you can--I guess the deeper question to that is that, is enough time being spent on, on the program--I mean, you know, programming curriculum and that sort of thing in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.  I--and that, that's a good question.  The advent of the Common Core [Common Core State Standards Initiative] has, is allowing us to rationalize our program, our educational programming, and also to make sure that we have equitable offerings everywhere in the system.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that a parent won't say well, if I--my student is in this area, I, I can't find a decent school.  I gotta take him across town or--
Speaker 2:  	Right.  There will still be some who have that attitude.  It's a misplaced attitude, in that we have what we call value added data by teacher.  And what we find is that it is completely independent of the area.  It was a little surprising to us because, you know, we felt like, well, they had good teachers up here in north Atlanta, and they have not so good ones elsewhere.  That turns out not to be case.  There are good teachers everywhere who are adding great value.  There are some who don't, who need to be taught how to do that.  Or, and if they can't be taught, or are unwilling to be taught, then they have to move on.
Story_ID: 640992
Speaker 1: What about discipline pr- policy, you know, the, in low income neighborhoods?  I know that, that seems to be like--I hear teachers complain that they can't--the, the parents don't discipline the children.  The children come with no respect to the classroom.
Speaker 2:  	The absolute best discipline is an engaging teacher that can engage the child.  We have looked at discipline programs.  They are not uniformly applied even within a series of small learning communities or small schools on the same campus, so we have to rationalize those types of things.  We've also noted that probabilities of graduation decline amazingly drastically the more time kids spend out of the classroom, the more days of school that they miss and down to the point where, you know, if you miss five days of school, the prob- in eighth grade, the probability of graduating from high school is, you know, pretty high.  You miss more than fifteen grades [sic. days], it goes down like into the 20 percents.  It's stunning.  And so what we looked at was, what's our first response to a behavioral problem?  We expel them; we take them out of school.  We're doing it to ourselves, and that's the--what--you know, we need to understand that there are alternatives.  We need to make sure that discipline is applied uniformly and equitably, and we gotta just stop reflexively dismissing kids, expelling them, particularly young African American males.
Story_ID: 640993
Speaker 1: Is there a, a plan, a, a major plan that you'd like to--or, or, or major goals that you'd like to complete before you re--
Speaker 2:  	Well--
Speaker 1: --retire as superintendent [of Atlanta Public Schools]?
Speaker 2:  	Generally, my goals have been for any organization to be able to leave and nobody notice, that I don't want there to be a vacuum when I leave.  I want leadership structures in place, focused in the right directions.  And so, you know, I focus more on people development, getting people trained.  There are some infrastructure things, such as an internal control system that I believe need to be rebuilt.  I want to see that happen to make sure that we're leveraging technology to the extent that we should be.  I want to see that happen as, as well.  And so, there, there are a number of projects, which I, I won't go into right now but that I, I'd like to see.  But more importantly, I'd like to get them on a path such that even if I'm not here, people will stay on that path.
Speaker 1: Now, being a superintendent of a, of a major school system in a city in the United States is a, is a job that often meets with a disappointment.  And superintendents historically leave.  They start off with a lot of hope.  They leave the town in kind of under a cloud.  They get hired by another town, and then he goes to--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I won't be going to another town.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) right.  So this is your--so you've, you've taken this on really as something that you really don't, you don't need to do this necessarily.  And you, and you, you weren't even education that much--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --before.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, it's--what motivated you to, to, to do this?
Speaker 2:  	Well, as I said, I was just asked to care take for ninety days.  Then it all fell apart, and there was just a massive set of problems that I inherited.  And then, I visit schools, and you can't help but falling in love with the kids in the schools, at every level.  And you say well, you know, if I can do something to help them, I will.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when this job is, is done--
Speaker 2:  	When this job is done, I--if I say it long enough and loudly enough that I am going to retire, then I, you know, I can sort of force, shame myself into it.  But, you know, I don't know.  As you get--I, I know I don't want to run something going forward--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--because I've now come to the conclusion that if you run anything, anything, it runs you.  You are no longer the master of your own time if you're running something, 'cause you have to deal with all of the attendant, you know, mission problems, personnel problems, structural problems.  And you know, doesn't matter how big or, or small it is, it still runs you.  And I, I need to run my life a little better going forward, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what other organizations do you volunteer for?  What, what other activities are you engaged in here?
Speaker 2:  	Well, this one's pretty consuming, let me say that.  I am on two boards.  I'm, I'm on the General Motors board [General Motors Company], and I'm on the Union Pacific Railroad board [Union Pacific Railroad Company].  I am on the Electric Power Research Institute board.  I'm on the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations advisory board.  And there are a couple of educational things, the taskforces that I'm involved in as well.  So, it's busy, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the Carnegie Mellon board [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  You mentioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--I'm on the Carne- still on the Carnegie Mellon board as well.
Story_ID: 640994
Speaker 1: Now, I guess when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back to change it?
Speaker 2:  	I, I don't spend a lot of my time saying what I should have done, as oppose to, hey learn something and do better the next time.  I, I solve problems.  This, this is what I feel as if I were bred to do, quite frankly.  And not everybody's gonna be happy with what you do.  This job in particular [with the Atlanta Public Schools] doesn't have a lot of happiness factors associated with it.  When you make tough decisions you're gonna alienate one set of people, please another set of people.  Decisions about closing schools are painful decisions.  Someone said to me once that being in ur- making decisions as an urban school superintendent is like putting rocks in your pocket, and pretty soon you have so many in there you can't stand up, and then it's time to leave at that point.  And so, I'm still standing, let me say that.  But it is, there are just so many hard decisions, so many parents who feel really just an absolute sense of urgency that this year is the only year my son or daughter is gonna be in first grade, so I have to do everything I can to make it the absolute best first grade.  And I understand that perspective, but I have fifty thousand kids instead of one child to look after.  And your perspectives that help one child may not be the best for all fifty thousand.  And so, I'll keep moving, let me say that.
Story_ID: 640995
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2:  	Well, this job [with the Atlanta Public Schools] has convinced me that we can create excellence even in the midst of poverty.  We just have to have the will to do that.  Our school with the highest rate is the school that has over 80 percent free and reduced lunch.  It's a poor school.  And the second highest is in that same complex, another early--one's early college, one's I think performing arts.  And I, I am tired of excuses.  I, I have a concern that there are people out to throw out public education and, and because it hasn't delivered, and it hasn't delivered that well.  And I believe that we can put in programs with fidelity that will allow us to make--to meet our commitment to excellence, to meet our commitment to ethical behavior, to engage parents, and also to just be better than we are today.  I do feel we can be better.
Story_ID: 640996
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned before meeting your wife [Elaine Davis] in the seventh grade--and you've got one son, right?
Speaker 2:  	I have one son [Christopher Davis], one daughter [Whitney Davis].
Speaker 1: One son and one daughter, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2:  	Well--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2:  	--my son's forty years old.  He's a musician.  He lives in Brooklyn, New York.  We'll be going up there for the holiday, for Christmas, to see him.  My daughter is thirty-seven years old.  She is a returning adult student, about to finish a course in social work at Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I have one, one sixteen year old granddaughter, who is a gorgeous little child, you know.
Story_ID: 640997
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I don't worry about things like that.  I let others worry about that.  I, I have a storage unit where I'm paying $126 a month to store plaques, trophies, accolades.  And you know, they're out of sight, and they're out of mind, yeah.  And as, as I said earlier, we're gonna come in the world with nothing.  You're gonna leave with nothing.  And the only thing we can do while we're here is have some impact.  And I will say that I've tried--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--to have that impact.
Story_ID: 640998
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for young business students who want to get involved in management?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, absolutely.  Don't narrow your options.  I've done business all around the world, and I find, particularly in England, that English businessmen are much better educated than American.  And one of the reasons is that they don't just run right in and start studying business.  They study classics.  They, they develop critical thinking skills.  And they have great flexibility of what they can do.  And one of the reasons I believe I haven't looked for a job since my very first one is that people look at what skills I have, what I can do, and they see an easier fit than if they were to look at someone who had a very narrow set of skills and experiences.  And so, if I were really educational czar of the world or the United States, I would have everybody in college do a 3-2 program, three years of rigorous liberal arts, including math, and science, and econ [economics], and great works of literature, followed by two years if you wanted to specialize in something like accounting or business or something of that nature.  So, I really feel very strongly you should be grounded in or around critical thinking.  When you think about what makes a school like Chicago [University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] great, a business school, and it's not just because the business school has great professors, but it is because it's surrounded by an econ school that has giants, a cultural anthropology school where people understand how people interact, why they interact, and by great math departments.  And so it's the--I don't know--the relationship between all of these things that creates great success.  You can't really point to one thing.  And that's--I think the problem in education is we haven't really looked at it holistically.  We keep looking at it in its component parts and thinking that if we solve a component, that will, will have solved the entire problem, and you won't.  You have to look at the thing holistically, and put in solutions that are holistic in nature and put in solutions that will better engage our publics as well.
Story_ID: 640999
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything you want to say that I haven't asked it before I ask my last question--
Speaker 2:  	No, I--
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2:  	Oh no, no.  I think I, I got my wife [Elaine Davis] in.  That--I forgot to say I wouldn't be here but for her (laughter).  And again, she's been incredibly supportive of my journey.  And for that I am truly appreciative.  But I also, as someone says, you're never gonna be any happier than your unhappiest child.  So no--don't neglect them either, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2:  	I'd like to be remembered as someone who tried hard to make a difference, and did it in an ethical manner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 641000
Speaker 1:  	This a picture of my granddaughter as a little baby.  She's now a gorgeous sixteen year old, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what's her name?
Speaker 1:  	Her name is Alexus, A-L-E-X-U-S.
Speaker 2:  	This is a picture of my wife and I out for a day on Easter Sunday when we're about twelve years old.  And she is four foot eleven [inches], and as you can see in the photo, she's taller than I am in that photo, yeah.
Speaker 1:  	This is a picture of the family and the side of our home in Madison, Wisconsin, when my--the kids look like they're, oh, my daughter's about probably three or four--she's thirty-seven now--on there, so that's a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Describe who's in that picture (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) That's my son, Christopher [Christopher Davis]; my wife, Elaine [Elaine Davis]; that's me with hair; and my daughter, Whitney [Whitney Davis].
Speaker 2:  	This my son, Christopher, with his high top fade look, and I said that's in high school, you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he's forty now, so that'd be twenty or so years ago.
Speaker 1:  	This is a picture of the family on vacation in Door County, which is Wisconsin's equivalent of Cape Cod [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2:  	Another baby picture of now sixteen year old, you know.  She looks a little differently than that now.  And you might want to put that on here, yeah, this--she looks radically different.
Speaker 1:  	That's a picture of me with two university presidents, Alban- one from--on the far, my far right here is Ev Freeman [Everette Freeman] from Albany State [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right there?
Speaker 1:  	Right, that's Ev Freeman.  The other fellow is the local technical college in--and the shorter fellow is our two year college president.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here's what my sixteen year old looks like today.  Quite a bit different than the baby pictures.
Speaker 2:  	That's her today, and that's her again a long time ago, when she's a baby.
Speaker 1:  	That's my Ford Motor Company photo, and so that would be prior to 1973, again, when I hair.
Speaker 2:  	This is my son's, I believe, graduating class at Wayland Academy [Beaver Damn, Wisconsin], yeah.
Speaker 1: And which one is your son?
Speaker 2:  	Well, he is the only African American in there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2:  	That's a poster that is on a, also in the front of a card that's sent out by Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] urging people to read.  And I'm reading a book by Stephen Hawking ['A Brief History of Time'] and reading about black holes at that point.
Speaker 1:  	This is a picture of my wife and I with a fake background.  We went to a, a formal about a year or so ago.  I'd say this is a 2000 and--probably 2011 photo.
Speaker 2:  	A picture of my granddaughter and I at a Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] game in Philips Arena [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1:  	That's a picture of me at a graduation ceremony.  The man in red is Gary McGaha.  He's the president of Atlanta Metropolitan College [Atlanta Metropolitan State College, Atlanta, Georgia].  The other fellow is Louis Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan], the former health and human services secretary.  And that's me in the middle with my Mr. T starter set on.
Speaker 2:  	I am a member of the Carter Center Board of Councilors, and that's me and President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2:  	That's my daughter's high school graduation photo.  She's now thirty-seven.
Speaker 1:  	And my son's high school graduation photo.  He's now forty.
Speaker 2:  	And that is me at the Chancellor's Cup golf outing [Chancellor's Fall Classic Charity Cup Golf Tournament], an outing once a year for all of the colleges and universities within the system.
Speaker 1:  	Last one is just the picture of the wife and the kids when they were very young.
