Story_ID: 238220
Speaker 1: Okay sir, could you tell us about this first photograph?
Speaker 2: That was taken on April 1st, 1983, which was my last day as the parks commissioner of New York City [New York, New York].  And it was taken at the Central Park Zoo, right in front of the Arsenal building, in back of the Arsenal building, which is the building behind, which was built before Central Park [New York, New York] was built.  It was an arsenal and then it was the first home of the American Museum of Natural History [New York, New York].  And we're all facing a sea lion pool, which you cannot see.  But these were all the people in the parks department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] I worked with for five years.  Actually, I fired a lot of people and I brought in a lot of people.  So they weren't all there for five and a half years, but it was one of the most exhilarating experiences in my life.  We--when I got there in 1978, the city's parks were disastrous.  When I left they were changing.  And everybody knew they were changing.  And I loved the group of people.
Speaker 1: Where, where are you?  Where are you on the picture?
Speaker 2: How can you miss me?  I'm the guy in the white pants and the white sweater (laughter); you're kidding me, the cool guy on the left (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well these, well these are two of my most wonderful days of my life.  That's the day of my wedding.  That's my wife [HistoryMaker Peggy Cooper Davis] being kissed by an aunt.  I'm standing there in front of a cousin and a whatever.  And to my left is my father [W. Allison Davis] looking on by the--we were married August 1968.  My mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] had been dead for two years and I was terribly sorry she was not there, but she was there in spirit.  We were married at New Canaan, Connecticut because we couldn't afford to get married any place in New York.  So a friend said, "You could use my mother's backyard."  And my--his mother said, "Well, you can use the backyard, but you can't use the house."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.  At our recessional we could, we couldn't afford anything.  Well, we-Peggy's parents wanted us to get married in Dayton [Ohio], but we didn't know anybody in Dayton.  We didn't want to get married in Dayton.  So the processional was a guy we hired to play a guitar as we marched down the aisle, which was essentially a lawn under a tree and the recessional was Aretha Franklin singing, 'Think.'
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: She wasn't there live.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was put on by some cad from New York City, from Chicago [Illinois] named Alton Lawson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting, this is a series of pictures that are very important to me.  The, the parks department picture is important to me because it represents two or three of the most, a number of the most important things I have done publicly in my life.
Speaker 2: This picture is the day in 1982 when I received a honorary degree from Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts].  To my left is my wife, Peggy Cooper Davis, lower down is my daughter, Elizabeth Cooper Davis, behind her is my father, Allison, W. Allison Davis and next to him is his brother, John A. Davis.  All the men went to Williams.  My father graduated in 19, in 1924 and he was summa, and valedictorian.  And he was very bitter about Williams for many, many years because they wouldn't hire him to be an English professor, an English teacher.  To his left is my Uncle John, who graduated in 1933.  He was on the board of trustees, had a very different experience.  They both went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C.  Everything leads back to Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: This is the day--my father's bitterness about Williams, and that was--even when I went there he wouldn't come because of its history.  He knew--but he wasn't that much of a socialite at Williams--but Williams at the time, gave free rides to the top students from Dunbar High School, so that's how he got there.  They paid for everything.  That's how his brother got there.  They paid for everything.  But the first time I saw Williams we were driving back from Cambridge [Massachusetts] in the summer of 1957.  I was fifteen, sixteen years old.  We'd been in Cambridge for the summer while he was doing research.  We drove through Williamstown [Massachusetts].  I didn't know it was Williamstown.  When we got on the other side he said, "That was where I went to college" and kept going, he never stopped.  So, how I ended up there is a bit of a mystery, because he, he didn't want me to go there.  But this is the day, sixty years basically, after he graduated, almost sixty years when he, when the bitterness fell away, because by then he'd gotten an honorary degree from Williams and his attitude was, what took you so long?  A few--ten years later I got one and he was very proud of that.  But what really made a change in his life was we went to the reception and dinner the night before the graduation, and for the first time he was treated like a hero.  The whole faculty, the president, the trustees all came up to him and said how important he was to the history of the school, and then the next day, at graduation, I was the one getting an honorary degree, nobody's paying any attention to me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: They were all going up there--the next day, at graduation, at graduation leading the graduating class was the class marshal, and she was a black woman, a fine black woman, and my father said, "Who is that", and we said, "that is the class marshal."  And he said, "Damn, this place has changed", because it was all white men when he went there.  And the night this picture was taken, before he went back to Chicago, he said that was one of the happiest days of his life.  And he died a year later.
Speaker 2: Wow, that's lovely, that's a lovely story.
Speaker 1: Well that's me and my man Wynton Marsalis standing in front of a Jackson Pollack, which I first saw when I was in high school hanging in the front room of the parents of my best friend in high school.  I went to Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] the last two years, before that, I went to Hyde Park [High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], but my last two years I went to Francis Parker.  And my best friend's mother's name was Muriel Kallis Newman Steinberg [sic. Muriel Kallis Steinberg Newman], and she had one of the great collections of abstract expressionism, and I use to see that painting every weekend.  We'd hang out at his house.  I didn't understand it, but I saw it.  Many years later there was a, an exhibit of Jackson Pollack at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] and Wynton did the narrating for the video, the, the audio that was done.  And so, I was there the day he was doing the recording and we posed in front of this picture that came from my Chicago days.  The reason we were together is because together we and a number of other people had, were in the process of creating something called 'Jazz at Lincoln Center,' which is grown to be the largest and most comprehensive organization dedicated to the most important art form America ever created, and I love this picture.  We were all younger, but I love it because of the continuity with Chicago, where I learned about jazz from my father, who said American never created anything better than this, when Louis Armstrong was playing 'West End Blues.'  And he, he was a scholar, he'd, and he'd read everything.  He knew 'Moby Dick' and everything.  He said that's the best thing America ever produced.  So I love it because of that.  I love it because we're about to create jazz; we were in the process of creating jazz at the Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], so, one of my favorite pictures.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, that is the spring of 1967, my last year in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  The fine young lady in what is a red jumpsuit standing next to me in my Moroccan robe is my soon-to-be wife, Peggy Cooper, at the time Peggy Cooper, who was in her second year in law school.  I'm wearing my Moroccan robe because the summer before I went to Morocco and I thought the robe made me look cool, so I'm standin' there.  We're standing on the banks of the Charles [River] at a "Be-in" trying to be cool (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a companion picture.  That is an anti-war demonstration in 1967 in Central Park.  It's the two of us again and it was taken maybe a month after the other picture, and the button on my chest I still have.  It's an anti-war button, and what can you say, it was 1967.  We were demonstrating and we were coming out of school, and we were getting ready to get married, and we were young and we had, you know--then we were chased by a New York policeman on a horse later on (laughter).
Speaker 2: That day?
Speaker 1: That day.
Story_ID: 238221
Speaker 1: This is--picture, is the foundation of the Davis family, my father's side.  This is a farm in Virginia owned by my father [W. Allison Davis]--owned by my grandfather [John Abraham Davis], who is the man sitting down in the middle emulating his hero, Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.].  And to his left on what use to be called an Irish mail--they still make them, is my father at the age of about five and above him, to his left, is his mother Gabrielle, and his sister Dorothy, Uncle John [A. Davis] had not been born yet.  And the others are assorted relatives and help.  And they had--and the little picture on the right is a picture of my father right after he graduates from Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], wearing his--well he had a stern look on his face most of his life, as you can see from the picture when he was five.  He was, he was a man who lived with a lot of, well, I won't call it all anger, but he was, he, my father was the first African American to be given tenure, granted tenure at any school of higher learning in the United States, state, private, any--and to get to achieve that, and the things he achieved subsequently, he had to, had to take a lot of shit, and model himself in a certain--anyway, this is the picture of the family in maybe circa 19, I must say, '06 [1906], '07 [1907].  They had a farm, he, my, my grandfather was the son of a, of not a marriage, but a relationship between a prominent white New York [New York], Washington [D.C.] lawyer named Carlisle, James [Mandeville] Carlisle and what we think was his housekeeper, and whose, whose last name was Davis.  She had the name, taken the name of another man she'd been married to.  Her name was, oh God, it's written down.  I'll give it to you in a minute.  I can't believe I can't remember my, my great-grandmother's name [Caroline Gaskins Davis Chinn].  But it'll come to me in a minute.  In any event, he was a product of this relationship and the story in the family was that Carlisle offered to take care of him, to pay for his education and he refused to accept his help and went out on his own and made his way in the world on his own.  And in those days the Federal Civil Service was a way that a lot of black people got up in the world.  And he got up in the world to the point where he was running an office in the government printing office of about thirty white men.
Speaker 2: So this was he at his height.  And then [Thomas] Woodrow Wilson became president of the United States and he systematically fired and demoted every black person in the federal government.  But most people don't know about Woodrow Wilson, that he was a racist, and he was a systematic racist.  And so, at the peak of his career my grandfather lost his job.  They lost the farm.  One of those papers is a picture of the auction sign from the farm.  And at that point, he became essentially a menial worker in the federal government, a janitor.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a--my uncle gave us many years ago, I wanted to bring it, a little liqueur glass that craved sort of--a piece of crystal.
Speaker 2: So that's my father and I am sitting on his lap on the Midway [Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois], which is the park area in front of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and by that time he was a tenured professor at the University of Chicago.  We lived in a black neighborhood because he--we could not live in the University of Chicago housing in the white neighborhood and every day he went from a black neighborhood to the University of Chicago and the ironies are obvious.  This is the stamp, if you want to picture the stamp, whenever you want it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] holding her precious, young, two-month old son.  That, that, that's said that's the first picture ever taken of me, so, that's all I know.  So that would have been maybe September, October 1941.
Speaker 1: This is years later, not so many years; maybe I'm six or seven.  I'm sitting on the steps, not at our house actually, but the house next door on Langley Avenue on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Our address was 6129 Langley and what was interesting about that when you look back, in those days the ghetto was racial but it wasn't economic, so on our block there are everything from doctors to people on welfare, to Pullman porters, to dentists, to--although I must say my--we were a little bit unique, there weren't any professors at the University of Chicago, and part of what made it unique is, every once in a while, white people would come visit us in a black neighborhood, and that was always-- the whole neighborhood would turn out.  One of them was John Dollard who used to sit on the steps on Sunday morning and sing spirituals.  That really made the black people....
Speaker 2: That's the stamp issued in honor of my father in 1994, maybe '94 [1994], '93 [1993].  What can I say, a postage stamp, the U.S. government.  It was promoted, again, ironically, the moving force behind the stamp was the University of Chicago and Williams College.
Speaker 1: Oh, really, okay.  So when, when did this, when did this, you said come out?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], okay.
Speaker 2: There's my mother standing by our Oldsmobile 88, and in Idlewild, Michigan.  I'm going to guess it's 1951.  And the car is parked in front of our luxurious mansion, which as I recall had maybe two bedrooms and one other room (laughter).  It was a funny little house that we rented for two or three weeks every year.  My mother was a beautiful, smart woman.  And she was my father's collaborator, although she didn't get much credit until she had my brother, anyway, that's my mother.
Speaker 1: That's the day I graduated from college.  That's my Uncle John on the far left, who graduated from Williams in 1933.  That's my mother looking at me and that's my father.  I think he wore a three-piece suit every day of his life (laughter), practically.  He's wearing a three-piece suit, and that's me on the right in my robe, and that is June, late May 1963.
Speaker 2: That's just the two guys hanging out again on Langley Avenue.  What's very funny about that picture is behind us--well, on Sundays in those days you got dressed up even when you were a young man, and even if you were or weren't going to church, you got dressed up.  We were probably going to church, but behind us, on the steps behind us, is a young, a young black brother wearing a hat, he's even more dressed up than we are, he's right behind us on the steps.
Speaker 1: Well, this is interesting.  This is my mother's side of the family.  Her father was Doctor J. Bacon Stubbs.  He used "J" because the name he was given was "Jeanette", (laughter) and he didn't want to use "Jeanette", and to the right is my grandmother, [Florence] Blanche Williams Stubbs, and in the middle is my aunt, their first born, Jean.  My mother was the second born.  And he was a doctor.  This picture was probably taken in 1901, 1902.  They lived in Wilmington, Delaware and he was a doctor in Wilmington, Delaware.  A lot of his patients were Italian immigrants, but a lot, the, and the black community such as it was.  And the question I've never known the answer to was how did he become a doctor at the turn of the century.  I don't know the answer to that yet.  But anyway, they lived in Wilmington; my mother grew up in Wilmington.  We use to visit Wilmington and Washington [D.C.] every spring, because my father came from Washington.  I didn't like Washington because it was--it was the only place I'd ever run into segregation.  And my father didn't like it for other reasons, but, anyway, we'd go to Washington then we would go to Wilmington and visit my grandmother, who I knew.  I have no idea who that is.
Speaker 2: You don't?
Speaker 1: I have no idea who that is.  I mean, she is a family member, but I don't know which one.  There's a note in there about her someplace, but I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 2: But Blanche Stubbs, she, I see a note here that she was a big suffragist.
Speaker 1: Well, there, you know, this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Do you know who this is?
Speaker 1: I wish I did, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because he's the coolest person in the family.  Those are all my mother's side.  There were lots; Blanche was one of thirteen children.  So there were a lot of relatives on that side of the family.  And I didn't, you know--but Blanche, yeah, she was a suffragette and she was a leader, she was a teacher and--
Story_ID: 238222
Speaker 1: That's a picture taken when I was the parks commissioner of New York City [New York, New York], and many years later there was an, an event sort of in my honor.  They put the picture on it and I really like the picture because I've got on some cool argyle socks.  I've got on tasseled shoes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Also, the parks department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] with my daughter and a park ranger standing on the sheet metal which had just been re-sodded for the first time in thirty years, rebuilt actually.  You can see the fencing in the back, which was designed to keep people off of it, the skyline of New York.  And the ranger, well, there weren't any rangers until I got there.  We created rangers, Urban Park Rangers.  So, so it was all about the beginning of the rebuilding of New York City's park system, and the rebuilding of Central Park [New York, New York], which, well, which has been completely rebuilt.  It started right about the time that picture was taken.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my daughter.  That's Lizzie [Elizabeth] Cooper Davis, who was for ten years in the theater, then she decided it wasn't enough.  We said, "What do you mean, its not enough?  This is what you wanted to do all your life, and you've being successful."  She said, "Have you ever spent a lot of time with actors?"  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was like me.
Speaker 1: So she went back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --she went back to school; she's now getting a Ph.D. at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in anthropology and African American studies.  And she's about to have her second grandson [sic. son], which has put a little bump in her research, but she carries on.  But that's when she was--that's a headshot from her theater days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Grandson?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: How old is she?
Speaker 1: How old is she?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean your grandson.
Speaker 1: My grandson, not her grandson.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say! (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well that's the, that's the white great-grandfather.  When I was growing up and for many years not much was said about this guy, James [Mandeville] Carlisle.  In fact, nobody talked about him much at all.  And the reason nobody talked about him much at all is because his son, my grandfather,[John Abraham Davis] who I did not know, didn't talk about him at all, obviously resented him, even though he had wanted to help him.  But then a few years ago, oh maybe 2008, or so, a book came out about an attempt to liberate about seventy slaves in Washington, D.C. by some Massachusetts abolitionists who chartered a, chartered, or whatever they did, they rented a schooner to sail down the Potomac [River].  The slaves had been organized; they came down and got on the schooner.  The schooner began to sail away and immediately ran aground and the whole thing was a total disaster, this is in the mid-1850s.  And subsequently, the captain of the schooner was put on trial and he had two lawyers, one was Horace Mann and the other--well, and you always need local counsel, right?  So the other was my great-grandfather, Mr. Carlisle, who we learned for the first time from the book, was defending the abolitionists.  Now, he had a--it was fun--it was a funny, it's complicated, but the fact is, it turned out he wasn't such a bad guy after all.  And, subsequently, we learned that he'd been involved in a couple of run-away slave cases, but he did not marry the mother of my grandfather.  He probably treated them well, but all this came out in a little more detail four or five years ago.  One of my cousins' nieces found the Carlisle descendants.  We had a reunion about four years ago.  And there were many funny things about the union, not the least being that the white Carlisles (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I'm going to stop you because we're going to go over that.
Speaker 1: Well, okay, you've stopped me.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's pretty obvious what this is.  This is the president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the First Lady [Michelle Obama] from, from, from Chicago [Illinois], and we love the picture.  It was--we were very heavily involved in the first campaign and the second campaign through my brother [Allison S. Davis] who the president worked for when he got out of law school, and who told me that he was going to one day be president of the United States.  I said, "You're kidding."  But I love the picture because they posed with us under, under the picture, the portrait of [President] George Washington in the White House [Washington, D.C.] (laughter) I mean, we just love that.
Speaker 2: That was in, that was taken in November of, December of 2009, the first Christmas in the White House.
Speaker 1: And that, well, that's the front page of The New York Times, Easter--the Saturday after Good Friday in 1960.  And a group of students from Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] and Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] organized to picket the White House in support of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and the sit-ins in the South, and if you count back I am one, two, three, four, five, the fifth person in, sort of the darker skinned, taller person, that is me.  And there's a whole long story that goes with this picture, if you want it I can give it to you now, or I can give it to you later (laughter).
Speaker 2: Give it to me later.
Speaker 1: It's a very....  That's just another picture of the White House, a more informal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --a more informal picture of the White House.
Speaker 2: That's a very proud moment, that's, that is the night--Jazz at the Lincoln Center [Jazz at Lincoln Center, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York].  We started in 1989 and this is November, or this is October 2004, when we opened the Jazz at Lincoln Center facility, [Frederick P.] Rose Hall in the Times Warner Center [sic. Time Warner Center] in Columbus Circle.  The first time, not one, not two, but three different performance venues had been built specifically for jazz, it cost $200 million, and this was opening night.  And that's me on the left; on the far right is my brother.  The older woman with the purple leis around her neck is Peggy's mother [Margaret Gillespie Cooper], who at that time was ninety-two.  She died last year planning her 100th birthday party, which was going to be at Jazz at Lincoln Center.  That's Peggy in the orange.  That's Eric Reed the piano player, that's one of Allison's sons, Cullen, and that's Lizzie and that's Cullen's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Left is me, then Eric Reed, the jazz piano player with his then girlfriend, whose name I don't know, then Peggy, and Cullen Davis, Allison's son, then Peggy's mother, Margaret Gillespie Cooper, then Elizabeth Davis, my daughter and Peggy's daughter, then the wife of my, of Cullen, then my brother Allison.  That was an exciting wonderful day.
Speaker 2: This is a hell of a picture.  This is Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], the summer of 1949.  And there gathered are the, the Davis Brothers, the far left my Uncle John, on the--who was teaching at Lincoln, the far right, my father [W. Allison Davis] actually wearing a sports, a polo shirt, but with a jacket, tweed jacket with a handkerchief in the pocket (laughter)--my Uncle John, so there are the two brothers' families.  My Uncle John on the far left, his wife Mavis, next to him, his son John, standing in front, his son Smitty in his mother's arms, then my brother Allison, then my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis], then me, with my mother's arm around me, then my father.  And around us are gathered the family dogs, all Dalmatians.  The darker Dalmatian is the mother of the other two.  And one of those was Buzzy, who came to Chicago to live with us.  And our playmates that summer were [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and his cousin [J.] Max Bond [Jr.], and his sister, we were all at Lincoln.  Julian Bond's father was the president of Lincoln then, of course, and that's the summer of 1949.
Speaker 1: Well, that's the sign auctioning off part of the property related to the farm that my grandfather [John Abraham Davis] lost because [President Thomas] Woodrow Wilson demoted and fired him from his job as a senior manager of the government printing office, to essentially a janitor.  The letter I will read to you, when you tell me I can read it.
Speaker 2: Some years ago, maybe fifteen--my uncle always joined us for Christmas Eve dinner after his wife died and his family lived elsewhere.  And he gave us this little--yes, he gave Allison one too, this little crystal liqueur glass and on it was engraved Christmas, October of, Christmas 1901.  And it was a glass my grandfather had made and this is a letter, accompanied by a letter--so when my uncle gave us, he gave us this letter, and the letter says:  "This is one of the three remaining liquor glasses that your grandfather had made for Christmas 1901, as the inscription says.  Ten months later on October 14, 1902, your father was born.  It is clear that my father expected to have a family, which he fathered with total commitment.  Dad had lost his first wife and daughter to scarlet fever.  None of us knew anything about that until this letter.  After he had been sent home from camp in the Spanish American War with typhoid fever."  That whole paragraph is packed with information none of us knew until John gave us this letter in 1997.  "In 1901 he was riding high.  He was the head of a section of twelve men in the government printing office, ten of whom were white.  And he was the biggest landowner in Prince William County in Virginia, the biggest landowner, that's the farm.  He owned two laundries and six small houses, two in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], all left by his mother [Caroline Gaskins Davis Chinn]."  The mother was a trip.  She was something else.  "They were all mortgaged and he was responsible in some measure for his brother's family as a backup, four girls and one boy.  The boy died of an accident or was murdered.  Uncle Charlie was all over the lot."  That was one of the other--part of the family.  "Woodrow Wilson got rid of all the colored civil servants of any status and the Republicans kept the policy.  That cost Pop the farm.  The government did not begin to change until 1990, until 1933, but Poppa was, Poppa died in 1928.  He drudged to an unimportant job, but held important community posts.  He saw to it that his kids got the best education.  He was always at the top of his class too, but it cost him all of his property except 933 S Street in Washington, D.C.  He did establish the Davis family and this little glass is a symbol of that.  Love, Uncle John."  So that's the beginning. Great story.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Uncle John.  This was known as the Black Cabinet to [President] Harry [S.] Truman, and I think that picture may be originally from Ebony, but it names all the people in the picture that range from [HistoryMaker] Truman [K.] Gibson [Jr.], God knows, Truman Gibson, Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] and these were all black men of considerable achievement who were sort of advisors behind the scenes to the Truman administration.  I think they're called the Black Cabinet or something like that.
Speaker 2: Well, what can I say, this is (laughter), that's my, that's the, that's, that's out of my uncle's house in New Rochelle [New York], 25 (unclear).  The day he moved with his sister, Dorothy, who was always bitching about something, and John's youngest son, Smitty, who in those days was wearing a terrible wig, he finally got rid of it (unclear) looked like a fool.  I think Vernon told him to get rid of it.  They--he was, he's a partner at Vernon's and they couldn't come, that's been for many years.
Speaker 1: That's the house, 933 S. Street in Washington, D.C. which after the farm and all the other properties were lost, where the family lived, where my father was born and raised, where he went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.].  And the amazing thing about this picture is we'd been by the house maybe ten years before it was taken and it was a drug den.  And we came back, and whatever this is, '99 [1999] and it had been--the whole block had been gentrified.  You could see a young black professional family living in the house, two kids.  I went up and knocked on the door and started telling her the history of the house.  She said, "Oh really, that's interesting."  So, anyway, that's where we grew up--where my father grew up.
Story_ID: 238223
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I am the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and I need to have you start out by stating and spelling your name including middle name, and your date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Gordon Jamison Davis.  Somebody once asked me why I use the "J" and I wrote them a long history of Jamison, where it came from and why I was very proud of it.  I won't belabor you with that right now.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us now?
Speaker 2: No, I won't because I've got to finish answering your question.  I was born in Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] on August 7, 1941, Provident Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, the black hospital in Chicago, Illinois on August 7, 1941.  And one of the things in that volume over there is the check my father [W. Allison Davis] wrote to Provident to cover the cost of my being born there.  So that's my name, that's where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: You know, you tell me (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: It's July 17 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: July 16th or 17th (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --17th (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: 17th, 19--2014.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're in New York City [New York, New York] in the offices of the law firm of Skadden Arps.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 238224
Speaker 1: And then I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions.  Can I--
Speaker 2: Sorry, okay, really short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 1: Fried chicken and watermelon (laughter). (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Don't say that unless it's true, you do not (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) my favorite food.  Yes, next?
Speaker 2: There are only five of them.  Okay, favorite color?
Speaker 1: Blue.
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Spring.
Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 1: Oak Bluffs [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: I don't know--I have one but I can't remember what it is (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: My favorite phrase or saying, I'm come back to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It will come to me eventually.
Story_ID: 238225
Speaker 1: So I want to start out, I'd like to start out asking about your mother and her name, and what you know of her family, her year of birth and what you know of her background?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Alice Elizabeth Stubbs [Davis].  And she was the second child of Doctor J. Bacon Stubbs, a physician in Wilmington, Delaware and [Florence] Blanche Williams Stubbs, who was from the Williams family of Michigan.  She, Blanche, was born in Marquette, Michigan.  She was one of fourteen kids, I think.  How she and Doctor Stubbs met, I have no idea.  I don't know how Doctor Stubbs became a doctor, but nonetheless, by the time my mother arrived in 1904, they were living in Wilmington, Delaware on Tatnall Street.  And I don't know how many black people there were in Wilmington, (laughter) how many black doctors, but not many.
Story_ID: 238226
Speaker 1: When she [Davis' mother, Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] was born, her older sister's name was Jean [Stubbs], and Jean was maybe four years younger [sic. older] and she had a younger brother, [Frederick] Douglass Stubbs, who went on to be a very, very prominent black doctor, surgeon, prominent in the sense that he was revered throughout the black medical world for all kinds of reasons.  He was a great--he was a terrific guy.  I remember him to this day.  And he died of a heart something, on a train going to New York at the age of forty-six.  It was one of the great traumas of the life of my mother and the Stubbs family.  He was a god.  I mean he was liked; he was the most handsome guy you've ever seen.  He was brilliant.  He was engaging.  He was--had a certain energy about him, and he was the first doctor to be head of this thing and the first to do this, and the first to do this, and so and so forth.  He went to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts], and then he died.  He married a woman named Marion Thomas, who came from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], who was the most beautiful black woman in American as far as I could tell at the time.  She founded Jack and Jill [of America, Incorporated], one of the great stains of the family name.  Marion was the founder (laughter); stain because Allison [S. Davis] and I got kicked out of Jack and Jill!  So that's you know, complicated.  But in any event Marion was a concert pianist, she was beautiful.  So the beautiful and the handsome doctor, Douglass, Frederick Douglass Stubbs and Marion got married.  They had two daughters and then he died of this massive heart thing.  Anyway, I remember so vividly because I came home from school and maybe I was in second grade or third grade, and my mother was in tears and the house had, was filling up with people, and I had no acquaintance with death and I didn't know what the rituals of death were and certainly not the rituals of sudden, unexpected death.  But of course, what happens in any community, but in this black community, people come over and they bring food and they embrace the person whose loss it is and my mother--I never-- but--this, Douglass' death caused a terrible sadness to affect her and her family and to some degree to this day, even, to the next generation.
Story_ID: 238227
Speaker 1: But anyway, that's where she [Davis' mother, Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] was.  That's where she grew up and somehow she ended up going to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts].  I don't know how that happened (laughter) I'm not quite sure.  Her sister [Jean Stubbs], her oldest sister didn't, she went and got married.  But, somewhere in 19, say '22 [1922], or '23 [1923], my mother picked up and went to [Mount] Holyoke College and we have the yearbook and some very funny stuff about her.  She was absolutely beautiful, light skinned, but she was not hiding her race, I'm sure everybody at Holyoke knew she was an African American woman, and, so that's who my mother was and where she was from.  Then she met my father [W. Allison Davis] and they got married and, excuse me while I check the date.  I still have to give you the name of my grandmother [Florence Blanche Williams Stubbs].  The next time we break I want to tell me to go get it--my great-grandmother, I mean.  My mother and father were married June 23, 1929.  My father was about to leave Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] where he'd been after not getting a job at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  It's not entirely clear how my mother and father met.  My father was a great tennis player.  And it may be they met at some of the colored tennis matches (laughter), but I'm not entirely sure.  But in any event, they would have been the most handsome couple in the world, I have no doubt, and they met and they got married.  I don't know much about that except they, their honeymoon was at Harpers Ferry [West Virginia] and I always would say, "Why would you have a honeymoon (laughter) in Harpers Ferry?"  And the answer was, "We didn't have any money, so we went someplace nice that was close that we could get to by car."  So then my mother became my father's principal assistant in his groundbreaking research that he conducted in the '30s [1930s].  And if you want me to go on I'll go on, or I'll stop there.
Speaker 2: Just a question, did your mother talk about growing up?  Did she talk at--did she share any stories about (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: You know I'm sure she did, but because we went to Wilmington [Delaware] every year almost when we were growing up.  My, my grandmother died in 1952, her mother died in 1952.  And I know--maybe not every year, but we went back--once a year we'd come east and go to Washington [D.C.], so I'm sure she talked about it, but I don't have any memory of it.
Speaker 2: Do you--did she talk at all about attending Mount Holyoke?  Did she share any stories about that experience?  Usually there were two, two spots for black, black people.
Speaker 1: She didn't.
Story_ID: 238228
Speaker 1: The great irony is that my father [W. Allison Davis] went to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  They didn't know each other.  They didn't--I don't know if they overlapped, although they were two years apart in age, so they might have overlapped.  By the time I got to Williams every black student in any of those schools, we all knew each other, there weren't that many.  I knew who was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I knew who was at [Mount] Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], I knew who was at Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts], and so.  So I assume they may have known of each other, maybe even known each other, but I don't have any details about it, don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would be sort of interesting.  Maybe people didn't know each other though, because there were so few of them, maybe they didn't.
Speaker 1: It's hard to believe that they didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They didn't at all.
Speaker 1: --because when I came east to go to Williams, within six weeks or eight weeks, I knew who all the black students were in all the nearby schools.  We may not have known each other, but I knew so and so was at so and so, and so and so was at Bennington [College, Bennington, Vermont] and I knew three or four of the black students at Harvard.  You know it was a small universe.  A very--when I got to Williams in 1959, there were fewer black students when my father was there and graduated in 1924.
Speaker 2: Is that, now that's (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: That is the absolute truth.  My father--there were this whole slew of black students who came from [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D. C.] and related schools.  I'm not saying there were 20 or 30, but there were five or six when he was there.  When I was there, there were three; myself, my cousin John [Davis], who was the son of my father's brother [John A. Davis] who also went to Williams, and a guy name Bill Boyd [William M. Boyd, III], who been president of his class at Deerfield [Academy, Deerfield, Massachusetts].  We were the three black students.
Story_ID: 238229
Speaker 1: Which led to some funny stuff.  I mean my freshmen year I had two roommates.  One day I found a letter in the drawer of one of them, asking them if they minded rooming with a Negro.  I noticed at that point that both Bill Boyd [William M. Boyd, III] and my cousin [John Davis] did not have roommates, which led me to believe my roommates, the only two white people in the freshmen class who agreed to room with a Negro (laughter).  That's sort of a joke, but I marched over to the dean of freshmen's office and said, "This letter was in--you asked them if they would room with me?"  (Sound), I said, "Well you didn't ask me if I wanted to room with these two assholes."  He didn't like that (laughter).  He said, "Young man, watch your mouth."  I said, I said well (sound).
Speaker 2: So you did actually say that?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 238230
Speaker 1: So let me, let, let's go back (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I, you know, look, I came from Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I came from Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I came from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I came from Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I came from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] was like going to the moon.  It was like going (laughter) and so, but I, the one thing I learned in all that growing up in Chicago stuff was honor my father and mother.  You asked my favorite expression it was something my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] said and my father [W. Allison Davis] said, "Black people are just as good as white people, actually, they're a little better", (laughter) so that is the spirit which we grew up with.  Better in the sense of course, that we hadn't bought into a racist system to oppress millions and millions of people, and abided by its rules, so that, that's, what that meant, really is that they didn't really mean it in the sense that a black person....  One of the great things about growing--one of the funny things about growing up on Langley is my father and mother's associations with the University of Chicago meant that every once in a while white people would come to visit us in the black neighborhood, and this was unheard of.  The only white people in a black neighborhood were the guys selling insurance, a dollar a month, or whatever it was, the firemen, you know, the cop, that was about it for white people.  But--John Dollard, one of the great scholars who worked for my father was--would come by and visit. He'd sit on the front steps singing old spirituals on Sunday mornings, the black people in the neighborhood would say, "What the hell"....  One of the great days it wasn't a white person; it was Ralph Bunche who came by one day.  And this was shortly after he'd won the Noble [Peace] Prize.  The whole neighborhood came out to see Ralph Bunche, who was, you know, Jackie Robinson, Ralph Bunche, Joe Louis, that's about it, right?  And Ralph Bunche appeared at our, visited our house and people came out on the block, because he and my mother and my father had studied together when they were, they'd, they'd been in Paris [France] and London [England] around the same time as students.  When Ralph Bunche and his wife [Ruth Harris Bunch] were going off to West Africa to study the colonial system and my father was studying at the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] with [Bronislaw] Malinowski and then going to the University of Berlin [Berlin, Germany] where he was studying basic anthropology and anthropological techniques, and they all knew each other.  So, when I (laughter), I was a graduate student at Columbia [University, New York, New York] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your father's background.
Speaker 2: My parents (unclear), Liddie was my mother's nickname and Allison and the Bunches got together in France for Christmas and they went off in their various worlds to study various things.  Fast forward to 1964, and I'm a graduate student at Columbia University, I haven't the faintest idea what to do with my life and my Uncle John [A. Davis] and my father suggest, "Well why don't you go talk to Ralph."  So I went to see Ralph Bunche at the delegates' lounge at the UN [United Nations], and he listened to me and after a while he said, "Well, you don't know what you want to do, so why don't you go to law school?"  So that's what I did (laughter).  I asked--of course, Ralph Bunche had started as an academic and a scholar and became a great international civil servant, essentially.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 238231
Speaker 1: Anyway--what do you want to ask me next about my father [W. Allison Davis]?
Speaker 2: So I want to ask you about your father's side of the--your father, give his name and his year of birth.
Speaker 1: I need that--wait a minute, don't, don't....
Speaker 2: Well, here, I can tell you who his (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No my, it's my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --do you have my notes there.  Have you gotten my thing I filled out?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Just hand that to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He, he was born in 190... (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, I know he was born.  I'm so upset not remembering his mother's name, his grandmother's name, which was (pause) oh, it's not on here.  I can't believe I didn't put it on here.  Oh, the question is the origin of the Davis name.  Come on man (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's probably there.
Speaker 1: --Caroline [Gaskins Davis Chinn].  My father, my father was born in Washington, D.C. in 1902 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Go on.
Speaker 1: --in 1902.  He was the son of Gabrielle Beal Davis and John Abraham Davis.  Not much, I don't know much about Gabrielle's background, but John Abraham's background we know a great deal about now.  My grandfather, my father's father was the son of a black woman and a white man [James Mandeville Carlisle] in Washington, D.C.  The white man was a very prominent lawyer, mostly international law, representing foreign countries and things, but not entirely.  And the woman who was my father's, father's mother was a housekeeper, whatever.  It was an interesting relationship because while they were together for three or four years as best we can tell, they had only one child.  She lived there and you have a sense of a genuine relationship between them, but that's just a sense.  The reality is that when my father's father was asked if the subject of his father ever came up he said, according to a memo, a recollection with my mom [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis], "He means nothing to me."  So that is what my father's father said about his father, "He means nothing to me", even though the story was that James Mandeville Carlisle had offered to pay for my grandfather's education and so on and so forth.  But the story is my grandfather walked out, made his way in the world and never spoke much about, or saw James Mandeville Carlisle again.  It's a little bit of speculation.  Only recently did we, did we discover that Mr. Mandeville--Mr. Carlisle had some good points, including representing some, and being involved in some abolitionist trials.  And, so he wasn't some terrible slave owning, you know, whatever, whatever.  The Davis name came, not from him, but from my great-grandmother, who at some point was married to somebody named Davis.
Story_ID: 238232
Speaker 1: In any event, my father's father [John Abraham Davis] turned out to be quite a man.  He went into the Federal Civil Service, rose to the point which many of the pictures show, running an office with twenty or thirty white men working for him, and this is 1902, '03 [1903], '04 [1904], had lots of property, had this wonderful farm in Virginia that he was very proud of.  He emulated Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.].  He grew a Roosevelt type mustache.  He wore his hat the way Roosevelt wore his hat.  And then [President] Woodrow Wilson became president and the whole world fell apart.  Wilson was a racist.  He demoted my grandfather to menial positions--then what's, you know, it's fascinating about how Google and all this has changed the world.  A friend of ours, Danny Parker, who you should do, by the way, a federal judge, Barrington Parker, Jr., whose father [Barrington D. Parker] was a federal judge in Washington [D.C.], and, and Barrington Parker, Jr. is now on the Federal Court of Appeals in New York, the Second Circuit [United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] and a fascinating subject to do.  In any event, he called me one day to say that a friend of his, he had a nephew--Danny has a nephew who teaches at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and his nephew called him and told him that he should call me to tell him that one of his colleagues who had just finished the book ['Racism in the Nation's Service: Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow Wilson's America,' Eric S. Yellin], a colleague who had been at Yale was now a professor at the University of Richmond, [Richmond, Virginia] on the subject of the blacks in the Civil Service in Federal Civil Service in Washington and what happened to them when Wilson became president.  So I got the book and true enough there are five citations to my--he's not a big figure, but he's an example, and so I called the guy up.  I said, "Well, how did you get this information?"  He said, "I got his personnel file."  I said, "Whose per....," he said, "I have your grandfather's --your great-grandfather's [sic.] personnel file."  So we now have a file that lists-that records in minute detail, every job he held, what his pay grade was, when he held it, letters that were involved in his demotion.  They created a phony record saying he was too slow.  I mean, it was an unbelievable set of rec... you know, the--and how he dredged on, my uncle's [John A. Davis] letter said, so he, he came to life in a way he'd never come to life because we never knew him and he died at a fairly early age and there was his entire personal history including a letter from my grandmother [Gabrielle Beal Davis] asking how to get the death benefits and so on and so forth.  It's a terribly sad story, but the way we found this guy was in a book about him.  We never, in any event--so he was a great man and then he was broken.
Speaker 2: But he also, but you had said earlier, he owned property.  He--can you talk about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, he owned this wonderful farm in Virginia.  He owned all kinds of other pieces of property and when Woodrow Wilson demoted him and all these other black folks, he lost all the properties, except for one, the one on S Street [Washington, D. C.] where the family grew up and he kept that one, but the others had to be auctioned off, and he was demoted to being a janitor, but my father [W. Allison Davis] and uncle always said he was involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all kinds of civic organizations, so even though he had lost his professional status, he continued to maintain the, maintain a full kind of civic life, but at that point he begins to recede and the stories about the family and my grandmother begins to become more and more and more prominent.
Story_ID: 238233
Speaker 1: Indeed, she [Davis' paternal grandmother, Gabrielle Beal Davis] became the bulwark of the family and when my father [W. Allison Davis] graduated from Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] it was his mother who came to his graduation, not his father [John Abraham Davis].  And he would tell how beautiful his mother was and how all the, the president and all the trustees wanted to meet his mother and stuff like that.  So my father --two books came, well essentially these three books all came out within a period of about four or five years.  The one about the escape of the Pearl ['Escape on the Pearl: The Heroic Bid for Freedom on the Underground Railroad,' Mary Kay Ricks], the abolitionists' attempt to liberate slaves in Washington, [D.C.] was the first time we had a little more texture about the white great-grandfather, Mr. James Mandeville Carlisle.  And then another book ['Racism in the Nation's Civil Service: Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow Wilson's America,' Eric S. Yellin] comes out about blacks in the [Federal] Civil Service and what happened when, as a route of mobility and what happened when [Thomas] Woodrow Wilson became president.  And then there's a third book ['First Class: The Legacy of Dunbar, America's First Black Public High School'] about [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.], which just came out last year, it was written by a young black woman [Alison Stewart] who was a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] reporter, I can't remember her name, it's a terrific book about Dunbar High School and the incredible role it played in the black intelligentsia of this country.  So my father went to Dunbar High School, his brother [John A. Davis] went to Dunbar High School.  Their sister [Dorothy Davis] went to Dunbar High School and in those days you had black people with Ph.Ds. teaching high school.  And they created this sort of Underground Railroad of top students going to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and Williams.  And so my father went off to Williams and my uncle went off to Williams.  And--Sterling Brown, my father's best friend in high school, went off to Williams.  And it's just very (unclear) she's got it all in her book, the Dunbar book is terrific and I can't remember the name of it.  But these three books all came out in the last four or five years, and it's fascinating.
Story_ID: 238234
Speaker 1: In any event, he [Davis' father, W. Allison Davis] went off to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], not much of a social life.  He didn't go there for a social life, but he never--(unclear) Williams--many years of bitterness and hatred, not hatred, bitterness and anger about Williams in my father's life, which eventually were all resolved in 1982, when I got an honorary degree, but after he died and Williams then became a moving force (unclear) in his name.  Williams created a lecture--they originally wanted to name a house after him, a black students' house.  And I went up and visited the black student house and they're all sitting around looking at TV, and not doing anything.  I said, "This is not what..." and they didn't--and white people couldn't go in the house.  I said, "This is not what my father was about."  I said (laughter), "These colored boys sitting around doing nothing, but talking about how angry they are, no, that's not my father."  So Williams created a lecture, the Allison Davis Lecture [W. Allison Davis and John A. Davis '33 Lecture] and every year a scholar is invited to Williams to spend a day or two on the campus and to give this lecture, last year it was Danielle Allen from, who is a remarkable person, and the year before that--it's really terrific people.  And then after my uncle died it became the Davis Lecture, named after both my father and his brother [John A. Davis].  It's a wonderful experience, and then as more and more of this history came out, Williams last year named a complex of buildings and all their diversity programs that fall under that diversity, whatever they call it, the Davis Center, after my uncle and my father.  So they have a lecture named after my, my father, they have a whole center of programs and then they even went one step further, there is something called a Mellon Fellowship, which funds, which is created to create more candidates, diverse candidates seeking graduate degrees.  And I think Skip [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip"] Gates [Jr.] had a Mellon--I mean it gets quite important in creating people, black people went on to higher education.  Williams had ten Mellon fellowships and they decided to create a Williams research fellowship, which they have now named after my father.  So it's now called the Allison, W. Allison Davis Research Fellowship of which there are ten every year and they're Hispanic, and they're Arabic, I mean they're all kinds of wonderful young people.  So Williams has become the place that created this bitterness in my father and the place he didn't want me to go to school, and the place that sixty years later, partly through my uncle's efforts, when he was on the board of Williams by then, he reconciled with, not only reconciled with, but became embraced after his death, embraced him in ways that were astounding.
Story_ID: 238235
Speaker 1: How could your, your, your father had how many siblings?  Was, was it he and his brother and who else?
Speaker 2: Allison, W. Allison Davis was the oldest, his name was William Allison Davis.  He was named after a senator from Iowa.  Why was he named after a senator from Iowa?  Because when you go to the personnel files of his father [John Abraham Davis], the guy in the--who was a civil servant, who Wilson ruined, it's a letter of recommendation from Senator William Allison that got him his first promotion in the federal government.  So that is why my father was named William Allison, makes sense.  In any event, he was the oldest, 1902, his sister was born, Dorothy [Davis], was born I think, 1906, and John [A. Davis] was born in 1912.  So the sis, the sister went to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], I mean these, these Negroes went to some good schools. (Laughter)  They went where they got, everything was paid for basically.  My father-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And then his--so then he goes to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --he goes to Williams and graduates in '24 [1924]; his brother goes to Williams, graduates in '33 [1933].
Speaker 1: And then his sister goes to Wellesley.
Speaker 2: His sister goes to Wellesley.  His brother had a much better experience at Williams, or didn't leave with the same bitterness.  His brother ended up on the board at Williams.  And my father, as I said, you know, he was bitter until a year before he died when it all came together.
Story_ID: 238236
Speaker 1: But you--we understand that though.  I mean it was really probably, I mean he had done, he had done incredible, I mean unbelievable (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well that's the thing, you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --part of the reason he [Davis' father, W. Allison Davis] was bitter about Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] was they never--it wasn't just the original incident, which in retrospect, I don't know why he was so bitter.  There weren't any white colleges hiring black people to teach anything.  It didn't make a difference what their grades were, so his expectation because he was the smartest person ever to go to Williams and had the best record of anybody ever to go to Williams, that somehow Williams was going to give him a job, I mean where was his head, he was in the clouds.  No black people were getting jobs like that.  So off he goes to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] (unclear) but anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But, can, can you--did he ever amongst his, separate and apart from his bitterness, did he ever share any stories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --of, can, can you tell us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, first of all he was the darling of the humanities and English departments at Williams.  He was so smart.  They didn't give a shit what color he was.  And when you see his transcript, you understand it.  So, I'll tell you two stories about his time at Williams.  One that he told, and another we learned about from a letter recently.  The course at Williams in those days, if you're black you're not going to belong in a fraternity.  You're not going to live with the white boys.  You're not going to, you know--but he understood, they all understood that, that's wasn't what made him angry, that it was a, you know, socially he couldn't be on any athletic teams, okay.  So a story he loved to tell, the town, nearest town of any size was North Adams [Massachusetts], which is now where Mass MoCA [Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, North Adams, Massachusetts] is.  It's an old New England mill town, but at that time it was buzzing.  It was humming and it was also a rail center.  A lot of the railroad lines went through North Adams to the, to the upper northeast, and so as a result of the railroads there were a lot of Pullman porters, so the social life for my father and the black guys at Williams is they go to North Adams to the Pullman porter parties (laughter).  The Pullman porters had some parties.  And the story he loved to tell was, I think it was [J.] Saunders Redding, who was at Williams also, or maybe it was Sterling Brown.  In the dead of winter there's a Pullman porter party and the snow was coming down, and the door opens and there is either Sterling Brown or Saunders Redding, I can't remember which, wearing a golf outfit, knickers and the jacket and the whole thing, because it's the only thing he could afford.  He had some secondhand golf suit (laughter) he was wearing.  And it's a blizzard outside!  And his line is, "Just of the links, just off the links."  My father loved to tell that story, about this golf outfit, "Just off the links."  The other story is a more poignant and more painful and more testimony to the courage of my father that became so evident when he and my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] were doing the research in Mississippi, real courage.  This story is not about physical courage, it's just about a certain kind of fortitude and confidence that is hard to imagine.  When my father was corresponding with the president of Williams after getting straight A's and getting a M.A. in English at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 238237
Speaker 1: And the word comes back, "Well, we do have an opening, but you know, we can't--there are too many southern students here and it just wouldn't work.  But I will write a letter of recommendation to the president of Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] who's a good friend.  And in the letter of recommendation, the president of Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] writes the president of Hampton about my father's [W. Allison Davis] character.  And he says that there was an episode recently, when he was a senior or a junior that is, testifies to his wonderful character.  And this is the story that he wrote in the letter.  My father worked in one of the fraternities as a waiter, dishwasher, waiter, serving the fraternity boys and on this particular night the literary club, which was a big deal, was having its meeting at the fraternity where he was a waiter.  And the paper being delivered that night at the literary club was one my father had written, was to be delivered by my father.  And the president described my father waiting on tables and then taking off his waiter's outfit, turning around in his Williams outfit and reading this paper to the literary club in the same fraternity.  As a, as an indication of his, his good qualities, that he was a gentleman throughout, he did you know--of course you--this is a story from 1923, but you could imagine what it was like to be the smartest guy in the world and to have this demeaning experience, going from being a waiter and then turning around and delivering a paper.  But this is the story he writes to recommend him just showing how stable he was to Hampton.  And when we, we found it when Williams created the Davis Center two years ago.  They went back in their files and all their, you know, archives and they found all this stuff about my father and about John [A. Davis] that we didn't know about.  And this letter was one of them.  And we just were, we were--it was breathtaking to us.  In any event, my father went up to Hampton, married my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis], as an English professor at Hampton, his field was English.  But you can see in the materials he submitted to The Crisis that the boys began to publish, that increasingly his interest in being a novelist and a poet and an essayist was fading and his interest in social change and the structure of society was emerging.  And in fact, we understand from an article written by St. Clair Drake, who he, my father discovered essentially at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], as one of putting it, Drake said it that way, that my father began to be the person the students who wanted to--who were fermenting trouble against the administration, went to for guidance and he may have been asked to leave Hampton, but it didn't make any difference because when my father left Hampton, he went back to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and got an M.A. in anthropology.  So, he came, he wanted to be a poet, an essayist, and when he left he went and got an M.A. in anthropology at Harvard, then he went to London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], then he went to the University of Berlin [Berlin, Germany], then he came back and hooked up with the group of scholars based at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] who were doing the first studies of the social class and caste structure of the United States of America and went off to the South with my mother and the courage part comes in, they did a book called 'Deep South[: A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class,' Allison Davis, Burleigh Gardner, and Mary B. Gardner] two couples, a white couple and a black couple in Natchez, Mississippi in the '30s [1930s], Natchez, Mississippi in the '30s [1930s].  The black couple my parents, lived in the black community and told everybody they were working on some research about the black church and the white couple were Gardners living in the white community, I don't know what they told the white people, but in fact, they were writing a book that was dissecting the social, economic, political and caste structure of Mississippi.  And they literally had to meet in the cornfields at night, the cotton fields at night to exchange notes, I mean literally.  It was like being in the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] in Russia [Soviet Union] in the Cold War, I mean I can't imagine what it was, I mean this is the fiftieth anniversary of the voting rights legislation [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and all this stuff is coming back, and my son-in-law's father is Bob [Robert Parris] Moses, who of course you have to do if you haven't done (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We haven't done him, but we want to do him.
Speaker 1: --and Bob was the architect of Freedom Summer and, so, and of course, the summer of '64 [1964] begins with the killing of [James] Chaney, [Andrew] Goodman and [Michael] Schwerner.  Well this is--my parents were down there in 1930 being spies, I mean, it was just, when you think about it, it's just hard to imagine what kind of courage it took to run that kind of, because clearly if they had discovered what they were doing God knows what would have happened, but, so they were down in the South.  They were going between Tuskegee and Natchez and Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 238238
Speaker 1: In fact, we were down in New Orleans [Louisiana] this spring and I said let's go see Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], because my father [W. Allison Davis] was a professor at Dillard.  That was his base when he was doing all of this work.  We'd never seen Dillard.  Dillard was terribly hurt by [Hurricane] Katrina.  It's all rebuilt, but they lost about a half of their student body and never got it back, because they went off to other schools, and, so we went to see Dillard, which was very moving because it was the base.  It's also where my father met the woman who became my stepmother after my father [sic.] died, Lois Mason.  She was from New Orleans.  Her husband [Clarence E. Mason, Jr.] became head of the Carver Institute at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and my parents (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You said Lois Mason became what after your (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: Lois Mason, my stepmother, after my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] died my father married a woman named Lois Mason.  They had, my father and mother first met Lois when they were in New Orleans in the '30s [1930s] at Dillard.  Lois' husband was a guy named Clarence Mason, who became head of the Carver Institute at Tuskegee.  It's, you know, too much information.  But in any event, her husband died and a year later my mother died and six months later they got married, which was a great shock to me (laughter), but obviously they liked each other for a long time, and really just didn't meet, shit!  So who knows what the hell was going on there.  I never forgotten, this was a story you don't tell on tape, but I'm going to tell it anyway.  We loved Lois, my brother [John A. Davis] and I loved, she was just wonderful.  She's younger than my father, my father died in '83 [1983] Lois lived at least another ten years and moved back to Tuskegee.  And one day she's now in the nineties, not much more to go, I said to Lois, I said--living at her house at 1905 Montgomery Avenue, in the middle of Tuskegee, I said, "How did you meet my father?"  "Oh", she said, "I'll never forget it.  It was the day I got married to Clarence."  (Laughter).  I said, "Beg your pardon?"  She said, "I was coming out of the church after my wedding with Clarence and walking down the steps and over to the left I saw this guy in a panama hat and a white suit, and I thought he was the most handsome man I'd ever seen in my entire life.  And that was your father."  (Laughter).  The day she was getting married to Clarence.  That's--she said, "I'll never forget, that is when I first saw your father."  (Laughter).  I said (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is an adorable story. That is adorable.
Speaker 1: --I said, "God bless you, Lois."  (Laughter).  I said, "Damn!"  In any event, so the thing about Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] was, is that my father's bitterness metastasized over the years and part of the reason is because the faculty at Williams was a liberal arts faculty and never really had anybody there who understood his achievement.  They didn't understand the social sciences.  They didn't know of his prominence in the social sciences and it wasn't for a while before they got people there who understood who W. Allison Davis was.  And so when they gave him an honorary degree in like 1979, or 1972, or whenever the hell it was, the same year that Sterling Brown got an honorary degree, my father was angry the entire weekend because his attitude was, what took you so long?  So instead of it making him feel better about Williams, it made him feel even more angry about Williams because it took so goddamn long to understand.
Story_ID: 238239
Speaker 1: Also, being with Sterling [Brown] was a problem because by then he and Sterling had had a falling out.  They had been best of friends at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], best of friends at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  Sterling became a little unstable.  I think he had alcohol problems, whatever it was, they were (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I see, because Sterling is a well-known, you know, person in the literary world.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  He was one of the great black poets.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, but he was another, you know, Dunbar with my father, they were both going to be great poets.  Sterling went on to be a poet; my father went on to be a social (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Were they the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes!
Speaker 2: --years, same year they went.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was the same year, but they were there at the same time, maybe a year apart, because they were best friends in high school at Dunbar.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And I--he was one of the people we used to go and when we were in Washington [D.C.] as young kids, we'd see, Sterling and Daisy [Turnbull Brown].  But there was some falling out at some point and I don't quite know what it was about.
Story_ID: 238240
Speaker 1: Now [HistoryMaker] Gordon [J. Davis], what, what--describe your father [W. Allison Davis], his personality.  What, what was he like?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a very complicated question because children never see their parents through the eyes that are objective, but my father, he was a man of extraordinary originality and brilliance, who chartered a scholarly field of study that nobody understood at all.  I mean, his second book was 'Children of Bondage[: The Personality Development of Negro Youth in the Urban South,' Allison Davis and John Dollard].  'Children of Bondage' was a social psychological study he did with John Dollard about twenty poor black kids in New Orleans [Louisiana].  My mother, [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] again, was a research assistant.  Nobody had ever done anything like that.  Nobody gave a shit about the social psychological issues involving young black kids.  And they did a book called, appropriately, 'Children of Bondage.'  So, he had a way of thinking that was way outside the box for a social scientist.  And the thing I most remember growing up about other academics saying about him was that he was the most wonderful writer.  He said, "He, your father can write like nobody else.  He doesn't write like a social scientist.  He writes like a, a great literary figure."  So here comes the--and you read his books you can see it come through.  He was a very reserved person.  He appeared to be very reserved.  And if you look at the pictures, picture after picture, after picture he never smiles.  Rarely is there a picture of him smiling.  This one book was, flap from his last book where there's a picture taken when he was about eighty where he's smiling.  And there's a, a nice smile at that picture at Williams [college, Williamstown, Massachusetts] when I got that honorary degree.  But right from the time he was a five year-old sitting under an Irish male, you can see he has a sort of dour expression on his face.  He somehow knew from early on that, he, to do what he wanted to do in the world, he would have to compromise things in a way that--so he always was dressed with great--he was always distinguished.  He never looked like some guy from the corner.  He never dressed down.  He was always at least as well dressed if not better dressed than anybody in the room.  And part of that was playing the game.  He wasn't going to have anybody degrade his work by, you know--all his books are co-authored.  He's always the senior author, but they're always co-authored with a white author, because he knew, at least in his mind, if it was just him, you'd hear (a) it wouldn't get distributed or whatever, or (b) it would be diminished because it was by a black.  When he did it with a--the great irony of that came to me when Daniel [Patrick] Moynihan, who before he was a senator and before he was this, was an alleged scholar although not a great one, but a very boisterous one, he wrote an article in Commentary magazine, before it became a totally Jewish-oriented magazine, about the great black social scientists, because he knew of them and thought they should be talked about.  This Daniel Pat--he left out at my father.  So I wrote him a letter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He left (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He left out my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He left (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He's talking about great social scientists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --He didn't mention my father.  So I wrote a letter, I said, "How could you leave out my father?"  He wrote me back, we have the letter.  He said, "Well, your father, of course, was the greatest, but I forgot he was black."  (Laughter).  "I forgot he was."  Well, that's the whole point.  The whole strategy was not to let race become a barrier to his intellectual contributions and that people would think, race, race, race, instead of--so Daniel Patrick Moynihan writes--who knows literature and says I forgot he was white, (laughter) I forgot he was black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He was black.
Speaker 2: --We have the letter.  He's--oh God, so, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you know that this (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --my father, my point is my father, there is a lot of pain there.
Speaker 1: So, so this is, I mean it's, it's a complicated history there? --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's very complicated.
Speaker 1: --and, and at a time when, you know, it was daily complicated, you know--
Story_ID: 238241
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he [Davis' father, W. Allison Davis] was trying to succeed in a field (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was trying to succeed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --when nobody had ever been allowed to succeed.  It wasn't as if there weren't black scholars.  They were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and wherever they were, but, you know, people say, "Well, the [W.E.B.] Du Bois went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]" he yeah, went to Harvard, but he never got a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A spot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --He never got to teach at Howard, Harvard.
Speaker 2: --a spot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I mean none of them got (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: A spot.  So when (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So when he got to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and every awful winter after every awful winter he'd sometime say, "Maybe we should move someplace else", because he had offers to teach all over.  He wouldn't, he was loyal to the University of Chicago until the day he died.  He would not leave it because the University of Chicago was willing to make him--first to hire him, then to promote him and then to grant him tenure.  And the letters about his tenure decision, about his hiring and tenure decision are hysterical because you have the president of the University of Chicago saying, "I want the Rosenwald Foundation [Julius Rosenwald Fund] to help us pay his salary, because when we put him up for tenure I don't want money to be an issue.  I don't want the board to be able to say, 'Well we don't have the money.'"  So his initial salary as a tenured professor was funded by the Rosenwald Foundation, one of the great foundations in America in terms of race.  So there are all kinds of nuances and, and the letter says you know, we're going to hire you and we're going to promote you and give you tenure, but you can't expect to have a social life that's integrated with the university.  You can't be a (unclear), you know--the Quadrangle Club was a faculty club.   Basically, the letter said, you can't expect to be a member of the Quadrangle.  You can't expect to live in the University of Chicago housing.  But they gave him tenure.  They didn't give it to him he earned it.  And (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So you're saying--so let me--because when he receives tenure I think you are about six years old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 2: --and, and do you remember the (unclear), you don't remember because you're too young.
Speaker 1: Well, you remember that my father, often I remember--we were oddities on 61st [Street] and Langley [Avenue].  There weren't any colleges; there weren't any college professors there.  There were teachers and there were dentists, but wasn't anybody who was a professor at the University of Chicago.  We, we sort of stood out all, all, right away, and we were going to the Lab School at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] until I got kicked out because--and these white people, associates, would come by the house, they were totally fearless.  They didn't--so we sort of stood out because of this affiliation, but underneath that affiliation, all that stuff, was my father's enduring gratitude to the institution for bring him there in the first place, [W.] Lloyd Warner, appointing him to be from a research assistant to a faculty member and then allowing him to achieve--and you know that they waived retirement for him until the day he died.  They never--he was supposed to retire about three different--and they waived retirement.  And when they put out the centennial book about the 100 most important members of the University of Chicago, he--there he was.  So he, he, would not leave the University of Chicago come hell or high water.  The minute he died, Lois [Mason Davis] moved back to Montgomery--to Tuskegee [Alabama] just to be warm, she said.  She couldn't take this shit anymore.  I mean-she said get me out--but he lived a life that had, he paid a price we didn't fully see, but I think my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] understood because she had known him when he was young and playing tennis and being full of energy and fire and vinegar, and we, by the time my brother [John A. Davis] and I were born we were told we were born late because they didn't want to have children in Mississippi.  It wasn't entirely true; there were some issues about my mother being able to have children.  But for those, the time I was--my mother was thirty-seven when Allison [S. Davis] was born and thirty-nine when I was born which was very late.  And, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's very late in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh no, that's very late then.  And she--but there was always this reserve, there was always this--but when he let it go a little bit, he had a wonderful laughter, wonderful, wonderful sense of humor.  He taught us how to play baseball.  He loved the [Chicago] White Sox.  He'd go out and throw, throw with us.  Around the corner from us was the Evans Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], at 61st and Evans [Street], one block over and that's where all the black baseball players stayed.  We didn't go to Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois] to see Jackie Robinson because Wrigley Field was a racist's bastion, but we, he'd love to go to the White Sox games and he was a reserved, dignified--all our friends loved to come to the house for my mother because my mother was as lively and as engaged as she could be, but she had some terrible physical problems later in life.  They always referred to "Doctor Davis" as a model.  I don't know if you've done Donald Stewart yet (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I've been trying to get him to sit, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, Donald, his sister just died, Ruth Ann [Stewart] just died.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Donald and Ruth Ann were the son of a man [Elmer Stewart] who worked in the post office.  Nothing, I mean, shit, in '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], stockyards, post office, I mean give me a break, elementary school, those were good jobs, but his mentor became my father.  We weren't even aware of it, but as Donald, who went to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] also, began to aspire to scholarship and academia.  The person he talked to was my father about it.
Speaker 2: Well because it would be no one having that role.  The thing I find interesting is also the role of the University of Chicago because most, a lot of HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and University] presidents, accordingly to [HistoryMaker] Dr. [James] Bowman, came out of the University of Chicago.  (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: That may be true, I don't --
Story_ID: 238242
Speaker 1: --And you know, and then you have, as you know, the Rosenwald (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the Rosenwald Foundation [Julius Rosenwald Fund] was critical to all kinds of people (laughter).  I mean they funded my father's [W. Allison Davis] salary.  They gave [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks his first money to go out and take photographs, I mean they were--and of course, the Rosenwald [Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Garden Apartments] was the only decent new housing in Chicago [Illinois] for black people, the middle class.  That was where I went to nursery school.  People would, "Where you go to nursery?"  I go to Rosenwald Nursery [School].  They called it Rosenwald.  We all went to the Rosenwald.  I mean, I had no idea what that meant then, but looking back; I subsequently met some of the heirs to the Rosenwald money.  And I'd tell them how grateful I was.  They didn't quite understand what I was talking about (laughter), but I understood (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No, it was critical that, and then you had the Rosenwald schools in the South--
Story_ID: 238243
Speaker 1: But I want, and you know when you think, think about this, your father [W. Allison Davis] just as well been maybe sixty-five in today's terms, you know, having kids.  So he's, he's an older parent, you know, so you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It didn't feel that way though.
Speaker 1: It didn't?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, so, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: We never felt, I don't know how to put it, my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] was so lively, I mean when I was in the parks department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] and really hitting my stride, I gave it, all the credit to my mother.  I wasn't being, I wasn't being successful as an academic.  I was being successful as a leader who could take an institution from the depths of despair and bankruptcy, to begin to think of itself with pride and a lot of that involved certain kinds of people skills that I didn't really know I had until I got there and I attributed them all to my mother because my father (laughter) was so, my father was so reserved at times that my mother was a, well, look, she's a black woman born in the early part of the century who had--who was a housewife, had been my father's assistant all through some of his most difficult work but not enough to get her name on the book in terms of her scholarly background.  And then the kids--they moved, the kids came, she became a housewife.  And then she had a terrible back problems--terrible back problems, a slipped disc, blah, blah, blah.  She was in great pain for much of her life.  And then near the end we were stunned, she went back to school and got a teaching certificate and started teaching grammar school as a substitute teacher in the black schools in Chicago [Illinois], starting at about three years before she died.  She died of colon cancer, before she knew that she had it though, she was sick of us.  She was sick of my father.  We were--she was sick of all these men who didn't give a shit about anything except themselves, as far as she was concerned, so she went back and started teaching in public schools and wrote some hysterical letters about the kids and she was a very brave woman and she put up with a lot of very self-centered men, both of her sons and her husband.  She taught me about politics, when Adlai Stevenson ran in 1952, she was the one who took me out to Governor Stevenson's neighborhood headquarters and we were out there leafleting for Stevenson, and you know, stuff like that.  And she was just a fabulous woman.
Story_ID: 238244
Speaker 1: So tell me what your earliest memory of growing up is.  Do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: There some of those early pictures that capture a sense of it, you know, of living on Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], you know, we didn't know, we didn't know that we were black, but that's not, well we knew, but it didn't, it didn't feel like--in our family it didn't feel like a constriction.  Whereas, next door the guy who was trying to get a job, you know, there it was.  But in our family because my father [W. Allison Davis] had broken through a major barrier and that was--we didn't really understand what had happened, Allison [S. Davis] and I, but we knew we were different.  We knew we were going to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].  We knew we had English bikes with skinny wheels, not the big fat wheel Schwinn bike.  We knew we were different in that sense.  We knew white people came to our house.  I know one of the great stories about white people.  The family named Pollack, they were wonderful people.  They were involved with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], but he [Robert Pollack] was, he was a theater critic for the [Chicago] Sun-Times and his son became a good friend.  We were all very close friends.  And every Christmas--there came a time when they put on National TV a Gian Carlo Menotti opera, called 'Amahl and the Night Visitors.'  It was live every year and what was so unique about it is one of the three kings in the story of the birth of Christ was black.  And they cast a black person and he sang the black role, this was unheard of, I mean, there on TV every Christmastime was a black king, not in a degraded role, but a full basso.  So we watched this, 'Amahl and the Night Visitors,' every year for about five years, and then finally one day my father looked up and said, "Why are we watching this?  The music is terrible."  And everybody said, "It is terrible."  Everybody said, "We're watching it because this black guy, forget it!"  We never watched it again.  But in those days that's what you did, you watched, there are all these memories, you know--pay phone, the house had a pay phone.  You had a party line, you know, guys selling watermelon off of wagons drawn by horses in the alley.  It, it was a--I think back on growing up on Langley as being a wonderful experience, notwithstanding my mother's [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] back problems, notwithstanding very clearly the segregation of Cottage Grove [Chicago, Illinois], and we crossed the line, so we kept going back and forth across the line.  Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] was a wonderful experience because it was the one, it was like the shining moment when Hyde Park High School was totally integrated and it was the first totally integrated place.  It was amazing.  This was 1954, '55 [1955], blacks, Jews, Japanese, Italians, I mean, Hyde Park High School was a very special place for about four or five years when [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock was class president and this, you know, it was just--so all that was sort of special.  They use to say about Hyde Park High School that all the black guys thought the Jewish girls were hot, or the Jewish guys thought the Catholic girls were hot, and all the Catholic guys thought the black girls were hot, and none of them were hot, as it turned out, but that's what we thought.  So Hyde Park, that whole growing up--the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] was very special.
Story_ID: 238245
Speaker 1: Your, your older brother is, his name?
Speaker 2: Allison Stubbs Davis.  He is not a junior because my father's name was William Allison Davis [W. Allison Davis].  He is two years older.  And my first memory of my brother he's hitting me over the head with a bottle.  (Laughter).  I say that, it's not true but, you know (laughter).  We're brothers, we're two years apart, so sibling rivalry has been a constant factor in my life.  We are each other's best friends, but at the same time--when we were both going away to school, he went away to school first.  I would inspect his, his suitcase to make sure he wasn't stealing some of my records or ties.  And then when I started going away to school we were each inspecting each other's suitcases to see we weren't stealing from each other.  One day we were having a fight.  I was about nineteen (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Turn this way.  Turn this way and talk to me.
Speaker 2: We were having one of our not infrequent battles in the back room of the apartment.  And we were going at it and my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] came in the room and she said, "I cannot take it anymore.  You are driving me crazy.  I hope you kill each other," and she left.  And we both said, "What was that about."  (Laughter) That is the absolute truth.  My brother was in the--had all these difficult experiences, the brother who's two years older.  So he had to take me to the parties and he had to bring me home, once I got to be thirteen.  So his younger brother was always--"Oh you're Allison's little brother."  He could drive at sixteen, I couldn't drive, I was fourteen.  He had to drive me to the parties, drive me, you know, all that kind of stuff.  So, that was part of it, but the other part of it we were two brothers who ran all over Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and Idlewild [Michigan] and went on trips with our parents.  They were always exciting.  One time we went to, we were going to California, my father was teaching at [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] I think.  And we--hold on I've got a call, let me just see what it is.  I think it's nothing.  (Pause).
Speaker 1: Talking about your brother.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My brother, see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --right away I forgot who he was.  One time we were traveling on, on a train.  We loved going on a train to California, Berkeley [California].  And I guess we must have had two rooms, one for my parents, one for us.  And we were up to no good in our room, whatever we were doing, and so we locked the door.  And then we fell asleep.  And my parents came and they couldn't open the door because we'd locked it from the inside, and we were sound asleep, they were pounding, pounding on the door.  Eventually they had to stop the train and bring in (laughter), I don't know, firemen to open the goddamn door.  They didn't know if we were dead or alive.  We were just in there sleeping away.  My brother and I are great friends.  We have slightly different, but slightly similar careers.  And we're both ended up-- nobody ended up trying to take after of my father in terms of academics, that's for sure.  And he in Chicago [Illinois] became a lawyer; I in New York [New York] became a lawyer.  He's been involved in civic and public affairs.  I've been involved with civic--he never--one of the principal differences in Allison and myself, I think, Allison was always in effect, self-employed with his law firm [Davis, Miner, Barnhill and Galland; Miner, Barnhill & Galland, P.C., Chicago, Illinois] and then with his development companies.  And he--where as I have either worked for a law firm or for the government.  I'm not sure how important a distinction it is, but it-- there is a distinction there.  I'm jealous as hell of him because he has more friends and he has more dogs and he has more, yeah he was Barack's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] boss, you know.  He was first celebrated--I've never forgotten the first place ever I met Barack Obama was in their front room.  But then, in 2006, he called me up and said he's going to run for president.  I said, "What, are you kidding me?  Why would he run for Senate, for president?"  He says, "Because he's going to be president."  I said, "Allison give me a break."  So it may have been around October 2006.  So I called him back in November and I said, "How do you know he's going to be president?"  I said, "Is he still going to announce?"  He said, Yeah."  I said, "How do you know he's going to be president?"  He said, "I know."  I said, "Okay, that's good enough for me."  (Laughter).  So he started to work on the campaign.  Which is we started basically raising money.  But it was--we've been in touch constantly all our lives.  There have never been--there have been periods of tension and this and that, but we've always been there, involved with each other somewhat.  We went--I tell people the story--"Why do you live in New York?"  I say, "Because my brother said that Chicago, the town wasn't big enough for both of us."  And I said, "Okay, can I go to New York now?"  That's not true, but it might be true in a psychological sense.  Somehow I chose to come to New York and not stay in Chicago.  He chose to stay in Chicago.  As a result he turned out to be he would travel constantly.  At the drop of a hat he's on a trip someplace.  I never go on trips.  Everything I want is a block away, right?  I'm in New York.  I don't need--that's again an exaggeration.  For many years we owned a house in East Hampton [New York].  We got sick of the house and we got sick of East Hampton, the Hamptons, they changed and became less a community and more of just a mall.  And Allison had been going enjoying the [Martha's] Vineyard [Massachusetts] for years and years and said you should come over here, and so one year we did, and we've been there ever since, although he's up island (unclear) and we're down island.  That picture I showed you I mean, it's a picture of our combined birthday party about four years ago.  And it just, it's a panorama of our lives, in effect, who's there.  I mean these are people we knew before they were important people, like Helen [ph.] or....  [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, when my mother was dying, use to bring her soup, carry some soup that her grandmother made to the house.  I mean so these, so all these--Donald Steward is in that picture, Valerie's in that picture, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E. Jordan, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Ann [Dibble Jordan] are in the picture, or they're in the one the next year, because the pictures from year to year look exactly the same, only people get older and stupid.
Story_ID: 238246
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I don't think the story of your neighborhood is all, you know, has quite been told yet, of the neighborhood you grew up in.  And so, I would just, I want to ask, I mean, let me--so elementary school is where?
Speaker 2: Well, again, we straddled this line between the white and black world in ways that were very unusual at the time.  But, this is how it begins and it has one of the apocryphal, but true, family stories, which is a block and a half up the street from 6129 Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] was a school, A.O. Sexton School [Austin O. Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was a public school, public grammar school, and that is where we went to school.  One day, at the beginning of the school year, my brother [Allison S. Davis] came home from first grade, maybe the second, said he had a new teacher, of course he had a new teacher, and my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] and father [W. Allison Davis] said, "Well, blah, blah, blah, and by the way is she white or colored?"  And my brother said, "What are we?"  And my mother said, "We're colored."  And he said, "Well, she's white."  They went to a parent-teacher conference and she was as black as the blackboard.  (Laughter) It's the absolute truth; it's the absolute truth.  That's raised from the perspective of the Davis family in 1945 or '46 [1946], or '7 [1947].  "Oh, we, we, if we're colored, then she's white."  So we went to Sexton.  Everybody in the neighborhood went to Sexton.  There was a school store that we use to go to on the corner.  And Allison was a yo-yo, Duncan yo-yo champion.  I mean this--those were the days of the Duncan yo-yo guy would come once a week and you'd be doing your yo-yo and he'd--Allison....  But then by second grade I was now at the Lab School at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, how did that--why did that happen?
Speaker 2: (Gesture).
Speaker 1: Well you know--at the time that you go to the Lab School, who's also there who's black with you?
Speaker 2: Like I said a fairly good number of black people were there or about to arrive there.  Allison was there by then, of course.  So I--what--my parents decision for us to go to the Lab School, I don't know.  But I assume, you know, the culture in the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] in 1946, '47 [1947], '48 [1948], there may have been something and they just--they were educators, among other things and they just maybe just thought it wasn't the best education.  I mean, it wasn't because the, the books we were reading were 'Dick and Jane' and they were all white, because the same kind of books were at the University of Chicago Lab School.  They hadn't quite gotten over that hump yet.  The Sengstacke boys went there.  [John Herman Henry] Sengstacke owned the [Chicago] Defender, and his two sons went there.  My good friend, Johnny Sengstacke [John H. Sengstacke, III], had a terrible life as it turned out.  Karen Gibson went there, Truman Gibson's [HistoryMaker Truman K. Gibson, Jr.] daughter.  You know, there were a good, fairly good number of black people.  Did Bo Brown go there?  Bo Brown may have gone there.  They were admitting black students.  And we're talking about when I was in second, third, fourth, fifth grade.  So.  But even then, you know, half the school were faculty brats, of one kind or another.  So there was a certain--but when the parties started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You mean the parties when you're a teenager?
Speaker 2: When you get to be a teenager and dancing starts, all of a sudden we weren't invited to the parties anymore.  So you know, things crept in there (unclear).  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --Now that wasn't true of everybody.  It was usually the non-faculty member parents.  There was one of the greatest--this was one of the great things.  There was a stable at the corner between 60th [Street] and 61th Street, Langley [Avenue] and Evans [Street].  There was a stable, horses, it was owned by a guy named Markes [ph.], whose daughter went to the Lab School, and he probably owned other stuff.  So it was a riding stable because there were the riding paths up and down the Midway [Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois] and the Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois], so people would stable their--but the stable was right across the line in the black area, right.  Idlewild, Michigan, which was a black resort then that people went to, we went to, you know, some of us, we rode horses.  There was a guy named Sarge, who'd been in a Spanish American War (laughter), and allegedly he was part of the black troops who saved the Rough Riders, you know the whole story about the Rough Riders took San Juan Hill [Cuba].  No, they got almost chewed up--by sending in the black troops who came and saved--Sarge was a Rough Rider.  And so, Sarge had a stable in Idlewild and we use to go ride there every morning all the black middle class kids in Idlewild.  We'd go riding with Sarge and we'd all line up and he'd, he was so bowlegged he couldn't even walk.  He'd sit in the car and one--the horn blowing once meant walk, twice meant trot, three times, you know, it was all this sort of....  But there was no place to ride in Chicago [Illinois], except the stable.  They didn't want any black people in their stable, so what they did is they reserved Thursday afternoons for black people to ride at the stable.  And now who would ever remember this (laughter), this is a stable, Thursday afternoons.  Now, there were some black people who actually owned horses.  Karen Gibson owned a horse, and to this day I believe Judy Barry [ph.] owns a horse.  Judy Barry's father is my father's doctor, Leon S. Barry [ph.].  And maybe a couple of--but we use to go riding and finally we said, "Well, I don't want to ride here, this is stupid."  They--part of growing up on the South Side, if you were saddity, you were riding horse at the Markes Stable, but only on Thursday afternoons.  So how funny is that.
Story_ID: 238247
Speaker 1: Now, about the issue of color, can I ask you that, like you know, you talk about Allison [S. Davis] being, I mean, you know, he was confused.  Well he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He wasn't confused.  He just didn't understand the meaning of the word.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: We were never confused about race.
Speaker 1: And why (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That maybe a bit apocryphal, but generally I don't ever remember him being confused about race, because of what our parents [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis and W. Allison Davis] taught us.  They taught us, even to this day, sometimes white people almost say, "Well you could have passed for white, why didn't you?"  As if it were a rational question.  And I look at them and say, "Why would I want to be white?"  (Laughter) Even if I had a choice, why would I want to be, and that always stuns them, because they never could imagine that being the answer.  They can only imagine it would be much better to be white than....  And of course, that day, most days there were all kinds of black people disappearing, who'd passed, and so forth.  But my parents were social scientists.  My father spent his life studying race in this country, and education, and race and education, caste and stuff.  So there was a consciousness about these issues in the house, not that we were going around thinking, but they--and the issue being anything other than colored people was never an issue.  Even though--you know, and it wasn't an issue not only with us, it wasn't an issue with my father's brother [John A. Davis] and sister [Dorothy Davis].  It wasn't an issue in my mother's family (unclear) light-skinned people, all of us, although my father was darker.
Speaker 1: Yes, people talk (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was darker.
Speaker 1: That's right.  People talk about that.  That he was darker.
Speaker 2: So that, so the whole growing up is littered with stories about how funny race can be.  That Allison saying the teacher's white when she was black.  We went to Hawaii (laughter).  My father went to Hawaii (laughter) we went to Hawaii in 1947.  My father was going to teach at the University of Hawaii.  And his principal reason for going, however, was Hawaii was supposed to be the only place in the United States and its dominion, where there was no color line.  Coming off the boat, you knew that wasn't true.  It didn't take any research.  You knew the minute you got to Hawaii there were color lines all over the place.  I mean, there were white people, Hawaiians, Japanese, they're all, you know.  But it didn't take any study to feel, to realize there was a color....  There's a great picture in the Hawaii Gazette [sic.], 1947, a picture of my father clearly black, a black person, "Distinguished Professor Comes to Hawaii From the University of Chicago to Study," blah, blah, blah.  Well, that was, you know, we were a big deal.  But there wasn't any need to study because we knew right away there was a color line.  Although it was very diverse and the friends my parents had, there were a couple, she was very black, he was white, and the only place they could live a decent life was Hawaii in 1947.  So they lived in Hawaii.  Actually she, the woman, was she the grandmother of [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier?
Speaker 1: Oh, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lani Guinier's first name comes from the name of the woman who was--in any event, there's a picture of me--we lived in the Moana Hotel [Moana Surfrider, Honolulu, Hawaii].  There's a picture of me when my last day of class in whatever grade I was in, kindergarten, and the kids all gave me a lei with little good-bye notes on it.  And you look at my class, there're very white kids there, all these Asian kids, it was very diverse.  On the boat on the way over, which was only one class, it wasn't first class, it was only one class, we were in a boat on the way over.  And we were a curious group.  People would look at us and couldn't quite figure out what we were.  A train, even the Pullman porters couldn't quite figure it out.  (Sound).  So we're on this boat for five days going to Hawaii and it's a woman from the South, she'd sort of been buzzing around and one time--you go up and down on an elevator, so we're in an elevator and my sister, my brother [Allison S. Davis] and myself going up and down the elevator.  She finally had her chance.  She said, "What are you all?"  This is one of these stories from Urbana [ph.].  My brother said something like, "What do you mean?"  "Well, what nationality are you all?"  My brother said, "We all is Indians."  (Laughter).  This is another family story.  Did he say that?  I think, oh that's the story we told for sixty years, that he actually....  The woman was for real.  I mean she definitely was trying to figure out what we were.  So the issue of race, of color, it wasn't for a long time--the only people didn't know we were, couldn't figure out we were black were white people, because in Chicago [Illinois] everybody knew everybody on Langley [Avenue] everybody knew.  I mean every once in a while some kids would wonder into our area of Langley and not know, and start to beat us up and we'd run to the school yard and say, "Tell them, tell them we're"--you know.
Story_ID: 238248
Speaker 1: So it happened--I'm at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  I got there, it was a guy who was my best friend for the first three months from Tennessee.  It was an article about my father [W. Allison Davis] in Time magazine because he was at the New School for Advanced Study of the Social Sciences [ph.] somewhere out in California.  There was an article about it and one of the scholars, here's my father, distinguished Negro professor blah, blah.  And this guy, my freshman year was my best friend, came and said, "Is this your father?"  I said, "Yeah."  He never spoke to me again.  Oh okay, shit, you know.  So there is racism in the world.  And at our twentieth reunion I got a little tipsy and I got up at the dinner and in front of him and his wife and his two daughters, I told the story about how he was a racist son-of-a-bitch.  It was a terrible mistake, which haunts me to this day, because I did to him exactly what he had done to me, which was to assume twenty years later he was the same immature, first year freshman that he was when he got there (unclear).  He never came back to another reunion.  I tried to apologize to the class the next day, but I'd had too much to drink so I was incoherent again.  And then our fiftieth reunion was two years ago and after it was over I got a note from this guy, Art Farris [ph.].  I tried to find him to say he should come to the fiftieth reunion.  Instead a note came after the reunion from him saying what happened all those years ago should be put aside, blah, blah, blah.  We should see each other.  I may be up in New York [New York], some, and I immediately responded and I never heard from him again.  But it was just interesting over, all those years.  So you ran (unclear), my roommates had a note saying, "You mind rooming with a Negro?"  Freshman year I was the star of the basketball team, after the game was over, second game, the third game, I went out and hitched a ride up to Bennington [College, Bennington, Vermont] because I was going to see a girl up there and there were three seniors in the car, it's a twenty mile drive, it's dark, at night, I, and we're talking, one of the seniors driving the car said, "I hear there's a real good nigger on the freshman team."  Now this is a problem because there's part of it that I want to accept and there's part of it, I want to challenge.  The really good I want to accept.  (Laughter)  I liked the really good basketball part, the really good nigger, (sound).  So I was sitting there trying to figure what the fuck do I say.  I mean we're in the middle of nowhere.  I do not want to say let me out of the car because we are in the middle of nowhere between Bennington [Vermont] and Williamstown [Massachusetts].  So I finally say--the guy said, "There's a really good nigger on the freshman team."  I said, "Yes, that's me," dead silence for twenty miles (laughter), nobody said another word.  I didn't get out the car though.  I wasn't giving up my ride.  I said, "Yes, that's me."  So my way of dealing with it has always been, I try to diffuse it with humor, but it, it's, it's never been an issue--for nobody in my family has the issue ever been, well maybe I should try to pass for white, or say, "Oh, I'm sorry, I'm not white, I know I can pass for white."  So I have given speeches over the years, sometimes involving issues of race and so on and so forth.  Sometimes, before audiences that have no idea that I'm black, or some of them don't.  And so I always say in those circumstances, some, sometimes people don't know I'm black until it's too late.  And there's sort of, you could see them trying to adjust to what I just said, the ones who don't know, they have to go through first, "Oh he's black.  Oh, shit," or "I said, oh, my God, what did I say", you know.  But I try to diffuse it in various ways not because it's--look, my parents taught us, you couldn't (unclear), you're just as good as anybody else, in fact, you're better than most of them, (laughter) so what the hell.
Story_ID: 238249
Speaker 1: So let me--so you were in (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Allison [S. Davis]--there're funny stories about it.  Allison goes in a restaurant, he doesn't get seated fast enough, he gets pissed off and tells the maitre d' he's a racist.  He's standing there as white as he could be with his white wife and white-looking children, and the maitre d' is going "What the fuck is he talking about."  (Laughter) You know, but (sound) there was literally a scene that was duplicated later in life.  Allison went to Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] and we were riding--I went to visit him once on the train from Chicago [Illinois] to Grinnell, Iowa, and we're sitting in the club car and there's this woman who keeps calling the waiter in the club car boy, the waiter's about sixty years old.  And finally Allison says to her, "Does he look like a boy to you?"  Well the woman went into complete shock.  First of all, she's being challenged on the race issue by somebody who apparently was a white, and wants to....  Some years later Allison was in a movie called 'The Human Stain,' where he played a white person on a train abusing a black Pullman porter waiter.  I, I, I said, "Allison, why the fuck would you do this movie?"  (Laughter) "What, why are you doing this?"  But in any event, it was sort of, it was actually art imitating life, because literally that scene had played out.
Speaker 1: That's right in that, that movie dealt with the complicated issues.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it dealt with--
Story_ID: 238250
Speaker 1: The thing--so you're at the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]--I want to go, so you're at the Lab School for how long?  See, that's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: From second grade through eighth grade.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And eighth grade, it was agreed I'd be happier someplace else.  There were a series of incidents that lead up to "Would you be happier someplace else?"
Speaker 1: And what were these incidences?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, happened to be standing next to a locker that blew up.  I mean, and the principal happened to be walking by.  He said, "Do you know anything about this?"  The smoke's pouring out, I said, "No, I don't know anything about that."  (Laughter) The next day we're in his office and my father's [W. Allison Davis] there and my father's office is in the same building.  And it was agreed I'd be happier someplace else.  And I would be, I wanted, I would be happier someplace else.  So off I went to Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] where my brother [Allison S. Davis] was having a great time, he was already there.  And Hyde Park was this like heaven on earth, totally integrated, totally a place that everybody was proud of the fact they weren't racists.  In the early--in mid-'50s [1950s], I mean, you know, nobody thought like that.  So these kinds of incidents have, are there all the time.  I mean, while I was at--rushed in a fraternity at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], and rushed through the year, freshman year was--my pledge (unclear), two guys didn't know I was black.
Speaker 1: All right.  They would have happened a lot (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: They were in deep shock.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --They said, "You're black?"  I said yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But that would have put a lot--but I want to ask you about Jack and Jill [of America, Incorporated].  You said that you and Allison got kicked out.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Kicked out.
Speaker 1: --Kicked out.  How did you get kicked out of Jack and Jill?
Speaker 2: Because my mother [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] didn't go to any meetings.  It's all, it's a mother's club, and so, she didn't attend.  She didn't give a shit about Jack and Jill, and plus we were not always the best people to have at the parties.  The other mothers were, you know....  So they kicked us out.  In fact, as I said, our aunt [Marion Stubbs Thomas] founded Jack and Jill.  [Frederick] Douglass Stubbs' wife founded Jack and Jill.  We got kicked out.  My parents were very conscious of social class issues.  At the same time, but not by being suffocated by them, but by knowing what they were like and how they could affect people and make them behave in really stupid ways.  And of course, Jack and Jill is about social class and color and all that shit.  And it wasn't as if the people in Jack and Jill weren't our friends, but it just was, you know.  My mother, my father, Jack and Jill was not that important for them.
Story_ID: 238251
Speaker 1: So what are you like as a young man then?  What are you thinking, you know, what's your personality like, what are you wanting to be?
Speaker 2: Exactly what I am today.  What am I wanting to be, I don't know what I want to be.  I clearly wanted to piss off my father [W. Allison Davis], so I went to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  Clearly he didn't want me to go to Williams.  And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that, but (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I was a terrible student.
Speaker 1: You were a terrible student when you went to Williams?
Speaker 2: I was a terrible student right on through grammar school and Williams and everything else.
Speaker 1: No, but you mentioned also going to Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So when did you go to Francis Parker?  That's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, I go to Hyde Park.  It's wonderful.  My brother [Allison S. Davis] goes off to college and it's very clear that I'm having such a good time at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  There's not much chance I'm ever going to get to, into any college.  So, my parents, I guess with my consent, decide because there are some black folks at Francis Parker that I should go to Francis Parker and so my last two years in high school I went to Francis Parker, and had this wonderful experience there.  The black guys were all stars of the basketball team and when I was a senior I was a star of the basketball.  U High got me declared as ineligible.  I'm bitter about U High to this day.  That's a long, different story.
Speaker 1: U High, U High....?
Speaker 2: University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Because when I was at the Lab School they went to this system where they wanted to go from a two-year high school to a four-year high school.  In order to do that they created something called a pre-freshman year.  It's a, it's this transition to a four high.  And so my senior year at Parker they said was essentially my fifth year in high school.  It wasn't and as a result they got me declared ineligible to play senior year and I've been angry about it ever since.  In any event, so that's why I went to Parker, because it was an attempt to boost me a little intellectually so I could go someplace.  And so I applied to all the usual Midwest schools like Kenyon [College, Gambier, Ohio] and Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] and so on and so forth. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, so you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --And on a lark, I, I went to visit Williams and applied to Williams and they let me in probably because they thought I was a good basketball player, plus I was a legacy.  My father could not have been more unhappy about my choice of school.  He said, "Oh, they have fraternities there?"  He didn't stop me from going, but the depth of his anger about it, I didn't understand until years later, how, how really seriously that that must have hurt him that I chose to go there.  And now, it all worked out at the end, as they say, because now Williams has created this mecca [Davis Center] in his honor, I mean, and he understood it by the end of his life, but--so I went to Williams, and so now I come back to Chicago [Illinois] from Williams and some, some of the brothers on the South Side say, "Hey man, say what's going on?"  I say, "I'm in college."  They say, "Where you going?"  I say, "Williams."  "Oh, George Williams, you going to be a gym teacher."  You know, there's a George Williams College [Chicago, Illinois; George Williams College of Aurora University, Williams Bay, Wisconsin] like, and I don't really this.  There was a George Williams College like at 57th [Street] and something, which was essentially a school for gym teachers.  So when I said Williams, nobody ever heard of Williams in Chicago, they thought I was going to become a gym teacher.  I said, "No, I'm not going to be a gym teacher, man."  So then I went to Williams which was--
Story_ID: 238252
Speaker 1: We, how should I put this, Allison [S. Davis] and I and Peggy [Cooper Davis] equally as well, have led very full (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Full lives.
Speaker 1: --full, interesting lives in various ways.  But the story of the family is really the one that has, I mean; it, it really struck home when Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] created all these things in my father [W. Allison Davis] and uncle's [John A. Davis] honor.  How this lineage from this guy, [James Mandeville] Carlisle and there, in the (unclear) is the descendant of Carlisle who lives in Williamstown [Massachusetts] holding a picture of this guy Carlisle.  There were some internal problems in the family about the whole issue.  Some people thought we were paying too much attention to Carlisle.  And it's very nice to find out he did some nice things, but who gives a fuck about him because he had a son [John Abraham Davis] he didn't marry the mother of and didn't say was his son and who left and didn't want to have anything to do with him.  That's what we should take our lead from.  So there were a lot of people who were, not a lot, but there's (unclear).  There is other parts of the family where people essentially think of themselves as white because they are married to white people.  They live in white worlds in the Southwest and they essentially don't, they essentially think that they are white, I guess, I don't know.
Speaker 2: But isn't--this is all really issues of identity and part--I mean it's really issues of identity a lot.  But see the thing is the, the history is very complicated and blind, it's very complicated, and its--but I--your family, I, I put in the whole thing as sort of black royalty, you know because of the rich, it's part of the story that's not much told.  It was known in the black community, but it's really not known much outside (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No, that's true, it isn't, it's not known much.
Speaker 2: And, and that's, that's why I have an interest in this.
Story_ID: 238253
Speaker 1: But anyway, let's--so you, you go to Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] who else was at Francis Parker when you're there?  You said there were some others, who's there?
Speaker 2: Well, Jimmy Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry], Jimmy Simmons [ph.] had graduated the year before I got there.  There was a guy named George Gray [ph.], Karen Gibson, Sandy Forni [ph.].  The first black person to go to Francis Parker was a woman named Diane Dickerson, whose father was Earl [B.] Dickerson and his mother was Katherine Dickerson.  Katherine Dickerson and you know, I can't remember names anymore, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett's grandmother, (pause) Dorothy Taylor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Robert Taylor's mother.
Speaker 2: --My mother [Alice Elizabeth Stubbs Davis] died of colon cancer in 1966.  In those days, cancer was, people thought it was contagious; they just stopped coming to see you.  And the only two--the people who were there at the end and never stopped coming were Katherine and Dorothy Taylor.  They didn't give a shit about--they were there right at the end.
Story_ID: 238254
Speaker 1: Yeah, well we were unusual.  Where, I mean, like I don't know how my grandfather [Dr. J. Bacon Stubbs] on my mother's [Alice Elizabeth Stubs Davis] side became a doctor.  I just don't know where they came from or, the grandmother [Florence Blanche Williams Stubbs] was highly educated.  She was a suffragette and a teacher.  On my father's [W. Allison Davis] side we know the history there pretty well.  And we know that these were two very strong people [paternal grandparents, Gabrielle Beal Davis and John Abraham Davis] that one of them was crushed in effect, at least partially by what [President Thomas Woodrow] Wilson did to him professionally.  We have the records now that explain how that happened and when it happened.  But the mother was a rock and [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D. C.] was the key to their getting off to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] and, but they were people who already knew the value of education, the importance of education.  They didn't have to go to Williams to figure that out.  And, but then, both my uncle and my father did something that was just not on the career path of black people which was to go off into academia and then create--my uncle was the head of the American Political Science Association.  He was chairman of the department of political science at [The] City College [of New York, New York, New York].  That was before open enrollment, and listen, he was the real chair of the--so there were quite--my uncle was not so deep into scholarly work, but my uncle was very important in opening up cultural exchange between the West African independent states and the United States, and an organization called AMSAK [ph.] that played a critical role (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And his name?
Speaker 1: John A. Davis, played a critical role in all that.  And then it turned out they were getting CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] money.  The CIA was funding everybody, you know.  It wasn't--that destroyed AMSAK, but--so they took a path in the white academia that wasn't for the light of heart that's for sure.  John's first teaching position was at Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]; my father's was at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Hampton.
Speaker 1: --at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And what they both learned from that is they didn't want to teach at an all-black school anymore because their own scholarship would be, not be treated as being as serious because--and the resources weren't--whatever it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well the black colleges [HBCUs] have struggled over the years with being able to have any money to do research (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, it's not just that, I mean my father was at Hampton.  Hampton was--he's down there trying to teach right out of the cotton field black guys [William] Shakespeare.  He's trying to teach them Shakespeare.  Shakespeare--he said this is nuts.  Not in a way that degraded them, but in a way that led him to say the hell with Shakespeare.  I need to understand how this happened and how to change this.  So it wasn't as if he just said, "Oh these poor ignorant Negroes, I don't want to have anything to do with them."  But he knew that to do that he had to, he couldn't, he couldn't stay at Hampton and do it.  And there's a wonderful piece by St. Claire Drake about--Drake was a student at Hampton and my father sort of took him under his wing.  He became his research assistant and then he was his key research assistant on 'Deep South[: A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class,' Allison Davis, Burleigh B. Gardner, and Mary R. Gardner].  And then Drake went on to have his own full career so on and so forth.  And, but Drake wrote a nice little piece for a, some black scholarly journal that stopped publishing twenty years ago, about my father at Hampton and the beginnings of 'Deep South' and the beginnings of the kind of research that was involved, and talking to people at the bottom and it's a fascinating story, just fascinating.  But anyway, so they took this path and for, and along the way very, some, there were people who played critical roles, John Dollard was a critical colleague.  [W.] Lloyd Warner was a critical mentor who guided my father's career and helped him get to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and helped manage the whole group of scientists who figured out social class and caste in the United States, and, so yeah, we were not just light-skinned upper-class Negroes in Chicago, which meant certain things happened, we saw certain people, Jack and Jill [of America, Incorporated] and so--but even among those people we were--we had, we knew, we were, understood we were different because of my father's affiliation here in Chicago.  Although we didn't quite understand it, we didn't really know what it meant.  And we were very proud and very proud of our father and you know I'm sure my brother would say the same thing.  I, I think of growing up in Chicago, growing up on the South Side, growing up living in Langley [Avenue] until 1957, then in Hyde Park, Kenwood.  I think of all this as a golden era.  I mean, I think, I know, I mean there're bad memories--I don't have any bad memories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --about all that, not of, not about my parents, not about my brother, not about where we lived, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not about money, not about status, not about--
Story_ID: 238255
Speaker 1: Now Idlewild [Michigan], you would go there, you would go there (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: There was a period where we went there maybe four or five summers in a row.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So who were the families up there that you were, were with?
Speaker 2: Well, I, the Browns [ph.] and the Mahons [ph.] were two.  Butch Mahon's [ph.] parents, Lottie [ph.], and he was a, I think a lawyer; I can't remember his first name.  Bo Brown, his mother was a teacher at Dunbar maybe and his father was a dentist and then I can't remember who else.  Oh, Judy Barry [ph.] whose father was a doctor in Chicago [Illinois].  Leonidas [ph.] who my father [W. Allison Davis] says saved his life because he had--something happened with his stomach, ulcers, whatever and he thinks Leonidas saved his life.  So Judy Barry was there, Karen Gibson always appears in these places at one point or another.  Then it gets a little vague.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: And so when you, when you get ready to go off to Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], can you talk about that, like when you arrived on the campus?  Is your mother [Alice Elizabeth Stubbs Davis], does, do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I was sort of dumped there.  I don't know if they took me there.  I got a ride with a guy named Carter Marshall [ph.] who was in Chicago finishing his residency and he was driving back to New Haven [Connecticut] where he was from, so he gave me a ride and then he drove me up to Williams and I arrived there, I mean I couldn't have been more naive about what I was getting into.  But it didn't faze me.  I didn't give a shit.  I just (sounds).
Speaker 1: You mean naive because you were used to being in urban places and its out in the sticks (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I'd never been in an environment where 60 percent of the kids have been to prep school.  I'd never been in an environment where 90 percent of the people were white Anglo-Saxons, basically.  The Jewish population was not, I mean there were Jews, all my best friends became Jews, but it was a predominately white, Protestant prep school environment and that was all new to me.  I didn't give a shit.
Speaker 1: So how did you navigate?  So you said there're, there're three in your class, six in your father's class.  So how are you navigating that and even things like getting--well yeah, you weren't having problems (unclear).  But I mean (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I didn't think, I didn't think I was navigating anything.  I was just trying to grow up.  After my freshman year I, there was a period that I didn't think I wanted to go back.  When I went back, anyway, I found out that I had a tremendous number of friends there and was so glad I went back and, you know, I just, I wasn't getting any good grades that's for sure.  I got a D with four minuses behind it from a chemistry professor once.  It kept me from flunking out of school because it wasn't an F.  The next year I said, "How come a D with four minuses?"  He said, "If I had given you an F you'd have to take the course again and I never want to see you again as long as I live."  I said, (gesture) "Hallelujah that."  There were transition problems clearly.
Story_ID: 238256
Speaker 1: And the moment--so the defining moment freshman year was that picture of the picketing.  In the spring in my freshman year at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], the sit-ins started in the South, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and so and so forth.  There were on the Williams campus certain liberal, usually affiliated with the churches; we called them "God squatters."  Intellectuals were "God squatters", who decided to join with some students from Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and Trinity [College, Hartford Connecticut] and Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and go picket the White House [Washington, D.C.] in support of the students in the South.  And they came in the freshmen dining room and they made an announcement that anybody who'd like to go, please sign up and they were booed and jeered and I was looking around and said, "What the fuck is this?"  I mean they were treated like dogs and a guy who was sitting at my table who had sat at the same table I'd sat at with my cousin [John Davis] for many, many months, was booing them.  And I said, "What are you", I said, "What are you doing?"  He said, "Well, I don't believe in that."  I said, "You sit with us every day and you don't believe in that?"  I said, "Why don't you get up and move."  My cousin said, "[HistoryMaker] Gordon [J. Davis] stop that."  I said, "Either you get up and move or I can come over there and I'll move you."  (Sounds).  But it was sort of a, but it's college and, and college you, things happen and all of a sudden you grow up in a way you didn't know you were going to grow up.  And so, little, but what I remember most about that was the leadership of those guys who stood up there and who'd contacted the students at the other schools and said we're going to do something to support what's going on in the South.  As a result, I signed up to go.  I didn't call my parents [Elizabeth Stubbs Davis and W. Allison Davis].  (Laughter) I didn't call.  I just decided to go.  There was some concern the school might throw us out, I mean, this, this was a time when The New York Times was writing editorials against sit-ins because they involved trespassing on private property.  I mean it was a different era.  So I signed up to go and it's a very small group of us, two carloads from Williams, drove down overnight, eight hours down and eight hours back, to get there, in order to be there on Good Friday.  There we were out in front of the White House, picketing [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower.  And there was a guy in the freshmen class who said to me he wanted to go but he was afraid his parents would find out.  And I said, "Jeff, there's no way your parents will ever know."  So he said, "Okay, I'll come."  So we went down and after eight hours of walking around in tweed jackets in ninety degrees on Good Friday, we got back in the cars and come back to Williams.  And the next morning we pick up a New York Times and that picture is on the front page (pointing) of the New York Times.  And he is the first person in line in that picture, Jeff Howard [ph.].  And within minutes the phone rings and in those days there weren't cell phones or anything.  There's one pay phone in the basement of the entry of the dorm we're in.  And everybody knew it was his parents.  We didn't read The New York Times regularly, but everybody knew, had saw that picture, (unclear) word starting going around because there we were, right on the front page of The New York Times.  What the hell is he, and it was his parents and he thought his world was going to come to an end, and they said, we have seen your picture on the front page of the Times this morning, we couldn't be more proud of you.  We bought every New York Times we could get our hands on, given them to all our friends.  So that was a profound experience, that whole three days going down there.  You know, people would say, why are the girls at Bennington [College, Bennington, Vermont] picketing Williams--Woolworths in Bennington [Vermont]?  I said, "Let me explain why they're picketing Woolworths (unclear)."  But that experience, the parents--we're still friends.  There are four or five people in that picture who, we are still close friends, email all the time back and forth.  And there was one guy at a reunion in 1940--the forty-fifth reunion who none of us knew had been there.  We'd forgotten he was there.  The guy was sort of a mild guy on the campus, who got up at our forty-fifth reunion when we were talking about this episode, he says, "Oh I was there."  I said, "You were?"  He said, "Yes."  I had no idea he was there.  Later on when I was writing somebody at Williams who were at the fiftieth anniversary, I called, I emailed him, I said, "Why were you there?"  He said, because my mother was divorced, and she raised me and she had to work, and so I was raised by a black woman.  He said, he said, for me it wasn't a hard decision at all, so, big deal, big deal, then.
Speaker 2: So--
Story_ID: 238257
Speaker 1: So what else was defining about the Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] experience for you?
Speaker 2: I grew up.
Speaker 1: You grew up.
Speaker 2: Not much.
Speaker 1: Now what were you doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean (laughter) I grew up a lot.
Speaker 1: --What were you doing summers?
Speaker 2: I don't remember much about the summers.  I went back to Chicago [Illinois], partied, I don't know, some bullshit job some place, I don't know.  You know it's hard to put a finger on what happened at Williams but socially, you know, you grow up, you know, or you don't.  There was a little bit of the 'Animal House' to Williams.  It was dominated by fraternities and drinking, binge drinking, disrespect for women, I mean, (sound) to put it mildly.  It was really one of the first places I learned something about feminism.  I mean about something's wrong with the way women are being treated here; drinking, the first place I ever had to confront homosexuality, and a friend who's--wanted to kill himself.  So it was, you know, it was a funny kind of place, but confront these--and meanwhile I'm getting shitty grades, but I don't give a shit.  But, that's the personal side of it, the, the greater community side of it was this, the world was changing and Williams College, off in the middle of nowhere, began to change as the world was changing, and that was the first I might have seen that.  So the school was dominated by fraternities, it didn't have any colored people, it was all male, it was a horrible place for a woman to come and visit on a house party weekend.  It had compulsory chapel.  Seven times a year, seven times a semester you had to go to chapel.
Story_ID: 238258
Speaker 1: So I said about the guys freshman year, walking into the freshmen dining room to say come picket the White House [Washington, D.C.] and got booed and they didn't bounce, they didn't, you couldn't deter them at all.  As an example of leadership I hadn't seen before.  So at the end of our sophomore year, some guys who were in the so-called best fraternity in the campus, an incident occurred involving an Asian student that they thought should be a member, but the rest of the fraternity members booed down and wouldn't even consider him because he was Asian, even though he was eating his meals there every day.  They walked out and they called a meeting in the physics lab to discuss the future, what should be done about fraternities and their effect on Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  It ended up as something called the Grinnell Petition, named after the guy [Bruce Grinnell] who was the captain of the football team and lead the--and ninety of us signed the petition saying Williams should get rid of fraternities, the spring of our sophomore year.  People had been saying things about fraternities at Williams for fifty years.  My father [W. Allison Davis] said, "Don't go to Williams because of the fraternities."  (Sound).  But this was a little bit different because the people signing the petition were more centrists than the wacky non-affiliates and beatniks.  That summer the president of Williams, James Phinney Baxter [III], who had been president for twenty-five years, it was his last year, he resigned, and the new president was a guy named John [Edward] Sawyer, a Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] economist.  He began my junior year.  He invited some of us "campus leaders" to come to dinner at his house--the president's house, and he and his little white wife and his little, tight-ass white self couldn't have been more boring, less interesting, less anything, I mean, we came away saying "Oh God, nothing is ever going to change."  A week later, he eliminated the compulsory chapel.  And the summer between our junior and senior year the board voted to abolish fraternities, immediately, no all-deliberate speed, no nothing.  They said we're going to get rid of fraternities as fast as we can.  The campus was in a state of shock.  We were, the ninety of us, were in a state of shock.  So within (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There were ninety of you?
Speaker 1: Only ninety had signed this petition (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Only nine (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --of the thousands of students, ninety, nine-o.  And here this new president got the board to abolish it.  Well, clearly he came with that as an agenda.  It wasn't just us.  He knew that was on his agenda, because he knew that Williams would never be a better institution until fraternities were gone, we could go co-ed without fraternities because fraternities meant you couldn't go coed.  They housed--80 percent of the students were housed in fraternities, all men.  Fraternities were a deterrent for anybody of color to go there.  So, we were stunned.  And outside of Williams, the Civil Rights Movement was reaching its crescendo.  So I graduated in June of 1963 and a week before the graduation a bunch of guys who were my friends who had just come back from Birmingham [Alabama], they had been down there--the campus was all up in a civil rights thing, everybody was reading [James] Baldwin's '[The] Fire Next Time' and signing up to get on buses, the same place where they were, everybody was booed when they raised it four years before; the whole campus was swept up in the civil rights--had students visiting.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] spoke there.  So this was the profound part of Williams.  One, there's a personal change going on.  It's a totally different experience than my father's [W. Allison Davis] experience obviously.  But the world is changing and then Williams is changing, so it was sort of this triple layer of things going on.  So the Williams experience became very indelible for me and for my group of friends, who are still very close.  We still email all the time.  We still talk all the time.  It was a very indelible experience because all these things were happening happened at the same time.  And all the guys who were totally, I mean, the outcry from the alumni about the fraternity issue, it did not--these WASPs [White Anglo Saxon Protestants], from this WASP, this boring WASP president and his boring WASP board, chairman of the board, who was a guy from--a Brahmin from Boston [Massachusetts], they didn't give a shit.  And sure enough within three years the fraternities were gone, I mean gone.  They had taken over the houses, they had kicked out all the fraternities, they were gone.  I said, "Damn," and three years later it went coed, or four years later.  And every step of the way--and the number of diverse students increased, increased, increased, increased.  And every step of the way, it got better.  All these guys were saying, oh it's going to be terrible, it's going to be (unclear).  It became better academically.  It became better socially.  It's now the number one liberal arts college in the country, has been the last ten years and all this stuff.  And it all began with this guy, Jack Sawyer, who nobody thought would change anything, and he just fooled the shit out of everybody.  And he eventually became head of the Carnegie Foundation [sic. Andrew W. Mellon Foundation] and he was quite something.  So, that in not quite a nutshell, that is why Williams was very profoundly important to me and my--changed me, affected me, whatever the right words are.
Speaker 2: So--
