Story_ID: 505726
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Coy Melnick.  Sir, could you give us your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Harold A. Dawson, Sr.  That's H-A-R-O-L-D, middle name is Allen, A-L-L-E-N, Dawson, D-A-W-S-O-N, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Born in Atlanta, Georgia, known as a Grady [Memorial] Hospital baby, born March the 5th, 1935.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a real estate developer and that occupation has evolved from real estate sales person, going back some forty-seven years, but today, and for the past twenty years or so, I've been a real estate developer.
Speaker 1: All right, and some now, we'll get into this in detail later but we're just kind of introducing the tape here but, you would call yourself a realtist instead of a realtor or you might be both now, I don't know, but there's an explanation behind that, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually, I've worn three hats and worn all three hats at one time but I am first and foremost a realtist and that is a member of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers [NAREB] that was formed in 1947.  It's made up primarily of minority real estate practitioners and professionals and I became a member at a time when I could not become a member of the realtor organization [National Association of Realtors] but ultimately I became a realtist and a realtor and a licensor official which was a real estate commissioner so I've worn three hats at one time but realtist first and foremost but been a member of, of all three organizations and participated with all three organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you tell us what today's date is?
Speaker 2: Well actually I, I know that this is September, I think, it's September the 12th.
Speaker 1: No, it's October, you're one month off.  That's all right.
Speaker 2: October the 12th, okay, one month off.
Speaker 1: And 2004, right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004].
Speaker 1: We're just checking with you so everybody who sees this, you know, knows that we agree what time it was done and that sort of thing, that's all.
Speaker 2: Yes, October, October.  The World Series month.
Speaker 1: That's right, and the, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in our corporate office of Harold A. Dawson Company [Inc.; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and we are located in Bank of America Tower [Bank of America Plaza] in downtown Atlanta, and we are on the 37th floor.
Story_ID: 505727
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food would be, would be chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color.  I like the colors of flowers, all different colors.  I like the colors of, that occur in the fall with the changing of the leaves, which would be the earth-tone colors.  So, I really love colors but don't have a favorite, favorite one.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say that, I enjoy spring and fall but I think that from a, from a religious viewpoint, I enjoy the spring because during my lifetime, I've seen the flowers spring forth when I thought that the, that the plant was, was dead and was told in some instances by experts that this particular tree would not bloom again and then I've seen, in the spring, that life would stream forth and so I always got a thrill out of that over the years.  So, I would say that spring is--shows faith and life and that would be my favorite time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think that the, that the islands would be, would be my favorite, although the Georgia mountains would be a close second.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question sir is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a number of sayings.  One of mine relating to, to business and it relates to procrastination and that saying is, do something even if it's wrong.
Story_ID: 505728
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's [Thomas Dawson] side of the family and we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her full name was Katherine Dawson, K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, D-A-W-S-O-N, her maiden name was Singleton, S-I-N-G-L-E-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her, her date of birth was September the 12th, 1912.  Her place of birth was Barnesville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what do you, what can you tell us about her side of the family or how far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to, to approximately, with the Singleton family, about 1865.  My mother's father, John Henry Singleton, lived in Barnesville and he was the owner of a shoe shop, or shoe repair shop and his father was a minister, a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister who was married in 1888 and had eleven children and my grandfather, on my mother's side, was one of those and, of course my mother was, his, his daughter but an interesting history on the Singleton family and their relationship with the C.M.E. church is, is written in a publication by the Women's Missionary Society of the C.M.E. church and I believe it was copyrighted in 1945.
Speaker 1: Now the, tell us a little bit about the C.M.E. church, now.  That's the, it was the, it's now the Christian Methodist Episcopal church, it was the Colored Methodist Episcopal church, when it was founded but, can you tell us a little bit about it?
Speaker 2: Well, some of those names that you called, I'm not familiar with.  As I remembered it from a boy, it was the Central Methodist Episcopal church.
Speaker 1: Central?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I never heard of Central before.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, I guess the history books will, will show exactly that the history and the evolution of that denomination but in Atlanta [Georgia] now, there is, still exist, and the whole church was Butler Street C.M.E. Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and it's still, it still exists today.
Speaker 1: Now is this--
Speaker 2: And I've been a, I guess, during my, my grown years, a Presbyterian and a member of Radcliffe Presbyterian Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  So, I've, I've kept up with the history of the Singleton involvement in the C.M.E. church and it's a very interesting and rich history.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is this the same C.M.E. church that was founded in Louisiana and, you know, you might not know?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't know on one hand.
Speaker 1: The one that has Lane College in [Jackson] Tennessee?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not familiar with that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a "C"--what, you know, there may be two or three different C.M.E.s.  I don't know but--
Speaker 2: Well, I would, I would not be surprised.
Speaker 1: --a big one that people talk about is the one that's now called Christian Methodist Episcopal.  It has Lane College and all that but--
Speaker 2: Okay, I, I think it may be a different, it may be the same, I'm not sure.  I'm not familiar that much with the history of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, so your great-grandfather was a, was a C.M.E. minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather was a, had a shoe repair shop?
Speaker 2: Yes, and not only did he repair shoes he had the talent to make new shoes and I'm told by my mother and my grandmother [Lena Jackson Singleton] that he would make new shoes and he would put them in the store window for people to buy and his, his specialty was making new children's shoes but he was primarily repair, a repair, a shoe repairman, but he had the talent to make, to make shoes.
Story_ID: 505729
Speaker 1: Do they [Dawson's maternal family] tell any stories about the end of slavery or any of that sort of thing since the history starts around 1865?
Speaker 2: Well, not a lot about the history of slavery.  Most of the stories that I remember were stories about education opportunities that a number of the children became teachers or went into professions and I heard a lot about going to school.  I had an uncle who was my grandfather's [John Singleton] brother, George [G.] Singleton, who went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] when it was a preparatory school back in the, around 1918.  He graduated from Atlanta University around 1920 but he became head of the school of commerce at Virginia State College [for Negroes], I guess Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] now.  His name was George G. Singleton and there were teachers, musicians, there were, that were in the family.  There were doctors on the Singleton side.  So most of that that I heard about was, was usually in a music setting and about various persons in the family going to school and receiving degrees in where they would, what they were doing and the aspirations and so forth.  Not a lot about, about slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, nobody in your family talked about what life was like after, 'cause I imagine it's a big transition from going from chattel slavery, even if you weren't a slave, you know, to, you know, well, so-called free society we know as segregated, you know, from Reconstruction until the 1960s but so--
Speaker 2: Well, there, I would say that in every black home the subject of race is always prominent and it was prominent in talking with my great aunts and great uncles.  I did not know my grandfather but did have an opportunity to have contact and to know the, the aunts and the great aunts and the great uncle that I, that I had and the impact of race and living in, during times of discrimination, was always an issue but the solution that I always heard was, was the importance of education and, of course, this came out of the religious setting and foundation and background that was part of the family and as I listened to stories and to conversations during that time, as I remember, race was always an issue and I knew that I, you know, lived in this, in this society but there never was any discussion really of hate, racial hatred, during that time.
Story_ID: 505730
Speaker 1: There was always a positive attitude but I learned early on that education was very important and I also learned about opportunities in business.  As I mentioned, George [G.] Singleton, who was my great uncle, was, was, taught business and taught commerce and he was an inspiration to me as I learned about, about business through him and while he was, he was a college professor, there was quite a bit for me to learn as sort of a beginning and, of course, as I continue to hear about my grandfather [John Singleton] and the [shoe] business that he had, and so that had to have been, I guess, maybe around 19-- when my mother's [Katherine Singleton Dawson] born in 1912, so it was during that period that he had a business.  So, I've heard about that and I would hear about it over and over again.  And so I'm sure that that had indirectly and maybe some subliminal way, it impacted to let me know that I could have a business one day and there was never any doubt in my mind as the time came for me to, to go into business but that was something that was doable, it was possible and that I could be successful.  So that kind of background and the things that I was, that I heard and listened to through those people had an impact on me.
Story_ID: 505731
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Katherine Singleton Dawson] talk about growing up?  Did she grow up--now she grew up in Barnesville [Georgia] or did she grow up here?
Speaker 2: She, I think that she was probably, she had a sister and her mother [Lena Jackson Singleton], my grandmother, came to Atlanta [Georgia] I guess when my mother was maybe six years old and my aunt was only four years old but there's an interesting mystery in our family that my grandfather [John Singleton] disappeared and we don't know that if it was, he, if it was foul play, was never, and this was one of the things that I would hear about, aunts talk about, was his disappearance.
Speaker 1: Now this is your, your grandfather that had the shoe store, shoe, shoe repair?
Speaker 2: The shoe store, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came to, he came to Atlanta to visit his father and in northwest Atlanta on Griffin Street [sic. Spring Street] and there was a train station here, Terminal Station, the Richard Russell Building is on that site.  Richard [B.] Russell Federal Building is on that site today but it was Terminal Station.  My, I'm told that my grandfather visited his father on Griffin Street and he left to go to the train station to go back to Barnesville and he never returned to Barnesville.  So that's one, that's a family mystery and I think, that I don't know if it was maybe a year later but sometime soon after that occurred, my grandmother brought her two daughters to Atlanta so my mother grew up in, in Atlanta and met my father [Thomas Dawson] around 1931.  He was a student at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and they were, they were married.
Speaker 1: Now was she a student at the time she was--
Speaker 2: She was not a student.  She was, went to a business school which was very close to the [Atlanta] University Center [Atlanta, Georgia].  It was Reid Business College [ph.].  She was a graduate of Reid Business College and she became a secretary and she was a career secretary for maybe 30, 35 years and she was secretary to, for a while to Maynard Jackson's [Maynard Jackson, Jr.] father [Maynard Jackson, Sr.] at Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and she was the secretary to Reverend [Dr. A. Franklin] Fisher who was the pastor of West Hunter [Street] Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] for a period of time and most of her career was a secretary for the Atlanta Housing Authority [AHA].
Story_ID: 505732
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about her personality?  What your mother [Katherine Singleton Dawson] was like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was very bright, very lively, had a lot of personality.  She was a member of the, I believe it was called the Atlanta Secretarial League [ph.] and I remember she was president of the now Secretarial League and they had a secretary's day at the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia] every, every year and she would be very excited about that occasion and she was a member of a social club called the Petite Matrons and they had different events and so she was very, she was very social and had a lot of friends, and she was a very good secretary also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a very good mother.
Story_ID: 505733
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I'm an only child.
Speaker 1: An only child, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I had quite a few cousins as you can imagine going back to the eleven children of the Singleton.  I had cousins, some first cousins, but quite a few second cousins.
Story_ID: 505734
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us now?
Speaker 2: His name was Thomas Allen Dawson, T-H-O-M-A-S, A-L-L-E-N, D-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His place of birth was in South Carolina, I'm not sure where, and it was December the 8th, December the 8th, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how far back can you trace his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well not as far back as, as the Singleton family.  The Dawson family, I knew my grandfather [Clem Dawson].  He was a male nurse and had an opportunity to spend time with him.  He lived with us for a while during the period, some years before his, his death but we had a good relationship, the grandfather-grandson relationship but my, I was told that my father's mother died when my father was very young and my grandfather brought him from South Carolina to Atlanta [Georgia].  My father had two sisters and I had a number of years that I spent with them as aunts and they were very good aunts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no stories about South Carolina that your father can tell and grandfather told?
Speaker 2: No, no stories, the only thing that I can remember relating to South Carolina was the fact that many people had potatoes for dinner and at my house it was always rice and I think that I asked the question, why the rice, and the rice came from South Carolina.  That was South Carolina's rice, low country rice, and, but not any particular stories.  My grandfather was, was a male nurse and I remember stories that my father telling about my grandfather that he was, that he was a ladies man and he was, he was a handsome man.  My father was a handsome man also but my grandfather, my father told the story of my grandfather going to someone's home and where there was a husband and wife, and my grandfather made the husband get out of bed and get out of the house and this was something that I really don't think about it often, I'm just thinking about it during this conversation as I reminisce about him but he was a good man and he was, and I knew him as being, you know, very quiet but I didn't know him in his young days.  So my father tells that story about my, about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Now is there any, any stories about how he became a male nurse or?
Speaker 2: I think it had to do with what was available during the time that he lived and it probably was an offshoot to being a servant but he had, you know, skills and he had, not only the skills to be able to take care of someone but the interpersonal skills to be able to forge a very strong bond with someone.  And one of the things that I remember is that there were a number of gifts, one a watch, a gold watch, that I kept for a long number of years that were my, that was my grandfather's that was given to him by one of his, I call a patient, someone he took care of and so he had some skills that helped him to be successful and provide for his family.
Story_ID: 505735
Speaker 1: His wife was fair.  The, you know, there is a possibility that, of course there's always a possibility, and probably what happened was that he [Dawson's maternal grandfather, John Singleton] might have just been killed, he may have been robbed and so forth, but there is a possibility of, and I hear about blacks who left the South, who were fair-skinned, and moved somewhere else and passed as white.
Speaker 2: But he was dark, so he couldn't--
Speaker 1: No, he, he was light-skinned.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was light, okay.
Speaker 1: He was light, so his father was, who was the preacher, was dark and I remember, what I remember him also when I was small, my grandmother was very, my great-grandmother was very fair.  So the children, the eleven children, some of them were brown, light brown, some of them were, were fair and I have a feeling that my grandfather, and I don't know, I have, you can't tell by the picture, I have a picture of them that, but anyway, it, I mean that is a possibility because I thought of every possibility--
Story_ID: 505736
Speaker 1: Tell us about, well you were, we were talking off-camera that you--one of the things you thought might have happened to your grandfather [John Singleton] is that he might have passed, you know, moved on and passed in some other city.  So, did you, do you want to explain a little bit about that to us, why you--
Speaker 2: Well, it was just, just speculations.  I mentioned there was a family mystery that my grandfather came to at Atlanta [Georgia] to visit his, his father and I have not been able to get, over the years, an explanation or a lot of information as to what, you know, what occurred during that period but I was told that my grandfather, and his father, had a discussion that my grandfather left, he was unhappy but he left to, to go to the train station, the Terminal Station [Atlanta, Georgia].  I also mentioned that there was speculation that he may have been robbed, he may have been killed or he may have, he may have left, he left home to, to move to another city to something that was prominent during that period.  I wouldn't say it was prominent but it did occur that some blacks passed as white in some other, some other city.  So we, we don't know what could have happened.  Those could have been possibilities but the facts still remains that he was very successful in his business, shoe repair, shoemaker business and, and, in Barnesville [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And your, your mother [Katherine Singleton Dawson] learned some of the skills too, right?
Speaker 2: Well she learned, I think, business skills from, from my, I guess, the story about her father, she was really very young but I've talked with my grandmother [Lena Jackson Singleton] over the years, my grandmother lived to be 104, and she never would discuss the disappearance of her husband.
Story_ID: 505737
Speaker 1: Back to your father [Thomas Dawson], again, we were just talking about your mother's [Katherine Singleton Dawson] father [John Singleton], right, and back to your father, now, did your, what kind of a personality did your father have and did he grow up in South Carolina or in--
Speaker 2: No, he, he came to Atlanta [Georgia].  His father [Clem Dawson] brought him to Atlanta at a very early age because his, his mother died when he was a baby and so they moved to Atlanta.  My father was a very hard worker.  He always worked.  He was, he worked at hotels or he worked the, as an elevator boy but he was smart enough to, to attend Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and was an outstanding student.  He played the, the viola and he was on the track team.  He was president of his junior class.  He was a business manager of The Maroon Tiger publication and he was really an outstanding student.  He graduated from Morehouse in 1933 but during that time he continued to work and I think in looking back, when I went to Morehouse, I worked also but my father had done it, you know, years before I did.
Story_ID: 505738
Speaker 1: What did your father [Thomas Dawson] major in at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: He was a business major.  He was a business major.  He worked at, one of his first jobs after, after graduating from Morehouse was to work at The Coca-Cola Company [Atlanta, Georgia] and he worked in the, in the lab at Coca-Cola.
Speaker 1: Now, that's based right here in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Right here in Atlanta, national, international headquarters here but this was in 19--around 1937, it was after I was born.
Speaker 1: This is also unusual too.  I would guess that, I mean, its, I talked to people who said it was unusual for a black person to be working in that capacity in any city, let alone Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was unusual.  I'm sure that he was regarded probably on his paperwork as a, it may have, he may have been listed as a custodian, let's say, but what he did, of course he had a college education.  He, that was a person who was the head of the, of the lab at Coca-Cola but what my father described to me what he did, that he experimented with rabbits and one particular experiment that he described, that he oversaw was the feeding and the real careful weighing of the food and observing the rabbits but taking care of them on a daily basis, every rabbit, and there were two groups receiving the same amount, same weight of food, one received water, one received Coca-Cola.  My father described it in detail that the rabbits that drank the Coca-Cola had, were much furrier and had much greater weight and were livelier than the other rabbits.  Well, of course, that sounds very good but the answer to that is that the Coca-Cola contained sugar and then, of course, I don't know what year the, the, you know, it came from the coke, Coca-Cola is made from the coke bean [sic. kola nut] and, of course, the coke had to be taken out of Coca-Cola at some point but it--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was out by then but they started off, you're right, with cocaine in Coca-Cola.
Speaker 2: Yes, and, of course, the caffeine but the experiment showed that Coca-Cola was good and it was probably used in the advertising in some way at that, you know, at that time.  But, I have a very good picture showing my father at work in the, in the laboratory at Coca-Cola.  Unfortunately, there was no future for him at Coca-Cola and as I look back on it, I think what a great opportunity it would have been for him to, to start at that time with a career with a business degree if there had been an opportunity at Coca-Cola.  But he, but he left to work for the U.S. Postal Service as a postal, as a clerk and to make more money and a more stable job because that's what he had to do and that's where he worked, you know, for the, you know, for the rest of his life until, until his death but it really taught me a lesson that this was just another lesson in discrimination and segregation that I learned about from my early childhood but it affected our, affected our family but it also let me know, and I was reinforced with this, that the people in our family were smart, they were capable and, again, that education was the key and, of course, I took the, I took the route of business, and I started business very early.
Story_ID: 505739
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a very interesting picture of my first days, or early years, in public housing at University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] and this was the, sort of the breeding ground of my, the first business opportunity.  There were people in the neighborhood who asked me to water their flowers and that was my first job and I would make, maybe twenty-five cents a week just, just watering flowers but I had to water the flowers at a certain time, around four o'clock in the afternoon and we had to do what this one particular lady said, this is the time you water.  So I've learned responsibility and the value of time early on.  I was paid, that was my first job but University Homes had a lot of brass.  The doorbells were made of brass.  The mail chutes were made of brass and the doorknobs, all made of brass, so I started a brass shining business and people had their brass shined always for Easter and for Christmas but other, and other times, so I had customers.  I had regular customers.  During that period--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started shining brass?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I, I think that I was probably eleven years old.  It wasn't, my mother [Katherine Singleton Dawson] was just getting me some, it was some brass polish and she would give me some rags and I had, I had customers and I made money so I was a businessman then, I didn't know it at the time but then from the brass, people would ask me as I got older, could I wash windows because one of the things at University Homes, it was a very good design but there were plenty of windows, everywhere.  So I washed windows.  Everyone got their windows washed during the year but always Easter, Christmastime.  So I had my brass customers and then I would shine, I mean, I would wash the windows.  Later on, as I got into, to high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I started throwing papers and this was, maybe even before I got involved in high school, the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] afternoon paper.  They hired paperboys at that time.  So I had a paper route and used to deliver papers to the same people that, that years earlier that I would shine their brass.  They took the paper from me and so I learned, I had a book so at that time I learned about recordkeeping because I had to collect for the paper every week and I had to keep up with who was paying, who didn't pay, if they owed me for two weeks, if they missed a week and sometimes people would tell me, I don't have the money right now but come back next Wednesday around 6:30 and I learned then that you write down things that you need to do and when someone tells you to come back, to collect some money, you go back at the time that they tell you and you have a greater opportunity of collecting money then than not showing up or comin-- or coming back at a different time.  So I learned many business skills right there in University Homes, public housing.
Story_ID: 505740
Speaker 1: I've got to go back a little bit to childhood because we always ask this question and that is, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some interesting things and they related to what happened to me as I, as I grew up.  One of the things that, as far as sight, I remember the, the shrubbery and trees in University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] and the fact that there was always someone from a central office, I mean an office near University Homes, they came through and would tell the kids to stay off the grass or don't pull on that shrubbery or don't break the limbs to that tree and so that was something that was always supervision and someone telling you to take care of, of, insisting that you take care of what's around you.  So those are some of the sights and sounds.  Also, I didn't mention, that as I moved away from public housing, as I got older, I started selling magazines, Ebony magazine and Our World.  Our World magazine went eventually out of business.  Of course, Ebony continues to today but back in the early, early '40s [1940s], I would get on my bicycle and I would ride outside of public housing and so I was expanding my world and I would ride to streets beyond to customers that I had then but as I was on my bicycle, I would pass Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I would pass Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and all the, all the schools.  So I knew then, in my mind, college was not something far away or something that I just kind of dreamed about.  I could see it and I could see the students and I knew that my father [Thomas Dawson] went to school there and, you know, if he went to school there, I could go to school there and I would just, I would pass it on my bicycle.  So that was a sight that I can remember and it was not something strange or foreign or unattainable or out of sight, it was part of what I saw and was around.  So the, so the working and the seeing, those kind of sights around me, sort of stick with me today.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could see a pretty clear path to what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 505741
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little boy?  It may sound redundant because you've already given us quite a clue.  You seem like you're very entrepreneurial and self-confident.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's true.  One of the things in one of the pictures that I was looking at this morning was a picture of me as a, maybe twelve years old, on a train going to Washington, D.C. as a safety patrolman and I was a student at Ashby Street Elementary School [Ashby Street School; E.R. Carter Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I used to walk to school.  I think I was self-confident but I remember that was my first exposure to responsibility and--
Speaker 1: What, being a patrol boy or--
Speaker 2: Yes, and being recognized because I started out, of course, you wear, you know, sort of a white striped, then you have a--
Speaker 1: It's a belt, right?
Speaker 2: It's a belt that goes around you and there were three categories.  I started out as a, I guess it's a private.  You get a badge that you put on the stripe and then I was promoted to lieutenant and then I became a captain, the captain, and that was the highest officer you could have as a safety patrolman and so I learned then responsibility.  That helped my self-esteem and this picture that I describe, a group of safety patrolmen, going to Washington, D.C. to walk in a parade.  I don't remember exactly what kind of parade at that time but I was about twelve years old.  But there were times in my life when I was not as self-confident.  It was the same kind of thing that probably happened to many young, young people and that was going through a period of having bad skin and, you know, as a teenager and that's something that I remember that sort of diminished my self-esteem, you know, at that time, but I had, as I mentioned, a very strong foundation from my family and the experiences that I, that I had.  So, all those things sort of, sort of won out and really prevailed but I was like many other teenagers that had different kinds of problems and mine, I think, one that I remember was the loss of my smooth baby skin and being a teenager having acne.  So those are the kind of things I had to work through, like a lot of other teenagers.
Story_ID: 505742
Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in school?  What did you like best about school?  What did you like, period?  I mean, what subjects were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that occurred to me during that period that I had an uncle [Dr. Otis McCree] who was not, who married an aunt, my mother's [Katherine Singleton Dawson] sister, who was a doctor and I was very impressed with him.  He was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate and a Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] graduate and with a tremendous outgoing personality and I said early on, notwithstanding the fact, as I said, that during the time that I was doing business, I did not know that eventually I was going to be a business man.  So, my first aspiration was to be a doctor and so as far as some favorite subjects, I said I was going to be a doctor so naturally I was interested in chemistry and biology and when I first went to Morehouse I was a pre-med student but I was always good in English which I learned later was very important.  And I also remember in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] that I had an excellent teacher who taught with a passion, the conjugation of verbs that my children I don't think learned, they went to some very fine schools, ending up both of them at, one at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], one at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], could not or cannot today conjugate verbs the way that I can from the, you know, the present to the future tense, future perfect.   And so, in answer to your question in a long way, I was a pre-med student, I thought I was going to be a doctor but the English was important, and I was just, I was a good student in high school.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in high school that you remember that they were particularly helpful to you or were interested in you?
Speaker 2: I had a number of, I had good teachers, a number of them, one I remember is Mr. Gaines [ph.] in physics and I believe that I had, for some reason, not turned in a paper on time and I thought I had a good reason for not doing it but he gave me a second chance to write this paper, turn it in, and he wrote on the paper, it was an "A" paper but he said that a person with special talent like you should never ask for special consideration.  So, he gave me a second chance, I had asked for it, and, but he was telling me it was a life lesson that I should not go through life making excuses because you won't always get a second chance and he didn't say that and I don't think I understood it when I first read what he wrote but that's what he meant and I remember that.  That was one of many.
Story_ID: 505743
Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you the name of your grade school.  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: It was Ashby Street School [Atlanta, Georgia] and it became E.R. Carter Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: So now it's E.R. Carter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then went to Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the lessons that I learned at Ashby Street School was the fact that I was, there was a special drive to raise money for a Cub Scout hut on the playground of the school and I remember raising the most money, and I don't know if I got some little award or something, but I raised the most money of all the different kids for that Cub Scout hut.  However, that was in the seventh grade and didn't really realize it at the time but when the hut was built, I was gone onto Booker T. Washington High School but it really taught me a lesson that in life sometimes you do something or you work on a project or you help someone or you do something, that doesn't benefit you, it benefits someone that comes behind you but it's worth the effort and it's something I look back on because I never even went inside the Cub Scout hut after it was built and I'm sure it was a fun place for the, you know, the Cub Scouts to maybe have their meetings and crafts and so forth but I never, I never had the benefit of going there but it was something that I reflect on, proudly, that I helped to raise money for the Cub Scout hut and, of course, that lesson has stuck with me all of my life but you, you know, you plant trees sometimes and you know that by the time the tree, you know, grows, you may not be here but someone else may enjoy the shade of that, a tree.
Story_ID: 505744
Speaker 1: Did you, when you graduated from Booker T. Washington [High School, Atlanta, Georgia], were you, did you, had you run for class office or anything like that or any of that sort of high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was active in high school.  I was the business manager in my senior class and I played in the band.  I played clarinet in Booker T. Washington marching band and was, I guess you could say, I had good friends, a large number of friends in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, it was a good time for me.
Speaker 1: Were there any other, any high school classmates that we would recognize now or know that went on to do anything, you know, noble or--
Speaker 2: Not on a national level.  We have an outstanding musician here that was in the band with me who still has a band that plays very popular, is Bill Odom Trio and at our fiftieth anniversary, he played for our high school, fiftieth anniversary celebration.  We've, so we didn't have anyone that's real, real famous.  Maybe when you leave I'll think of someone but it doesn't really jump out on me.  We have some good athletes and good musicians and good solid citizens and, you know, a lot of, a lot of them, you know, teachers.  Not a lot of people in business and, but I, sometimes I look back and I'm just amazed that the things that occurred and I'm, I have a very strong faith and things that have happened to me I feel that there has been a divine intervention as I look back over those times and when I think in terms of being a business manager of the senior class, it was, I don't think that I thought that this is an office that I want to run for because one day I'm going to be a businessman.  It didn't occur that way.  I think it was just in the excitement of being a high school student and I just decided I was going to be the business manager but not with any kind of a future in mind (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Story_ID: 505745
Speaker 1: --As you describe and look back at your activities as a youth, you were involved in a lot of business activities.
Speaker 2: But I didn't know that it was business, I knew that I was, what I knew was that I was making money, that's what I, I didn't think of it in terms of business.  I didn't think of it in terms of one day being involved in a $94 million development outside of Atlanta [Georgia] in a major city in the east, a redevelopment of the downtown city block that, I mean it, I guess you really can't look that far in the future, although some people do if you listen to a Donald Trump and then you hear him talk.  I mean, he talks, he, that he knew this or he knew that and, but I had not that kind of a vision but I knew the importance of making money and along the way I learned, you know, responsibility and service and satisfying your customer and so the things that I knew when I was, in going to business, that were part of success, and I really didn't, didn't realize that I had learned early on.
Speaker 1: Now those things are very important.  I know--
Speaker 2: That's the key to success.
Speaker 1: Yes, my father's a barber and he used to always point out businesses, especially black businesses.  We would go into where the people didn't understand that.  They'd start a business but they would, they were rude to you, ignore you when you come in, you know, be doing something else or a person who started the business had his relatives in there and really didn't care about what was going on and it was, you know, it could be, he would always point out and said, that's not the way to do business.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You're going to be out of business.  So--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So I'm very proud of my longevity, proud of success and the longevity--
Story_ID: 505746
Speaker 1: But as I said, I feel very strongly about a divine intervention.  'Cause going back to, to college, I mentioned that I was a pre-med student but I had something that occurred during my life that sort of derailed me and--
Speaker 2: When you were in college?
Speaker 1: When I was in college.  I was, my freshman year, I finished number three in the class, ranking number three, and during my sophomore year, it's not important for me to mention the details of what occurred, but it had such a negative impact on me that I quit school.  I went to work at Lockheed Aircraft [Company; Lockheed Martin Corporation].
Speaker 2: Now, I hope it's not too embarrassing, what happened, but, but it does help to know the story.  What can you tell us about what happened to make you drop out of school and having been such an outstanding student?
Speaker 1: Well, it was something that occurred that I was innocent of but I could not prove my innocence.  I was not able to prove my innocence and it was very discouraging.
Speaker 2: It wasn't a criminal thing?
Speaker 1: It was not criminal.
Speaker 2: Well, okay.
Speaker 1: It was not criminal.
Speaker 2: I think I can almost read between the lines here.  It's something today they could probably prove one way or the other, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, it'd be very simple to prove and I think that if it were something that would have been true, it would not have had the same impact on me because I think that you can deal with things that are, you know, that are true.  It's something that is not true and you cannot prove your innocence--
Speaker 2: Did it make you bitter or make you angry?
Speaker 1: It made me bitter.  It made me angry and I was very distracted because my, my sophomore year my grades continued to be good until this point and so, as I said, I quit and went to work at Lockheed Aircraft and I learned quite a bit there.  I never realized that I had mechanical skills.  So I was a structure assembler at Lockheed and, but during the time that I was at Lockheed working and away from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I became involved in real estate.  I took a real estate salesperson's exam and that was my first beginning in real estate and the beginning of the end of my being a pre-med student and planning to go to become a doctor.  So, as I got more involved in real estate, on a part-time basis, and continuing with Lockheed, I went back to Morehouse to take some classes and eventually I finished Morehouse and, of course, you know, left Lockheed behind and the real estate continued on.  When I graduated from Morehouse, I had, my life had evolved.  I had progressed to the point where I was the sales manager of a well-known and established real estate brokerage firm on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], Alexander & Associates [Inc.], which subsequently became Alexander-Dawson & Associates [Inc.].
Story_ID: 505747
Speaker 1: Well, let me go back a little bit now, you graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in, was it, '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1953, start at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: In 1953, was number three in the class but I graduated from Morehouse in 1963.
Speaker 1: Right, that's ten years later?
Speaker 2: Ten years--
Speaker 1: It took you to, you know, that amount of time to get through this crisis and working and all that.
Speaker 2: Yes, but during that time, I had established myself in real estate.  My career in real estate and in business was well on its way.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I read on your resume that you've been involved for forty-seven years.  I counted back from 1963 and it didn't seem possible.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I said, that, hmm, what happened, you know?  So--
Speaker 2: So it was, it was 1957 when I first got involved in real estate.  So counting from 1957 to 2004, that's forty-seven years.  So, I mean, in 1957 I was actively working in the real estate business.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you something about the climate in which you were working then and about the national scene now.  Around '57 [1957] is a year, I guess, that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] kind of emerges, it's '56 [1956], '57 [1957], he emerges as a national figure--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we're sitting here nine minutes away from Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] and Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and all that and I know the crisis that he was dealing with was in Montgomery [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the '50s [1950s] and, but SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] became big here in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --going forward into the '60s [1960s] and, were you aware of all, well, you know, what did you think about all the civil rights activity and the changes, I mean, that people were trying to make in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, of course, a very exciting time, a very serious time and being there on Auburn Avenue, I would see Martin Luther King walk down Auburn Avenue.  Our office was right across the street from Mutual Federal Savings and Loan [Mutual Federal Savings Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] and on several occasions I would see Martin Luther King walk down the street, walk into Mutual Federal and I'd, I assume he had a savings, he had a savings account and he was making a deposit, like a, you know, like a normal person and, of course, you knew at that time that he was a, he was, well famous really from, almost from day one and knew what he was doing.  Also during that period was the first time that I met [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, was on Auburn Avenue.  T.M. Alexander Jr., who I worked with in real estate, worked with he and his father [T.M. Alexander, Sr.], but he introduced me to Andy.  Andy came into the office and so I admit, I can remember in the front of the office, Andy was just coming to Atlanta during that period.  I remember one of the things that was interesting during that time.  T.M. Alexander Jr. always wanted to do different things in business.  I mean, we were there in real estate and real estate brokerage and real estate sales at that time but T.M. wanted to open a print shop upstairs, which he did.  He bought some equipment but I remember the first job that we had was for a [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte concert.  We did a program and it was a benefit for SCLC at the city auditorium [Atlanta Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia] and I remember we had to stay up all night to get the programs ready but that was one of my memories during that period that that was a time when, of the movement and activity and the people meeting someone like Andrew Young who continues to be a friend today but seeing, you know, M.L. King--
Story_ID: 505748
Speaker 1: --And also seeing, you know, during that time real estate opportunities for minorities to evolve.  We had, I mentioned Mutual Federal Savings and Loan [Mutual Federal Savings Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], they made loans during the period that I was first getting involved in real estate.  We were right next door to Trust, to Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia], that made funds available to Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] that made loans to minorities and one of the interesting things during that period was the fact that Atlanta [Georgia] has always had a very strong middle class because of the presence over the years of black educational institutions.  So, blacks could work and go to school and it wasn't, again, something that was distant, faraway, it was just right there for us, for our parents.  So, we had this strong black middle class.  We had the financial institutions that were there.  The white institutions saw the black institutions making loans and maybe they didn't make a lot of loans but they made loans available so white institutions probably, to a greater degree and to, in greater numbers, made loans to blacks.  It was, it was almost like the blacks were there and identified a market.  The whites' institutions, financial institutions, saw this market and made loans available.  So we, as real estate sales people and brokers, we could go to a black institution or white institution.  So mortgage money was available during this period and this was not something new at that time, it just was, it just became more prevalent and more blacks, families, bought homes.  And, of course, you had the FHA [Federal Housing Administration] and VA [U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs] loans available at that time so it was, it was a very good time and it was a changing time with the Civil Rights Movement as sort of an activity that was going on at the same time.
Story_ID: 505749
Speaker 1: Now are there any, I know you had one story, kind of a business story about, about, I don't know why I keep thinking, Buck Bennie, and I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Mays, Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Mays, yes Benjamin Mays, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, people call him that but what was it, you want to tell us that story and maybe talk about some of the professors at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well one of the, one of the things, before I tell you any stories, is that Morehouse really molded me and in many ways, you know, going back and it was something that my father [Thomas Dawson] never put pressure on me and to say that you had to do this.  So, I mean, I had an opportunity to grow and to sort of step aside, do other things, as I mentioned, Lockheed [Aircraft Company; Lockheed Martin Corporation], starting a career in real estate and go back to Morehouse but I would see Dr. Mays and I can just visualize that today, his very erect, straight walk across the campus and he'd just exude a confidence.  When I would hear him in chapel, he was very powerful, very charismatic person and the chapel was the greatest thing that happened to me at Morehouse because I saw great men, great black men, come and talked about, talked to us about what the problems were and what the possibilities were and what our place in the world should be as a graduate of Morehouse.  So I had this great admiration for Dr. Mays and his 'Born to Rebel[: An Autobiography,' Benjamin E. Mays] and that's the, a book that's really a great book.  It's a simple book but it tells about his, his life story and things that happened to him at Bates College [Lewiston, Maine] and at Howard University school of religion [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], but one of the interesting stories about Dr. Mays that I've heard down through the years and when I was a student there, was that Dr. Mays was in Chicago [Illinois] at an educational meeting and he was walking on the street and he saw this young man who was somewhat tattered at that time, in tattered clothing, but he was selling pies and immediately Dr. Mays recognized this person as a former student who was an outstanding, actually a brilliant student at Morehouse, and Dr. Mays, in his very commanding voice, said, "Young man, I recognize you, you were at Morehouse and I recognize and I remember that you were an outstanding student and I'm shocked to see you here on the streets selling pies."  Said, "We felt when you were a student that you were going to come out and make a contribution to your city and your country and I'm disappointed to see you here on the street doing what you're doing," and the young man waited patiently and Dr. Mays was a great speaker and he was a very emotional man.  He talked on and on to this young man and finally this young man became somewhat exasperated and interrupted the great Dr. Mays and said, "Dr. Mays, please," he said, "damn all of that rhetoric, buy a pie."  And this was one of the Buck Bennie stories that I heard, there are many others and I'm sure that you've heard them.  But one of the proudest moments of my life was to receive the Bennie Award at the annual [A] Candle in the Dark Gala in 2002 and I received the Bennie Award in Achievement in Business [sic. Bennie Achievement Award] that I'm very proud of.
Story_ID: 505750
Speaker 1: Who were some of the speakers?  You said there were speakers that would come to chapel [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Who were some of the people that you were exposed to when you were a student?
Speaker 2: Well that was a Reverend Sandy Ray who, from Brooklyn, New York [New York] that was an outstanding preacher and was one that I remember very well.  During that time, we had student speakers like a, you know, like a Maynard Jackson [Jr.] who was always inspirational.  We had this president of the senior class, a young man whose name was Olatunji and he was--
Speaker 1: That's not Michael Babatunde Olatunji is it?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's deceased now.
Speaker 1: Became the percussionist.
Speaker 2: Percussionist.  He was there, and he was the president of the student body.
Speaker 1: President of the student--I didn't know, I had no idea.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, he was, he was an outstanding student but quite a few ministers who, who spoke there in chapel they were always inspiring.  At the time that I was in school, chapel attendance was mandatory.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever hear Howard Thurman speak?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and read Howard Thurman but he was one of a kind.  He's one of a kind.
Story_ID: 505751
Speaker 1: Let's pick up the career again and now in the early '60s [1960s], Atlanta [Georgia] was experiencing some agitation.  I think they started to do some demonstrating here in Atlanta around '63 [1963], '64 [1964], around discrimination in employment and housing and other areas.  Did things start opening up then for, for realtists, you know, to--
Speaker 2: Yes.  During that time, I became a member of a local real estate board, the Empire Real Estate Board [Inc.; Empire Board of Realtists, The Atlanta Chapter of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers, Inc.] that was very much involved.  It was formed in 1939 and people like Q.V. Williamson and W.L. Calloway, T.M. Alexander, Sr., [Walter H.] "Chief" Aiken who was part Indian [Native American] who came here from Oklahoma was a, was a builder.  One of his major construction projects was the Waluhaje Apartments [Atlanta, Georgia] that was famous here but he--
Speaker 1: "Chief" Aiken was it?  Okay, "A"--
Speaker 2: "Chief" Aiken.  Yes, it's "W," W.H. Aiken, A-I-K-E-N, was very involved in the national Democratic politics and knew President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt but he was able to build houses with, for veterans and he used to work around Atlanta and he would ride a horse.  "Chief" Aiken rode a horse around from one project or one subdivision to the other around and so forth.  He was known, that he was quite a character but he was--
Speaker 1: Did he wear the Indian garb or, too, or what?
Speaker 2: No, he was more of like the, not that he didn't, never wear the garb but I never saw him but he was more like the John Wayne rugged-type but he, he had, he was a reddish color and, but he was part of during that period when, back to 1939 when the Empire Real Estate Board was formed that, when I became a member, probably around 1959, that the Empire Board was involved in challenging signed ordinances that eliminated an opportunity to put up a "For Sale" sign that a piece of property was for sale and, of course, we were concerned about fair housing legislation in the real estate license law here in Atlanta and in Georgia.
Story_ID: 505752
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you then, kind of focusing on your, one of your mentors, T.M. Alexander.  I think you mentioned him.  We kind of went past him, but we could probably go back and focus on him now.
Speaker 2: Well, T.M. Alexander, Sr. and T.M. Alexander, Jr., T.M. Alexander, Jr. was maybe three, four years older than I and we knew each other growing up, although he was a few years ahead of me, but T.M. Alexander, Jr. went away to school but he came back and asked me if I would join his, his firm and his father's firm, real estate firm [Alexander & Associates, Inc.; Alexander-Dawson & Associates, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], and at the time, T.M. was, Junior, was teaching a class at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was taking the class, it was in new enterprise, was the name of the class, but we had a conversation and he said, I'd like for you to, at the time I was working with Q.V. Williamson, T.M., Jr. said, I want you to come and be the sales manager at our real estate firm on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia].  So that was the, sort of how I first started working with the Alexanders.  At that time, T.M. Alexander was, Senior, was very well established in the insurance business, the casualty insurance business, which was very unique for a minority firm and was probably the only, and certainly the largest, casualty insurance company in the country and it was also located on Auburn Avenue  but right across the street from Alexander & Associates, the real estate brokerage firm but, but I was a sales manager that time and soon afterwards, Alexander & Associates became Alexander-Dawson & Associates and I had a career there for about seven, seven years.  Over time, there was a tragedy.  T.M. Alexander, Jr. was, was lost at sea and I think that after that occurred, although T.M. Alexander, Sr. and I had been close because the three of us were partners but most of the time I spent with T.M., T.M., Jr. but T.M. Alexander, Sr. and I became much, much closer after T.M. Alexander, Jr.'s death.
Speaker 1: Now, what year was this when T.M., Jr.--
Speaker 2: Now, the dates are going to be somewhat difficult for me--
Speaker 1: Well, if you could approximate about when it might have-
Speaker 2: It was, it was during the mid-'60s [sic. 1983].
Speaker 1: And what happened?  Did his ship sink or what happened?
Speaker 2: He was on a, it was on a cruise with a group and it was in the, in the islands on a cruise and he went onboard ship and I think as he arrived onboard there was a, water came over the deck and washed him over, overboard.  So that was a real tragedy and a real loss because, he was sort of in the prime of his life.  He was a person bigger than, than life--
Story_ID: 505753
Speaker 1: But the father, T.M. Alexander, Sr., was a business icon.  In 1941, as the, as the war [World War II, WWII] was beginning, T.M., Sr. was building an English Tudor house [sic. neo-French Normandy chateau] in the exclusive West Hunter [Hunter Road, Westside, Atlanta, Georgia] residential community of Atlanta [Georgia] and was always involved in politics, in the business of the city, particularly black business, in the cultural scene and he was always encouraging to me.  One of the things that we did that was quite interesting is that during this period that I was there and in looking at the big picture of what was going on in the Civil Rights Movement, and what was going on in Atlanta, this was a period when the Braves were coming, the Atlanta Braves were coming to Atlanta and the Atlanta Falcons.  Atlanta was becoming sort of a new South and was sort of reaching to be more of a national, even an international city and was suffering growing pains and this was a period of the infamous Peyton Wall where our well-regarded mayor, Ivan Allen [Jr.], actually agreed to put up a wall across Peyton Road to keep black families from going into southwest Atlanta.  Ultimately what has happened is that, you know, the public pressure, and it became known on an international basis as, you know, the wall came down and, of course, today, you know, blacks live everywhere and certainly went into, at that time, southwest Atlanta and just continued, just continued on, the movement, as far as integrating communities or establishing black communities where there was only whites at one time, but the, it was very interesting that the, with the wall because at that time Dr. J.B. Harris, who was a podiatrist whose office was on Auburn Avenue, had agreed to sell fifty-two acres of land on Peyton Road to T.M. Alexander, Sr. and T.M. [Alexander], Jr. and myself and Dr. [Hilliard Alphonso] Bowen, who was T.M., Jr.'s father-in-law and also was assistant superintendent of schools of the City of Atlanta and so the wall was there.  We discovered that part of Dr. Harris' land was behind this wall and the story goes that T.M. Alexander, Sr. called Mayor Ivan Allen and told him that, Mr. Mayor, we have some property and part of it is behind the wall and, in fact, there are four lots as part of this fifty-two acres that have frontage on Peyton Road and I think it was a case of a hint to the wise and sufficient and may not have been the only reason but very soon after that the wall came down 'cause what it really meant was that we had property behind the wall and at least four families would be able to buy the lots so we could build the houses.  You see, the houses were built for them behind the Peyton Wall.
Story_ID: 505754
Speaker 1: But there were a number of things that were happening during this same time, because I mentioned the [Atlanta] Braves and the [Atlanta] Falcons and--
Speaker 2: Now this is, the time we're talking about as early as seven--
Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s].
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 1: Yes, early, well, mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s], I guess, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, mid-'60s [1960s], when the Braves and the Falcons was coming.
Speaker 2: The Braves came around '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], right?
Speaker 1: Well, it was right about mid-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sixty-six [1966], I think.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: That's when they moved to--
Speaker 1: That's what I said, mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Oh, '66 [1966], okay, I'm sorry, all right.
Speaker 1: Yes, and what occurred during this period was that the white power structure in Atlanta [Georgia] was concerned about the image of the city.  So we have this backdrop of the Peyton Wall and we have the Braves and the Falcons, you know, they've been coming just one day.  It was kind of like a, it was, you knew a year ahead because they were leaving Milwaukee [Wisconsin], you know, just all of a sudden, you knew that they were coming, had to build a stadium and with the Falcons, it was a case of Rankin [M.] Smith [Sr.], you know, buying a team of, formation of a team, it was an expansion team.  So, this was sort of over time, over a period of time, so the white power structure, this included men like Mr. [Richard H.] Rich who was the head of Rich's Department Store at that time, there was a Mr. [James V.] Carmichael who was the head of Scripto Pen and [Scripto] Pen Company and others said, we need to get together and, and do something about the image.  And this was the case of my being present when Mr. [John A.] Sibley of Trust Company Bank, Trust Company [of Georgia] bank [SunTrust Banks] is the, known as The Coca-Cola [Company] bank, and Mr. Sibley of King & Spalding [LLP] premier law firm, called T.M. Alexander, Sr. and said, and now [Atlanta] Civic Enterprise, wants to create some housing.  They would be available to the black athletes that come into Atlanta and the idea is to--
Speaker 2: Because they were coming, right?  Because if you bring the Braves in, you're bringing in Hank Aaron?
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: You got a place so you can't have a segregated team now?
Speaker 1: You're going to also bring in some Latinos, you're going to, you're going to want to bring in some players who might have a white girlfriend so you're going to bring all of that.
Speaker 2: So, there's a lot of stuff coming to a head, because the governor is still Lester Maddox who's passing out axe handles at the door of his restaurant [The Pickrick Cafeteria, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: A lot of things going on at that time.
Story_ID: 505755
Speaker 1: So, Atlanta Civic Enterprise says, we are going to make available a million dollar revolving account, and we want you to bring us some proposals for housing and you will be the developer and you can make profits from, you can make, you know, profit from what you do.  So, T.M. Alexander [Sr.], of course, selected his son [T.M. Alexander, Jr.] and the son selected his father-in-law, Dr. [Hilliard Alphonso] Bowen, and I was selected as a member of this group.  So that was one of my first experiences with being a developer because we developed University Plaza Apartments in the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia] that was just a beautiful facility.  The financing was, was made available by Metropolitan [Life] Insurance Company [MetLife, Inc.].  We had one of our contractors, and the construction of it was [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell, but it was, we had, the architecture was very unique, Holiday Hill Stone, it was round, circular, swimming pool in the middle of one circle and in the other building, which was furnished, a famous restaurant called the Birdcage [Restaurant] that became really a place where, not only athletes came but everyone came.  Up to that point, we had the Paschal's La Carrousel [La Carrousel Lounge, Atlanta, Georgia] but, so the new place in town was the Birdcage at University Plaza and it was so unique that Chief [Herbert Turner] Jenkins, who was the police chief would, now this was before we had mixed drinks, but the people would come on Sundays for brunch before a [Atlanta] Falcons game and the bar would be open and everybody just understood, you know, Atlanta [Georgia] was coming of age and that was, you know, that was integration, you know, in the crowd and there were people had brunch and they had, they had drinks and the police chief was, you know, was there.  No one ever said anything.  It was coming, but Atlanta would be, we were what Atlanta was to be before it was, before it happened but we also developed with money from the Atlanta Civic Enterprise, the subdivision on the fifty-two acres I was just describing.  It's a beautiful homes [Harris Manor Homes] that was sort of the gateway to movement to black families into southwest Atlanta and beyond.  So Atlanta Civic Enterprise, this is a very interesting story that should be pursued because it was, it was a very important, from a standpoint, it's a story that really hasn't been told about the white business community being concerned about the image of the city and what it did to have an impact on, not only the perception but things that really happened that they're not really well-known but I was right there in the middle of it and, of course, T.M. Alexander, Sr. was selected because of his longevity, because he had been a good, sound businessman and because of his honesty and integrity.  And this is something that I learned then that was just, that just more learning about business and the importance of relationships and how money is available to do what you want to do if you know the right people and that you are perceived as being someone who is knowledgeable and competent and an honest--honest and a person of integrity.
Story_ID: 505756
Speaker 1: Two things I'm hearing here, and we've heard similar stories from Memphis [Tennessee], from Biloxi, Mississippi, Charlotte, North Carolina, of the white business community in those cities, during segregation, actually and, Lexington, Kentucky, too, same thing, wanting to, you know, send greater business opportunities that they could only, you know, I mean the social structure was an impediment to business growth and they saw it that way.  And so, a lot of the, and so what you're saying is that development on one hand, I mean, new development that you all were doing was actually changing the social structure of the city [Atlanta, Georgia] as well, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --with the, with the aid of the white business community that had the money to do it, that actually wanted to see the climate change.
Speaker 2: And, and they were really in the background.  They were in the background.  They preferred it that way and, of course, they gave us an opportunity, they said, we want you to make a profit, you know, for what you, the service you are providing and what you are doing and that didn't mean that we didn't have to put up any money.  I mean, we had to put up the money but, for instance, University Plaza [Apartments, Atlanta, Georgia] was a million dollar development which was 127 apartments and they were basically luxury apartments and--
Speaker 1: This is a million dollars back in 1960--late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: This is a different million dollars.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and the loan that we got, we got an $800,000 loan from Metropolitan Life [Insurance Company; MetLife, Inc.] and Atlanta Civic Enterprise made a second mortgage available.  I remember it was at five percent interest and then the four of us put in the rest of the money.  So, we had to, we had to do the work and we had to put some money in but in particular, this $800,000 loan, which was the major portion of it, would never have been available if Metropolitan Insurance Company was not really told that this is something that you should do for the City of Atlanta [Georgia] by the white business community.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lesson, I guess, of the civil rights story that isn't really told that much.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: I know the political stories and the confrontations in which you receive and not this part.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 505757
Speaker 1: I guess, just catch us up to, you know, so this really got, this kicked you off into the big money, I guess, in terms of development and--
Speaker 2: Yes, and, of course, as I mentioned that the death of T.M. Alexander, Jr. and one of the things that eventually I did in 1969 was to, was to form our current company, which is Harold A. Dawson Company [Inc.,; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia], but T.M. Alexander, Sr. and myself, we continued to be friends and had a very strong relationship until his death, I think in 2001, I believe it was, and, you know, very, very close.  He was a mentor of mine, a very strong supporter and he told me, you know, many stories about his father [James Alexander] in Montgomery [Alabama] and the, and he was a craftsman and the buildings that he worked on and, as I mentioned, the many stories about T.M. Alexander, Sr. but one of the most interesting was the fact that he built this English Tudor castle [sic. neo-French Normandy chateau] that was a real show place that was on Hunter Road [Atlanta, Georgia] and at a time when blacks did not have the ability to build that kind of a, that kind of a house.
Speaker 1: Now this is for himself, right?
Speaker 2: This is for himself and his family.  He had three children and after the, I mentioned the concert, the, and the thing I told you about, was the other thing for the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], it was at the [Atlanta Municipal] Auditorium [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 2: Harry Belafonte.  After that concert, there was a big party at Mr. Alexander's home and Harry Belafonte was there.  This was after the concert.
Story_ID: 505758
Speaker 1: So you were partners with Mr. [T.M.] Alexander [Sr.] until he died?  Or did you split before that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was before then.  In 1969, was when I formed my own firm [Harold A. Dawson Company, Inc.; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and ultimately my son [Harold A. Dawson, Jr.] came in to be a part.  He is the president of our, of our company and he is the, he is the one with the, with the vision now and the contacts and he directs the development, primarily the, you know, the development that we're involved in now.  He has a business plan and he has a strategy that relates to urban development, mixed use, transit oriented, urban development.  It was something that we do here in Atlanta [Georgia], we've done, are doing it in other parts of the country at this time.  It's something that, as I said, started back then, was for his, my understanding and having an interest in real estate development as opposed to selling houses and brokerage but I have learned about, you know, property management.  I've been through that and other phases of real estate but for the last twenty years, and what we do now, is real estate developers which is, is somewhat unique as far as blacks are concerned because it is not construction, it's not architecture, it's not engineering, although all those components come to, you bring, a developer brings to, to the table and coordinates but the developer has the vision and the financial capability to make a project become a reality.  And so, there are, all these other disciplines that are out there that are important but the developer is the conductor or the orchestrator of when you see some of the developments that we have, that we have done over the years, quite often people think that we've built, you know, this, but we are not in the construction business but we hire architects, we hire engineers, we hire contractors, we hire lawyers to provide all of the services that are needed and then we obtain the land and we have the vision as to what should be there.  We have to have someone determine the market feasibility and then we have to have someone who will finance it and those who want to invest in it.  So, that's what we do today but University Plaza [Apartments, Atlanta, Georgia], with T.M. Alexander, Sr., was a major project and that was in the mid-60s [1960s] and my son, who graduated from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], was able to work with Trammell Crow who is one of the premier developers in the country but he learned finance and development working four years with the Trammell Crow [Company] firm out in Dallas [Texas] and making, learning, meeting developers, I mean, meeting investors and financial sources all over the country that he has brought to our firm, and he's been here now, I guess, for almost ten years.
Story_ID: 505759
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your volunteer activities in terms of the various real estate associations and your involvement in improving the professionalism in the black realtists, in realtists.
Speaker 2: I mentioned earlier about me being a member of the Empire Real Estate Board [Empire Board of Realtists, Inc., Atlanta Chapter of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers, Inc.] and I had opportunities, I mentioned to know some very outstanding businessmen and women who were involved in real estate, particularly with the Empire Real Estate Board and I had the opportunity to serve as president of the Empire Real Estate Board from, for three years, 1970 to 1972, and one of the things that the board did was very much, involved in seeing that there was equal opportunity in housing, in Atlanta [Georgia], and we worked very hard to improve the professionalism of all of our members and over those years we had, we played a very major role in the political, social and cultural scene in Atlanta up until today.  So we're proud of that organization and the opportunity to serve and that serving with the Empire Board gave me an opportunity to work with the National Association of Real Estate Brokers [NAREB] on the national level and I was the tenth president of the, of NAREB, serving from 1977 to 1979 and we had a great impact, appearing before [U.S.] Congress and committees about fair housing, worked very hard to see the fair housing legislation pass and been sort of on guard to make sure that these rights have not eroded, the financing would be available to, to low-end, low income minorities and that housing programs would help throughout the country and that opportunities be available to minority appraisers and mortgage brokers.  All of this was sort of the mission of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers that I've had an opportunity to work with over the years.
Story_ID: 505760
Speaker 1: Also back here in Georgia, in the early '70s [1970s], 1972, [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] appointed me as the first black in the South to be a member of a real estate commission.  So I was a member of the Georgia Real Estate Commission [& Appraisers Board] and served for seventeen years, from 1972 to 1989, was re-appointed twice by Jimmy Carter and two other governors [Governor George Busbee and Governor Joe Frank Harris].  This was during the time that I was on the commission, a number of things took place, and probably one of the most important thing was the, getting into the law, fair housing legislation and rules were promulgated based on that, that fair housing law that was, that was passed.  And also during this time of being on the Georgia Real Estate Commission gave me an opportunity to be a member of the international license law group, that's now seventy-five years old and the members of that organization regulates, I guess, in excess of four million licensees around the country.  In 1985, I became the first and only black president of what is, was known as the National Association of Real Estate License Law Officials, NARELLO [Association of Real Estate License Law Officials (ARELLO)], is now known as the Association of Real Estate License for Officials.  And one of the most interesting thing that happened in 1985 when I was president was that South Africa submitted an application to be a member of what was then NARELLO, and this was, at the time when apartheid was still in existence and there were very, very few blacks that were part of this, or while I was the president, there were very few blacks around because there were very few blacks on real estate commissions around the, around the country but, to make a long story short, the decision was made without a lot of discussion, although there was a great desire for NARELLO to become more international in scope but the application was tabled and, of course, now South Africa and a number of other international license law groups are members but at that time, out of some influence on my part and maybe respect for me and also based on principal that the board of directors tabled the application of South Africa at that time, that was in 1985, but I've had opportunities to work with the team of commerce and I've met a lot of people and one of the things that always has happened is that in service in these organizations, I have gotten out of, while it was time-consuming, gotten out of more than, than I really put in from the standpoint of understanding and knowledge and just an opportunity to serve.
Story_ID: 505761
Speaker 1: I think that education is important for our profession to become more educated in some areas, particularly in the area of appraising and this area of real estate development.  I think for the future of cities and undeserved communities, that you need more minorities in the development, in the development field, and while you don't have, you can't get a degree in development but there are classes that are taught at some very good schools.  They give you an opportunity to learn more about urban development, urban life, urban from, you know, finance, population, all of these, all these things.  I think that real estate sales and brokerage, while it's very important, will take care of itself, although there is a revolution involving the Internet that impacts, or is impacting, realtor, to a greater degree in the future, impact real estate sales and the exchange of real estate.  I think that one of the areas in, as far as importance that I feel being very important, is this area of the development, or redevelopment of the cities and when I talk about development, it's just not always new construction or something new, but renovation of existing buildings and reuse of existing buildings in our cities, because there are great opportunities there.
Story_ID: 505762
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, is there any major thing that you would do different?
Speaker 2: As I mentioned earlier, I think the things that have happened to me have been by divine intervention and I cannot say that I had a plan, that you know, that all these things that took place really came about because of something that I did.  I have a very strong faith and a number of things that have happened to me, particularly relating to my health, and two separate encounters with cancer but a lot of very good things that have happened that were not of my making, a number of things that helped me to be resilient and I'm very proud of the success that I have had but I think that I've just been extremely blessed and I have to give all of the credit, my faith says that, God has, has guided me and so things have just happened in my life and continue to happen that just happen and I just sort of just move on and just step, just keep moving forward.  So I don't, I don't think of anything I could have done differently.  I did tell you that I had planned to be a doctor and that's the only plan that I can really think of.  After I did not become a doctor, just things just sort of unfolded for me and there's just, you know, next year I'll be seventy years old and I'm still going pretty strong.  I slowed down a little bit but I think it's been divine intervention.
Story_ID: 505763
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at all the things you've done, what would you see at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think it's a legacy first to my family.  Our family is close.  I think that the business [Harold A. Dawson Company, Inc.; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia] has brought our family together.  It has helped, of course, to support the family but more important than that, I'm very proud of the service that I have provided, the people that I have met, those who have helped me and the people that I have been able to help, individually, and particularly, through the organizations that I've had the opportunity to serve in.  And so, I have received some recognition which is very gratifying but it sort of validates the fact that I've made a difference and that those people that I have worked with and those people that I have served and organizations that I've served, have benefited from my working with those organizations.  So that legacy and the fact that I can point to many people who are in business and who are successful that I have touched in some way, whether from an organizational standpoint, whether through scholarships and financing or through just a word of encouragement, this is part of my legacy and, of course, it's very gratifying to be able to show, or to touch, those buildings that we've been a part of developing in different places around the country, to have a positive impact on those communities that we have gone into.  Many of those communities were underserved, and what we have done, have had a positive impact on the people who lived there.
Story_ID: 505764
Speaker 1: You've talked about your son [Harold A. Dawson, Jr.], he's a, basically the executive director of the organization now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of HADCO [Harold A. Dawson Company, Inc.; The Dawson Company] New York?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your daughter's [Cari K. Dawson] a lawyer, I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and she's a stockholder in the company--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and an investor in various projects that we're involved in but she's a partner at Alston & Bird [LLP, Atlanta, Georgia], a very, very fine law firm and she's very much involved in the community, on board at the [Atlanta] Symphony [Orchestra, Atlanta, Georgia] and the Woodruff Arts Center [Atlanta, Georgia] and, and she works with major corporations in class action litigation and she has some of the biggest corporations, clients, biggest corporations in the country.
Speaker 1: And your wife [Rose Dawson] is a retired educator?
Speaker 2: My wife is retired.  She served thirty-seven years as a speech therapist for the Atlanta Board of Education.  She's very much involved in philanthropy.  Very much involved in the church [Radcliffe Presbyterian Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  She is very smart, very integral part of the success of our company and we've always done things as, as a couple, I mean, as a, I mean she's always been there to help me and she is, has a beautiful winning personality and everywhere that we have gone, she, well, they always like her first.  I mean, she's, she is the, she has the winning personality in the family and she knows business and she knows how to get along with people and she knows how to make me a success.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your parents [Katherine Singleton Dawson and Thomas Dawson], your father died, I guess, about the time you graduated from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], right, and--
Speaker 2: Well he, he didn't see me graduate but he was there supporting me.  He saw me get started in real estate.  That was something that he saw.  He saw me, at that point I had attained the position of sales manager of a real estate firm on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] and to him that was one of the greatest things that, I mean, he was very happy to see me and he knew that I was, I was back in school, at Morehouse at that time.
Speaker 1: And your mother, I think she passed around the verge of this, the big development deals were starting, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Story_ID: 505765
Speaker 1: This last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would be--like to be remembered as an individual who came from a modest background, remembered as a, as a black boy and a black man who was not discouraged by surroundings, saw opportunity, had good parents [Katherine Singleton Dawson and Thomas Dawson], had good relatives, good friends, good teachers, and learned a lot and things that I learned when I was young, I was able to use to overcome all the obstacles that were there, some racial, but different kinds of obstacles that happened in one's life, health, but to be, to be a success in many instances because of, and many times in spite of, and this is how I want to be remembered, particularly by my children [Harold A. Dawson, Jr. and Cari K. Dawson] and my grandchildren but by all those who have known me through the years.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you, thank you for coming.
Story_ID: 505766
Speaker 1: It was taken in nineteen--1977 at a realtist party and it--
Speaker 2: Let me know if you have it, Coy [Melnick].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me know when you've got it.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: But anyway, it was in Chicago [Illinois] and it was a realtist party and it was at the time that I was president of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers [NAREB] and Muhammad Ali was a guest at the party.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: You're going pretty fast.  If we can just--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of the late business icon, T.M. Alexander, Sr. and myself and [HistoryMaker] Ambassador Andrew Young at an SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] women's program [SCLC/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.] where my son [Harold A. Dawson, Jr.] and I were given the Drum Major for Justice Award in business and that was in June, 1999.
Speaker 2: Okay, I have it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the University Plaza Apartments [Atlanta, Georgia], $25 million mixed-use development of HADCO [Harold A. Dawson Company, Inc.; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  That was a topping out ceremony and I'm in the middle but the other persons are members of the Atlanta City Council and that was in 1995.
Speaker 1: We put them this way for a purpose.  It scans better horizontally, so, we, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was a picture taken at the installation ceremony of, of, of my installation as the tenth president of National Association of Real Estate Brokers and that's my wife [Rose Dawson] next to me and the third person is Versia Thompson [ph.] and John [D.] Thompson.  John Thompson was the ninth president of NAREB.  So that's the husband and wife of the ninth president, the tenth president.
Speaker 1: I have it.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of then Governor [James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] who was appointing me as the first black in the South to be appointed to a real estate commission [Georgia Real Estate Commission & Appraisers Board].  The first person on the left is my uncle, Dr. Otis McCree, I talked about him and, that he influenced me to, I wanted to be a doctor because of him.  Then the next person is my godchild, Ernesta [ph.], my son, Harold [A. Dawson], Jr., that I have my hands on the shoulder and myself and my daughter [Cari K. Dawson] who is the partner of a law firm of Alston & Bird [LLP, Atlanta, Georgia], is there like she is not going to be anything because she was a little girl.  I think they were ten, my son was ten and my daughter was-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Eight and four is what I have, I think.
Speaker 2: Oh, eight and four, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  On the back it shows it.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me in 1970 when I was the chairman of the Atlanta Fulton County Joint Planning and Zoning Board [sic. Atlanta-Fulton County Joint Planning Board].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of real estate icon, Q.V. Williamson who was, during his day, one of the most powerful politicians in the City of Atlanta [Georgia] who's congratulating me as a tenth NAREB president in 1977.
Speaker 2: This is the Empire Board of Realtists [Atlanta Chapter of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers, Inc.; Empire Real Estate Board] annual banquet in 1976 and from left to right, myself, W.L. Calloway, real estate executive, Ambassador Andrew Young, President Jimmy Carter, the late mayor, Maynard Jackson, and insurance executive, now life insurance executive, Jesse Hill [Jr.].
Speaker 1: If you get a glare on these, let me know.
Speaker 2: So far so good.
Speaker 1: This one is just curling real bad, so I don't know, maybe I'll just, is that-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Maybe piece it with a little tape?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll go to the next one and I'll try to uncurl it while we're doing this one.  We'll do this one now.  I just, usually I just roll 'em.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, usually, in case of curling, trust me.
Speaker 2: Okay, well this is-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's number eleven.
Speaker 2: This is, this is, I don't know if we need this one but anyway, this is the swearing in for my second term on the Georgia Real Estate Commission with Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay, if you see one that seems redundant, just pull it.
Speaker 2: That's redundant there.
Speaker 1: We can do it as soon as you see it, you can just say, hey, we don't need that one, just keep going.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of me at The Americana [Hotel; Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel] in New York [New York] in 1976.  This was an NAREB convention.  I was president-elect.  That's where I was elected president-elect of NAREB in 1976.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the Dawson family at the Dawson family nursery open house at Radcliffe Presbyterian Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  That was about four years ago.  Left to right, Sonia [Arena Dawson], Harold Jr.'s wife, Harold Jr., my wife, Rose Dawson, wait a minute, that's not right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  There's Sonia, you and then Rose, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay, left to right, Sonia Dawson-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You.
Speaker 2: --me, my wife, Rose, my son, Harold, my daughter, Cari, and left to right, children, Katrina [Dawson], [Harold] Allen [Dawson, III] and Brianna [Dawson], grandchildren.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of me speaking at the fiftieth anniversary convention of NAREB in Tampa, Florida, in 1997 where the, in Tampa, was where the NAREB was, was formed.  I guess, how do you say, not formed, but founded, founded, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two minutes left on the tape.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Harold [A. Dawson], Sr. congratulates son, Harold, Jr. on receiving award for entrepreneurial spirit from the 100 Black Men of Atlanta, September 2004.
Speaker 1: Harold Dawson, Sr., Rose Dawson, Ambassador Andrew Young, Carolyn [McClain] Young at the Candle in the Dark Award ceremony at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Harold, Sr. received the Bennie Achievement Award, February, 2003.
Speaker 2: Harold, Sr. presents former [HistoryMaker] Mayor David [N.] Dinkins recognition on behalf of Leadership Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia], June, 2004, at Merrill Lynch [& Co., Inc.; Bank of America Corporation, Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] headquarters in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: The Centerpoint [Apartments] development in Baltimore [Maryland], it's the topping out ceremony, June, 2002.  That's, that's Harold Dawson, Sr. and Rose Dawson with Peter Angelos, owner of the Baltimore Orioles.
Speaker 2: Okay, got that.
Speaker 1: This was, would you understand when I say NAREB that I'm talking about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got it.
Speaker 1: Okay, NAREB past presidents, 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Harold and Rose--
Story_ID: 505767
Speaker 1: Rose [Dawson] and myself on holiday in Barbados, 2004.
Speaker 2: Past presidents of the Association of Real Estate License Law Officials, ARELLO [National Association of Real Estate License Law Officials (NARELLO)], international organization of real estate commissioners, commissions, that regulates over five million licensees around the world, Chicago, Illinois, September, 1994.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harold [A. Dawson, Sr.] and Rose at NAREB [National Association of Real Estate Brokers], what number is that?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Excuse me, at NAREB convention, August, 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay, Harold Dawson, Sr. speaking to students at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Chapel [Martin Luther King, Jr. International Chapel], during the Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], 136th Founder's Day celebration.
Speaker 1: Harold Dawson, Sr. receives the Bennie Achievement Award at the Candle in the Dark Award ceremony during the Morehouse College, 136th Founder's Day celebration, student presenter and Harold Dawson, Morehouse College president, [HistoryMaker] Walter [E.] Massey and actress Lynn Whitfield, February 2003.  I thought it was 2002?  Two thousand and three [2003] would be last year.  It was two years ago.
Speaker 2: It was two years ago?  Oh, I'm sorry.  I've got the magazine right here.  I can look.  I'm sorry.  I got it right here.  Well, this is the 2003 magazine, so--
Speaker 1: Well, keep going.
Speaker 2: We're still rolling.
Speaker 1: Let's keep going.  This one.
Speaker 2: It's 2003.  It's just that it happened in February so maybe it seemed closer to 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, whatever you say.
Speaker 2: Harold Dawson, Sr. and Rose Dawson at the, at the Candle in the Dark Award ceremony, February 2003.
Speaker 1: Harold Dawson, Sr. and Ralph David Abernathy, Reverend Ralph David Abernathy, a dedication of Ralph David Abernathy Tower [Atlanta, Georgia], a residential high-rise for seniors, managed by HADCO [Harold A. Dawson Company, Inc.; The Dawson Company, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Juanita Abernathy with Harold Dawson, Sr. at Abernathy Tower, a dedication of the Abernathy Tower high-rise, senior high-rise.
Speaker 1: Harold Dawson, Sr. making a presentation to [William Porter] "Billy" Payne, president and CEO of Atlanta [Georgia] for the, for the Atlanta committee for the [1996 Summer] Olympic Games, July, 1996.
Speaker 2: Harold, Sr. and Rose Dawson in their official uniforms as, as ACOG [Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games] presidents, president's representative, as president, as presidential--as presidential representatives during the 1996 Olympic games in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Hank Aaron and Harold Dawson at the dedication of Kroger City Center Store at the 100,000 square foot Kroger Cascade shopping center [Cascade Corners, Atlanta, Georgia], 1995.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's--it's not, what is it?
Speaker 1: I think it's twenty-nine.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, groundbreaking for the Kroger City Center Store in 1994.  Left to right, Harold Dawson, Sr., Bishop Smith [ph.], Shrine of the Black Madonna, Kroger president, Paul Smith, Atlanta City [Council] president, [HistoryMaker] Marvin [S.] Arrington, 1994.
Speaker 1: And Harold [A. Dawson], Jr. and me.
Speaker 2: Oh, it doesn't, it doesn't say that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  And Harold, Jr. at the end of that last one too.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Harold Dawson, Jr. and mother, Rose Dawson, at the topping out ceremony at Centerpoint [Apartments, Baltimore, Maryland] Maryland, August 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, Harold Dawson, Sr. speaking at the groundbreaking for the Bankhead MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority] station, [Fulton County, Northwest Service Center] Department of Family and Children Services [Atlanta, Georgia] office building.
Speaker 2: Centerpoint groundbreaking, Maryland, June, 2002.  Rose and Harold Dawson, Sr. with members of the Baltimore City Council.
Speaker 1: Let me know if you get a glare on these or anything.
Speaker 2: So far so good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Centerpoint, Centerpoint groundbreaking, Maryland, June 2002.  That's the, that's the Centerpoint development banner showing Bank of America and HADCO.
Speaker 1: That's my granddaughter, Brianna Dawson with her great-great-grandmother, Lena Singleton Jackson [sic. Lena Jackson Singleton] and that shows five generations of, of the Dawson Singleton line.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Harold Dawson, Sr. with friends, far right, at University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] public housing around 1939, in front of nineteen, in 1939, in front of our, our apartment, apartment where he lived.
Speaker 2: This is you right here, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, far right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The ugly one.
Speaker 2: They all look like kids.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Thomas Dawson in 1932 as a member of the Morehouse track team.  He's the third on the left, standing, third person on the left, standing.
Speaker 1: That's your father, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of Harold Dawson, Sr. on a train, it may have been the Nancy Hanks, on the way to Washington, D.C. to march in a safety patrol parade.  It's nineteen, 1990, 1947, at maybe age twelve.  I don't know how to identify myself.
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: No, behind, the third.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: The third person from the back on the right--
Speaker 2: On the aisle.
Speaker 1: --on the aisle.
Speaker 2: This is, this way too, we just do this.  Let me know when they, when they get, when they process the photo.
Speaker 1: It is not as good as the visual.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we process the photos, okay, here's the last one.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is an article from the Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Oh, there's some of these too.
Speaker 1: --the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] that, I believe the article was written in nineteen--
Speaker 2: It's '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].  This was prior to my becoming president of the National Association of Real Estate License Law Officials in 1985.  Has some history on it about what that meant at that time.
Speaker 2: All right, now, we had a couple of these in, and a few of these, I don't know where you start.  We'll look in the monitor and you can tell us which ones, which ones maybe--
Speaker 1: There are labels.  I don't know if you can see them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I see one, how about this one first.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of Renaissance--
Speaker 2: Decatur Renaissance Condominiums [Decatur, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Decatur Renaissance Condominiums and it's a 167 unit condominium with retail on the, on the first floor.  It's built between the Wachovia [Bank] high-rise and the shorter building on the left is occupied by the Centers for the Disease Control [sic. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)], but this is one of our developments, renovation of the Wachovia, CDC building, renovation of a 1200 car parking deck and this is new construction on the top of the parking, parking deck.
Speaker 2: Okay, you want to go--
Speaker 1: We'll do about three of 'em now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which one do you want next?
Speaker 2: Stay away from the tall ones 'cause I can't, unless you turn it sideways.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this one is, I think was right outside the window.  This one and this one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this one is Centerpoint in Baltimore [Maryland] and this is the one that you're, (simultaneous) (unclear), same town.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's one of the newer ones, right?
Speaker 2: Museum Towers [Museum Tower at Centennial Hill, Atlanta, Georgia] across from Centennial Olympic Park [Atlanta, Georgia].  It's part of a $60 million mixed-use development.  It's the home of the Atlanta children's museum [Children's Museum of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  It's located across from the new World of Coca-Cola [Atlanta, Georgia] and the new [Georgia] Aquarium [Atlanta, Georgia] and it's, how many condominiums there?
Speaker 1: It's twenty-six stories.  I have to look at the--
Speaker 2: Okay, twenty-six, a twenty-six-story building.  It's one of the tallest buildings built in Atlanta in the last twenty years.
Speaker 1: Do you want to get that?  Let's see the other one, the other tall one.
Speaker 2: I think there's one at the sixty-four seven--
Speaker 1: That's where I'm at.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a 19-story high-rise as part of a $94 billion development in Baltimore, Maryland, that's Centerpoint, and it's part of new, that's new construction but it's part of the renovation of about nine historic buildings that surround that building and also a new four hundred car parking deck in downtown Maryland, half a block from where the [Baltimore] Ravens play and three blocks from where the Baltimore Orioles play.
