Story_ID: 6372
Speaker 1: I want you to start, start out just by stating your name and spelling it.
Speaker 2: My name is Tyrone Davis.  It's spelled T-Y-R-O-N-E D-A-V-I-S.
Story_ID: 6373
Speaker 1: Tell us what it was like being a valet for Freddie King.
Speaker 2: To be very honest, Herb [Kent], I was like twenty-two years old, right?  So I was enjoying it because I had no  family.  I mean I had no wife and no family.  So I enjoyed going on the road traveling  from town to town.  You know what I mean?  I got a chance to go everywhere.  I used to  drive the station - we had a station wagon.  I used to drive the station wagon and I used to  put - handle his clothes, handle his guitar.  All these kind of things I used to do.  And I got  a chance to meet a lot of people 'cause he was on a big tour with people like Dee Clark.  Remember Delecta?  Chuck Jackson.  Chuck and I are very good friends  today.  Jimmy Reed.  Believe it or not, it was a tour like twenty-some people on the tour.  You never guess what was headlining?  Jimmy Reed.  After the concerts at night, we go  to the hotel and they would play poker.  They'd have a big poker game among themselves  and by me being a valet and everybody really thought that I was Freddie King's brother -  all the entertainers thought I was Freddie's brother.  And I'd sit around the table and watch  them play poker.  I could play too, but I didn't have the money like that to play with you  know.  They would say, "Tyrone, go to the store, go to the liquor store and get da, da, da,  da, da," and they would give a hundred dollar bill and whatever I got would cost thirty-five dollars.  When I come back, the change was mine, you know what I mean?  I loved it because I  was making, I was making money like that, you know, and at the same time, I'm around the stars and I  was hoping that one day that I would, you know, be like that.  I never will forget one time  we was in Dallas, Texas and they were playing poker and it was late at night, and they  said, "Go to the liquor store."  Somebody said, "The liquor store is closed."  "No it ain't, there's a  liquor store at da, da, da, da, da,"  I don't remember the street.  I jumped in Freddie's station  wagon, I went.  Sure enough it was closed.  I came back, I said, "The liquor stores is closed."  Jimmy Reed wanted two fifths of Gordon [Gordon's] Gin.  That's what he wanted.  So when I came  back, I said, "The store is closed, ain't, ain't nothing open."  So somebody said, "Well, that night  club out there at such and such a something, something is open."  But it was, but it was ran by white  people and at that time, Herb, white and black didn't mix that good down South, you  understand?  So we got in the station wagon, and I drove to the club.  When we got there  it was packed but no black faces around, of course.  You know what I mean?  This is like  1961.  So, we got out the station wagon and came up to the door and the white guy. was  taking up the money so we walked up there and Jimmy Reed said, "Hey bald man."  He  said, "We want to get some Gordon gin."  He said, "I'm Jimmy Reed."  The fellow said,  "What you mean you Jimmy Reed?"  He said, "Big bald man, can't you hear me when I  call?"  You might think I'm kidding, man, but this is what happened.  So the guy said,  "Come on in."  Gave him five fifths of Gordon gin.  He didn't let him pay nothing.  And  we went back to the hotel and they had a ball for the rest of the night.  But that - I mean  that's really the truth.  That happened like that.
Story_ID: 6374
Speaker 1: Where you from, Tyrone?
Speaker 2: I'm from Greenville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what was childhood like there?
Speaker 2: What was childhood like?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I started chopping and picking cotton at eight years old.  It was kind of rough, you  know?  So, I lived down in the country and I'm doing this and I just thought one day  when I was about fourteen years old, I thought I ain't going to never get no where like this.  I  can't do this.  Now, on a Saturday, we used to take - the straw boss had a pickup truck.  We'd all get on the back of the truck and he'd take us to town.  Well, the town was like  ten, fifteen miles from where I live.  So we'd go on the back of the truck.  My auntie on my  dad's side lived there.  So, I been thinking all of the week, all week long I've been thinking.  I'm going to go to my auntie's house and have her to call my father.  My father lived in  Saginaw, Michigan.  I said I'm going to have my auntie to call my father and see if I can  get him to send me a ticket, and if he does, I'm going to leave from here.  Now my  mother and my grandmother, they don't know nothing about this.  Don't nobody know  what I'm thinking but me.  So when I got to the town, I walked around to my auntie's  house.  She must have weighed 350 pounds with a real pretty face.  Her name was  Audrey Lee.  So when I got around to her house - her husband was a minister - I knocked  on the door and she opened the door and she said, "Oh, Tyrone, what you doing here?"  And she hugged me and said, "Come on in."  And I guess it's Saturday night at eight o'clock  at night.  And I came in and I said, "Aunt Audrey, I want you to do a favor for me."  She  said, "What?"  I said, "You have my father's phone number?"  She said, "Yes, let me find  it."  She went, she looked and she said, "Here it is."  She dialed the number and my father  was not at home.  She said, "What do you want with him?"  I said, "I want him to send  me a ticket.  I want to leave from Mississippi and I want to go and live with him."  My  mother name Ora Lee.  She said, "Tyrone, the only thing about that is did you tell Ora  Lee?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Why?"  I said, "I can't tell her that."  She said "What do  you mean you can't tell her?"  I said, "She ain't going to understand it."  And she ain't - I ain't going  to be able to go.  She said, "What were you doing?"  I said, "Aunt Audrey, just listen to  what I'm saying.  I got to get out of here.  Would you please do this for me?"  She said,  "Of course, I'll do it.  But I don't want Ora Lee and Miss Carrie (that's my grandmother) I  don't want Ora Lee and Miss Kerry mad at me."  I said, "Well, at some given time they  gotta be mad, because I'm going to do it."  She said, "Well, what I'm going to do is I  keep calling your daddy, and when I get him, I'll just tell him you said send you a ticket."  I  said, "Do that, but don't send the ticket down there.  Send the ticket to you."  I said, "Next  Saturday, I'm coming back and, and you let me know what happened."  She said, "I'll do that."  She said, "I'll make sure that I do that."  So I sit there and talk with her for a few minutes and  then I left.  The next Saturday, I went to her house. She said, "I got good news."  I said,  "What?"  She said, "I got your ticket."  I said, "You're kidding?"  It was like a ticket for  the train.  She said, "I got your ticket."  She said, "I don't know how you're going to work  this, but whatever you do, I don't want Ora Lee and them mad at me about this."  I said,  "Believe me, they won't be because they won't never know."  I took the ticket.  I went  home and I hid the ticket and I worked all that week in the field.  And I was so hurt, Herb [Kent] - I mean I was really hurt, man, bad because I didn't want to have to do it like this.  You  know what I'm saying?  Because I had two brothers and a sister.  Man, when you're a kid,  you just don't want to depart from them, but I knew it ain't nothing for me here, okay?  So  what I did was, I got my little clothes together and I - my mother went to the field.  I told  them I was sick and I left.  I got a ride to the town, got on the train, came to Memphis [Tennessee].  I  changed in Memphis and I came right here to Chicago [Illinois] to 12th Street Station.  I never  seen nothing like this before in my life.  Everything was - I didn't know nothing, Herb.  All I knew was I wanted to get on the right train.
Story_ID: 6375
Speaker 1: It must have been '54 [1954].  Somewhere in there.  So, the train took me to Detroit [Michigan].  My daddy  was going to come from Saginaw [Michigan] and pick me up.  I knew some people in Detroit.  When  I got to Detroit, the people that I knew - I had the address, they had moved.  I knocked  on the door.  The lady opened the door.  I got a cab sitting here.  She said, "They don't live  here no more, but I know where they live and I know their phone number."  "Would you  please call them?"  She called them.  I took the cab over to their house.  I'm in Detroit  now.  I stayed there for a week with this people, and I'm going to Belle Island.  I don't  know if you ever heard of Belle Island in Detroit.  I'm going to Belle Island.  I'm a kid, man, it  was so beautiful, man.  Herb [Kent], I'm a country boy.  I ain't never seen nothing like this before in  my life.  I go to Belle Island, and I'm playing ball.  I like to play ball.  I'm playing ball.  For a  whole week I don't go to my daddy's house.  My daddy - I had the people - I called him.  He said, "You're in Detroit?  I was wondering where you was."  He said, "I'll be there  Saturday."  It was like Thursday or something.  He said, "I'll be there Saturday and pick  you up."  Saturday he came.  I was out at Belle Island.  He can't find me all day.  I get back to  the house, he waiting there for me.  So we went on to Saginaw, Michigan.  I sit down and  I talked to him and I told him I said, "I don't want to live in Mississippi no more, you  know?"  He said, "I ain't, I don't want you there anyway."  I said, "Well, what can I do?"  He  said, "What do you mean what can you do?  You can stay here with me."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "I got to get you in school and the whole deal, but that's no problem."  But it's in  the summertime so school ain't going on right now anywa so.  By me being from  Mississippi and working in the cotton fields and doing all this, I can work like.  So there's a - around  the corner there's a bicycle shop and a Mexican owned the bicycle shop.  I would go  around there, ride my brother's bike around there all the time.  Something went wrong, I'd  take it around there and he'd fix it for me.  So he asked me he said, "Would you like to have a  job."  I said, "Of course.  You'll give me a job?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "What can you do?"  I said, "Anything you tell me and anything you show me."  And I caught on like this [snapping].  And I start working with, there with him.  And he'd give me ten, fifteen dollars a day.  Man, it was a lot of money to me.  That where I come from you make fifteen dollars a week.  So I was saving my little money, saving my little money.  So my daddy said to me, "What is you  doing?  Why you - playing that much?"  I said, "No, dad.  I'm working."  He said, "What  do you mean you're working?"  I said, "I work around the corner at the bicycle shop."  He  said, "Take me around there."  So I take him around there.  So the Mexican says - meet  him and says, "Nice boy.  You got a nice boy.  Good worker and everything."  So my  daddy said, "I just wanted to know."  So my dad said, "Fine.  That's fine if that's you want  to do, that's good."  So the Mexican said to me, he said, "Can you paint?"  "Paint what?"  He said,  "My house need painting."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Can you get up on a ladder?"  I  said, "I can do all of that."  He said, "I'll give you a thousand dollars to paint my house."  I ain't, that's unheard of.  That's unheard of.  You understand?  But it's frame houses and it's tall  up there.  You know you got to get up there by the attic and all that.  Herb, I paint that  house in less than a week.  He couldn't believe that.  This man couldn't believe that.  He  told my daddy, he said, "Hey, this kid is - I'm telling you you got a nice kid."  So I told  my daddy what he gave me and the whole bit.  He said, "Oh, I don't care.  I don't want  your money.  You do what you want to do with it." I said, "I'd like to get me a steady  job."  He said, "You're too young, Tyrone.  Nobody will hire you at fourteen years old.  You  ain't even fifteen yet.  Just keep doing what you're doing.  Keep saving your money.  Do what  you want."  I didn't have to pay nothing.
Story_ID: 6376
Speaker 1: I turned - when I got nineteen, you remember the Crown Victoria Fords?
Speaker 2: Uh, huh.
Speaker 1: With the wheel on the back?
Speaker 2: Uh, huh.
Speaker 1: I bought a red one.  I was nineteen.  Herb [Kent], I was living in heaven.  I said I'm going down South  and see my momma.  I ain't called them.  I ain't talk to them.  I ain't did nothing.  Okay?  Because I don't want to go back down there, and I know they're going to make me come  back.  I had me some nice suits.  They used to wear shoes back then called Stetsons.  I  used to get triple A's and all stuff like that -
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Not triple A's -
Speaker 1: I went to - yeah.  Nettletons.  Okay?  I went to the - I told my dad I said, "These guys  wearing their hair like that.  I like that.  What is that?"  "It's called a conk,"  he said,  "You want your hair like that?"  I said, "Yeah, I want it like that."  I went, I went, Herb, got my hair done.  It had waves all over it.  Waves all over my head but I didn't have  sense enough to know that you can't comb it.  If you comb it, you comb all the waves out.  So, I combed all the waves out.  My daddy says, "You ain't suppose to comb it."  So I  went back.  I said, "I'm going down South."  He said, "Who going with you?"  I said, "I'll  go by myself."  I got me some money.  I must have had two thousand [dollars], a little better than two thousand.  That's a lot of money then.  1955, because that's what I had, a '55 [1955] Crown Victoria.  Had  the chrome come across the top with the wheel on the back.  I got in my car.  I had about  fifteen suits of clothes, man.  Nice shoes and everything.  Nice straw hats.  I went down  South.  I came to my mother's house.  My sister say - I pull up in their front yard.  She  says, "That look like Tyrone."  I got out of the car.  Oh, man they hugging me and crying  and my mother crying saying, "Why you-?" -  now, first of all I reach in my pocket I get five hundred [dollars] and I give  it to them.  She - "Oh, my God!"  Sit down.  I said - I call her Dear.  I call her Dear for  short because we call her Mother Dear.  I said, "Dear, listen.  You have to understand I  couldn't make it down here.  I don't want to be like this."  I said, "I want to get you - I  want to move you up North.  I don't want -" She just said, "Well, you just take your time,  take your time.  As long as you doing all right."  I said, "I'm fine."  Then they want to ask  me, "Did you rent this car?  Is it yours?"  I said, "It's mine.  I ain't rent nothing.  This is  my car."  So I stayed there for like a week and a half, and I got ready to go.  She was sad.  I was sad, but she understood.  So now I come back to Saginaw [Michigan], and I move here to  Chicago [Illinois].  That was in 1957 I moved here.
Story_ID: 6377
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to come to Chicago [Illinois]?  Were you trying to sing?
Speaker 2: I was trying - yeah.  I was trying to - listen, we used to sing doo-wops on the street corner  we would sing.  And everybody would always say, "Tyrone Davis got a good voice.  Tyrone Davis can sing. Tyrone Davis can sing."  They had different groups out then.  I  can't think of them.
Speaker 1: Stand ups?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All them groups like that.  They sung real good though.  They sound good.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: There was a lot of them.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So, and I was listening to Elvis Presley had 'Jailhouse Rock,' and Little  Richard had records like 'Tutti Frutti.'  That's the way I wanted to sing.  I didn't want to  be no group.  I didn't want to be no group singer.  I wanted to sound like these guys.  Elvis was getting hot then and Little Richard too.  Little Richard was terrible.  Little Willie John singing "Fever" - stuff like that, you know?  So I wanted to - that's the way I  wanted to sing.  I'd say, "I don't want to sing with these groups."  And I had heard about  Chicago and how it was here and I had an uncle lived here.  So I came over here, and  they had then - years ago they had clubs everywhere, where they playing blues guitar.  You  remember Otis Rush?  Magic Sam?
Speaker 1: Magic Sam.  Cobra Records.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Hal Burrage [Harold Burrage].  You remember Hal Burrage? So I came.  Hal Burrage seen me.  So Hal Burrage start calling me his protégé.  He said, "Hey man, I'm going tell you  something.  You going to be a superstar."  I'm like, what?  "You going to be a superstar.  Man, you got it."  But I wasn't -- I didn't think so, Herb [Kent], because I didn't know nothing.  All I was  doing was opening my mouth singing.  I didn't know one note from another.  You know  what I'm saying?  But whatever, it came out good.  So people liked it.  Do you remember  Walter's Corner?  On Roosevelt Road and Washtenaw?  I used to go over there.  He gave  me a name, "Tyrone the Wonder Boy."  I sang in his club all the time.  He give me five dollars.  On  nights he'd give me five dollars.  Sometime if I'm lucky, I get ten [dollars].  So I kept on with that then  Freddie King.  Then we got - hey, Freddie say, "Hey, Tyrone, I'm going to tell you something."  I said,  "What?"  "These people telling you how good you sing, they ain't lying to you.  You  sound good man.  One of these days you might luck up on something."  So, I worked for  Freddie for a while then I said to myself, I don't want to be no valet.  I don't want to do  that.  I'm going to leave this alone.  Now, I come back to Chicago off the road and I met my wife.  So  she said, "You know it's okay to try to sing, but you got to be able to do something else to  make a living.  You got to work.  You can't - I mean, you ain't making no money singing.  How  are you going to live like that?"  She was working two jobs.  I said, "You right."  I got a job  working at the steel mill.  Now, twenty-three [years old], I got a job working at there at Laramie and Roosevelt  Road, and I worked there for about two years.  Now I begin to get known in these  different clubs, the Bonanza, Payton Place.  I know you remember all that, Herb.  I get to be  known a little bit, and the Wonder Boy's ringing.  Wonder Boy.  Wonder Boy.  I would  sing sometime two different clubs in one night.  I go here and sing, then I'd leave and go  over here and sing.  And I was making seventy-five dollars a night.  So you got to figure, you do two  clubs, it's $150 a night.  And I do that for three, four nights a week.  So, I figure to  myself, what I need a steel mill job for?  Herb, you were popping then.  You was at Birdland [New York].  Tell you exactly where you was.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: That's where you was.  So, I said I'm going to leave this alone.  I ain't going to work in no  steel mill.
Story_ID: 6378
Speaker 1: Now, Hal Burrage [Harold Burrage] says, "Hey, Tyrone, I'm going to record a record on you."  I  said, "You are?"  He said, "Yeah." He said, "I'm going to write the song and I'm going to record it."  Barney's Record Shop.  [Willie] Barney had a label called 'Four Brothers [Productions]' and the reason it was called  'Four Brothers' because Barney had four sons and he named the label 'Four Brothers.'  Now,  I'm doing a little odds and - I'm carrying records from Record Row [Chicago, Illinois].  You remember Record Row down on  Michigan?  The whole thing.  I'm carrying records every day for Barney, working a little  bit in the shop over there selling records behind the counter and stuff like that.  And it  was all right for me, you know, cause he paying me, I guess, $150 a week.  'Til one  night he said to me, he said, "Tyrone, it's almost closing time and this floor is dirty, and  you got to mop this floor."  I said, "No.  Barney," I said, "i know you my boss and all that, and I  like working for you, but I can't mop the floor."  I says, "Hey, I'm trying to be an  entertainer.  People coming in and out of the store.  I don't want nobody see me mopping  no floor.  I can't do that."  He said, "Well, I need somebody to do whatever.  So if you can't do that, then I'm going to have to get somebody else."  I said, "Fine, and I'm not mad at you,  but I don't want you to be mad at me either, but I just can't - I'm not going to let my wife  walk in here and see me with a mop mopping no floor.  I can't do that."  Because, Herb [Kent], I  thought I was - you know what I'm saying?  I thought I was - and I was trying to do - you  know?  So he said, "Okay."  So I quit.  Hal Burrage recorded a record called, 'You  Made Me Suffer' on me.  Didn't do nothing.  But he recorded me two or three times.  In  other words, he's trying to get me in the stream.  That's what he was doing.  One-derful  Records.  You remember One-derful Records?  He worked for One-derful  Records,  Hal did. But Hal -
Speaker 2: They did a lot.
Speaker 1: Right.  But he was trying to get me going and we was real tight.  He called me his  protégé.
Speaker 2: He used to play the teacher.
Speaker 1: Right.  He played piano.  So, I told Hal what happened.  "Man, I don't blame you.  You  ain't got no business mopping no floor.  What you mean mopping a floor?" He said, "I don't blame  you for it."  I said, "That's right."  "Don't worry about it."  He said.  "You'll make it.  We'll be all right."
Story_ID: 6379
Speaker 1: So, remember Monk Higgins?
Speaker 2: Uh, huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hal [Harold Burrage] came around to my house one day, and I was not there, and he fell dead right  at my doorstep.  And I know when he came to my house he was looking for me for  something.  And it hurt me just like -
Speaker 2: From his reaction to penicillin?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's what happened.  See what happened was it was a doctor named Dr.  Gludman (ph).  Used to be on the west side.  Hal liked to drink Old Granddaddy [Old Granddad whiskey], and he like 100 proof.  He went to Dr. Gludman.  He gave him the penicillin for his throat.  He had a  strep throat.  He gave him the penicillin.  Hal come back home, told his woman go to the  store and get him a half a pint of Old Granddaddy.  Can't do that.  He drinked it, and it -  the penicillin reacted and it choked him.  So he ran around to my house and he fell right  by the door, man.  Herb [Kent], that killed me because this was all the help I had.  But believe me,  this man sat on my back porch and told me six weeks before that happened - before he died, he said, "Tyrone."  I said, "What?"  He said, "You getting ready to be a superstar."  I looked at him, "What?"  He said, "You get ready to be a superstar." He said, "I'm going to tell you something.  I'm not going  to let you leave me because you're going." He said, "Wilson Pickett.  Otis Redding.  James Brown.  You going to be just like them guys."  I'm looking at (imitates how he looked skeptical) - "why you talking like this?"  "I'm  just telling you what I know."  This is what he said to me.  "I'm telling you that you're  going to be a superstar man." He said, "You know what?  You going to be riding in limousines.  You going to own limousines.  I'm going to be right there with you."  I'm looking -- (looks to his right)- - my wife looked at  me- -he said (shaking finger), "I'm telling you."  He got up and left.  It was at night like on a Friday about eight,  nine o'clock at night.  He got up and left.  I said, "Ann, what he talking about?"  She said,  "I don't know what he talking about." She says, "You heard what he said didn't you?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "You don't think he telling the truth?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Why?"  I said, "I  just don't think so."  She - "Well, I don't know why he would say that."  I said, "I don't either."  Six weeks later he passed.  Now, by me not knowing nothing, Herb, I figure my little  career is over.  Right?
Story_ID: 6380
Speaker 1: With me all the time, guiding me, telling me what to do, which I didn't know.  I didn't  know anything at all about what it started with being no entertainer.  And if something  did happen, I didn't know what to do.  So, anyways he died.  I got so sick.  I went to my  doctor, and he said to me, my doctor said to me, he said, "Did you - you got a wife?"  I  said, "Yeah."  "Did y'all separate?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Well, something is wrong."  He said, "Your mother living?"  I said, "Yeah."  "Is she fine?"  I said, "Yes."  He said,  "Something wrong."  I said, "My friend, my friend, my best friend died."  He said, "That's what it  is."  He said, "I understand your best friend died, but you don't want to die."  I said, "No."  He said, "Well, if you continue on the way you're going, it could happen."  Believe it or  not I still got the same doctor today.  His name is Dr. Conrad May.  So he said, "I got  some medication I got to put you on."  I didn't know what it was.  It was tranquilizers.  My nerves were shot, okay?  I was about to go into a nervous breakdown.  So he gave me  the tranquilizers, and I took them.  But it got me better, but it made me sick some other  kind of way.  You understand? The effect from that - because the dose that he gave me  was too strong.  So, I went back to him, and I told him.  He says, "Okay, I know what.  I  got to give you half that much."  And that's what he did.  Finally I came around, and I  came around.
Story_ID: 6381
Speaker 1: Another friend of mine named Monk Higgins, and he knew that I was Hal's [Harold Burrage]  protege.  So, I saw him one night on 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois] at a club called The Place.  A guy that he  recorded was singing there named McKinley Mitchell.  So I came up and I sang a couple  of songs.  And he said, "I want to talk to you."  I said, "About what?"  He said, "Come on, let's  walk outside."  We walked outside, he said, "you was Hal Burrage protégé?"  I said,  "Yeah."  He said, "Hal was my good friend.  We worked together down at One-derful Records."  He said, "Hal done a nice job with you."  He said, "Man, I'm going to tell you  something."  I said, "What?"  He said, "I really, really like your voice."  I said, "You do?"  I said, "Well, people tell me - some people tell me - everybody tell me I got a good voice,  but they tell me I don't know how to sing because I don't know" He said, "Well, that's the  meter."  He said, "You is not always on the meter" - that's the timing, okay? - "but your  voice is so good." He said, "With a little bit of more teaching, like what Hal was doing with you,  you'll be fine."  I said, "You think so?"  He said, "Yeah."  He said, "Who do you record  for?"  I says, "'Four Brothers [Productions]'."  He said, "That's [Willie] Barney, right?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said,  "You know what I'll do?"  I said, "What?"  "You tell them this.  I'll record you and won't  charge them a dime, if they let me record you."  I said, "You really feel like that about  me?"  He said, "Man, I'm telling you.  I feel that way about you."  I said, "You do,  Monk?"  He said, "Yes."  And I knew he was an arranger and a songwriter and the whole  bit.  So, the next day, I couldn't get there fast enough to tell Barney what he said.  Barney said, "There's a catch to it."  I said, "What's the catch?  The man likes me.  He wants to  record me only if you let him."  He said, "Well, I tell you what.  Tell him this.  I'll let him  record you if at the same time he record Junior Wells."  Remember Junior Wells?  He said,  "If he records Junior Well for free and record you for free, I'll let him do it."  Now this is  a lot to go back and say to somebody.  But I didn't have no choice.  So I went back to  Monk, and I said, "Monk, I got to tell you this." I says, "I don't want to tell you, but I got to tell  you."  He said, "Go on and tell me.  I know it's something silly he done said."  I said,  "Yeah.  He said to me if you record Junior Wells along with me for free, he'll let you do  it."  He said, "Tyrone, I like you so much, I'm going to do that too."  He said, "Now get  me with him.  Let me talk to him."  So I got them together.  Monk said, "Don't even worry  about it.  I'm going to do it."  We went in the studio and we recorded.  And believe it or  not, Junior Wells's record hit and mine didn't.  Okay?
Story_ID: 6382
Speaker 1: So, here I am again.  I got about another year on my contract with [Willie] Barney, and I got away from him.  When I got away from him, Monk Higgins had his own label, and the label was called Sack.  They wrote a song  for me called 'I Tried It Over And Over Again.'  And it was like a ballad.  And let me tell  you something.  I can kill a ballad any time.  I'm just telling you this.  I know this.  I can  sing a ballad to death, okay?  So I did the ballad.  And he had a friend, lived in Teaneck, New Jersey, named Wally Roker.  And they had this label together.  So, Wally loved the song that I did.  He said, Wally said to me, he said, "I'm going to tell you  something.  You just might get lucky and make it."  I said, "You think so?"  He said,  "Well, with the right people behind you, you could."  He said, "You got a manager?"  I  said, "No."  He said, "Well, you got one now."  I said, "Who's that?"  He said, "Me."  So  okay.  When you're in this business and you're young and you don't know nothing,  anybody saying a thing to you about helping you, you on it.  You know what I mean?  So  I said, "Okay."  So we kept fooling around, fooling around.
Story_ID: 6383
Speaker 1: My wife brother was living  at the time, and he was real young.  He had some young friends, and they write songs.  So  my brother-in-law said to me, he said, "Tyrone, these guys that I fool around with," he said, "they  write songs, man, and they write some nice songs." He said, "You ought to listen to them."  He said,  "I'm going to tell you what Barry wanted to do."  His name is Barry Despenza.  He said,  "Barry told me that they recording the wrong stuff on you because you're not a blues  singer and they trying to make you a blues singer, and he got some stuff that you ought to  listen to."  I said, "Where can see them at?"  "Right up on Madison."  He took me up to  the office.  I went up there.  And they started playing songs for me and everything I  heard, I liked.  He said, "I'm going to write you a song, Tyrone."  He said, "You know  what it's name?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "Baby, Can I Change My Mind?"  I said,  "Okay."  He wrote the song for me.  He said, "Now you need to learn how to sing this  song."  I said, "All right."  I came up to his office, and I - he said, "You got it.  Now we  need to try to get it recorded."  So I told Wally [Roker] about it.  He said, "I want to hear it."  We  let him hear it and it knocked him off his feet.  Now Monk Higgins done move from  Chicago [Illinois] to LA [Los Angeles, California].  He said, "You know what I'm going to do?"  I said, "What?"  He said,  "I'm going to send this to Monk and let Monk arrange this for you."  I says, "Okay."  He  sent it to California.  Monk Higgins arranged it.  When he got it finished, he called Wally and said, "Listen, y'all need to come to California and I set up studio time and we'll go  into the studio and record this."  Wally came to me on a Friday morning and said, "Hey,  you got to go to California."  I said, "When?"  He said, "Today."  I ain't ever been on an  airplane before in my life.  So, I'm a little bit nervous.  So Barry and the guitar player,  they going too.  So we get on the plane, and we go to LA.  When we get there we go to  Monk Higgins's house.  He said, "I want you to - Tyrone, I got this thing.  It's a nice song,  man."  He said, "You know what, man?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "This song here might  go places for you."  He said, "We going to Ray Charles's studio."  Ray Charles's studio was  at 16 and Washington.  So we went to Ray Charles' studio and we had a whole big  orchestra.  And they was recording the music.  Sound so good to me, but I was scared to  death.  I was like this.  And I didn't want anybody to see me shaking, you know?  But I  was shaking because I was - you know, I'm around all these people, all these big people  that know what they're doing, and I know I don't know what I'm doing.  All I'm doing is  what God gave me, which was beautiful, okay?  Time come for me to sing.  I go in the  booth, and I'm so nervous.  And I'm talking to myself.  Calm down.  Calm down.  Just  sing.  And that's just what I did.  And Monk Higgins said, "Let me tell you something.  You handling this real beautiful, man."  He said, "You know I record a lot of people."  He  said, "Tyrone, you sound so good, man." He said, "Just - I want you to do another tape.  Just relax a  little bit."  I did.  I recorded it.  I came home.  Got home on a Sunday.  At that time, used  to make dubs.  Not tapes, dubs like a -  something like a record.  I brought - no I didn't, I forgot it.  Came home.  Wally said to me, "How did the song sound?"  I said, "Sound real good."  I  was so happy because I knew I had never sounded that good before.  But I had never sang  with no orchestra before either.  He said, "Tell me what you think - how big you think the  record will be."  There was a group out at that time called The Young Rascals.  They had  a record called 'Groovin' On A Sunday Afternoon.'  I said, "It'll be that big."  He said,  "Man, you crazy."  I said, "Wally, you asked me, and I'm telling you."  He said, "You  think so?"  I said, "I think so."  I was taking him to the airport.  He was going back to  New Jersey.  I took him to the airport, and I dropped him off, right?  Three months  went by and I didn't hear nothing from him.  So it said to me he don't want to deal with  me.  If I ain't heard nothing from the man in three months, he don't wanna deal with me.  You  got to face it.  Anything going down like that, you got to face it.  I can't sit here and say  well he busy, he ain't called me.  Uh, unh. Uh, unh  If he was interested, he done call me.
Story_ID: 6384
Speaker 1: My mother came here from Mississippi.  She was over at my house.  Somebody sent, Monk [Higgins] sent  the dub to me.  She was over at my house.  She was playing records.  She ran across the  dub, and she played it.  She said, "Ty?"  I said, "Yeah?"  She said, "Who's singing this  song?"  I said, "That's me, Dear."  She said, "That's not you."  I said, "Yes it is."  She said,  "I'm going to tell you something."  I said, "What?"  She said, "You get somebody to put  this song here out.  If it don't happen, don't sing no more.  Just get you a job and leave it  alone."  I said, "Why you say that?"  She said, "I'm telling you that this song here will be  a hit record for you."  I said, "Dear, you don't know nothing about no record."  She said,  "Listen, man, I listens at Little Milton, Bobby Bland."  This is what my momma said.  James Brown.  I said, "You kidding?"  She said, "Man, I listen to all that stuff."  See, my  mother was living down South and they had a cafe.  So all them records is on the box.  She said, "That'll be a hit record for you."  Well, I don't know what to do with it.  I don't -  I just forgot about it.  There was a company called Brunswick Records, and Carl Davis  was the man.  Record company was at 1449 South Michigan.  I'm singing at a club on  Pulaski Road and 18th Street.  Otis Leavill is Carl Davis' right hand.  He so happened to  stop by there.  So I'm on stage singing.  Clarence Carter has a record at the time called  'Slip Away' and that's what I'm singing.  Otis came in and he sit and he listened.  When I  came off stage, he said, "I want to talk to you."  I said, "About what?"  He said, "Man,  you sound so good."  He said, "You want to record a record?"  I said, "I would love to."  "Well, we got a record company."  I said, "Where is it?"  "1449 South Michigan."  He  said, "You know Carl Davis?"  I said, "No, I don't know him."  He said, "Well you need  to come down there."  He said, "I'll talk to Carl for you and see can't we get something  done."  I said, "Okay, when you want me to come?"  Now today is Friday.  He said,  "Come Monday."
Story_ID: 6385
Speaker 1: He said come down to the recording company Monday.  I said, "Give me the  address."  He gave it to me.  I didn't go.  The next Friday, he came back.  He said, "Man,  why would you tell a lie like you told?"  He said, "Man, I'm trying to help you.  You got a  good voice.  What's wrong with you?"  I said, "Can I be honest?"  He said, "Yeah."  I  said, "I heard this story too many times."  He said, "This ain't no story. Tyrone, come  down to the office."  He said, "Now if you don't come this time, you will never see me  back over here looking for you no more."  Okay.  So Monday I go down there.  When I  get there I walk up to the receptionist and I says, "My name is Tyrone, The Wonder  Boy."  I said.  "Otis Leavill asked me to come down here."  "Have a seat over there."  Two  and a half hour wait, maybe three hours, nobody came.  I'm sitting there.  Finally, Otis  came.  And they ain't doing nothing that busy.  They just - it's just like that.  I came in. Took me to  Carl's [Carl Davis] office.  I met Carl.  He said, "Yeah, a heard a few things that you have done, but  you ain't nothing but a blues singer."
Story_ID: 6386
Speaker 1: He said, "You ain't nothing but a blues singer, and I  don't really like nothing that I've ever heard that you've done."  He said, "I heard three,  four things you done.  You been fooling around with Monk Higgins and Hal Burrage [Harold Burrage]."  Hal was a - Carl [Davis] was a big man.  He was running the thing for Brunswick Records.  Had Jackie  Wilson, the Chi-Lites, the Artistics, Barbara Acklin, Gene Chandler.  So I'm sitting there  listening to him.  What he said to me didn't make me feel good.  He said, "You know  what?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "I might get around to doing something with you but  it'll probably be a year from now."  I said, "Oh, yeah?"  He say, "Yeah."  Well, I thought  in my mind right away was the hell with that.  I ain't going - he was treating me like I was  a piece of trash, and I knew that.  He had a guy working there, a songwriter named Floyd  Smith.  Floyd had seen me at the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].  I was opening the show for - there was  Pigmeat Markham, the Manhattans, B. B. King, and Jackie Wilson, and I was  opening.  So Floyd had seen me there and he liked what he seen.  So he came up to me  and said, "Tyrone the Wonder Boy, right?"  I said, "Right."  He said, "You got a minute?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Come in my office."  I went in his office.  He had a song called  a 'Woman Needs to be Loved.'  He said, "Can you sing this?"  "Of course."  He said,  "How long will it take you to learn it, about a week?"  I said, "No."  He said, "How long?"  I said,  "I'll take it home and I'll learn it over night."  "That fast?"  I said, "Yes."  He said, "If you  know the song by tomorrow, come back down here."  I said, "Okay."  So the next day I  went back down there to see Floyd.  I went in his office.  He played it on the piano.  I  sang it.  He said, "Man.  Come on."  We dashed to Carl's office.  Got in Carl's office, Carl  said, "Listen, that song belong to Jackie Wilson.  He ain't going to get it, and you know it  belong to Jackie and don't you come in my face no more with that.  So now if I have to  tell you what to do, keep this office clean and write songs and drive my limousine."  I  looked at him and it pissed me off bad.  I said, "Man, please.  I can't deal with this.  I ain't  nothing, but I - hey, I don't have to do this."
Story_ID: 6387
Speaker 1: He [Floyd Smith] said, "Come in the back, Tyrone."  I was  on the way out the door.  He said, "Come in the back."  I said, "I ain't coming back there  man."  He said, "Hey, Tyrone come back here."  I went back in the back to a two track  machine.  He said, "Sing this song."  By me being pissed, I did half what I could really  do.  He had it on tape.  He driving Carl [Davis] in the limousine.  He took Carl home.  Carl  was sitting in the den watching the baseball game.  He took the tape downstairs and put it  on the machine and turned it up real loud.  Carl come running to the stairway, "Hey man,  who it that?"  He said, "Tyrone, the Wonder Boy."  He said, "Man, where he at?"  He  said, "You pissed him off, Carl."  He said, "Go get him."  I was living at Carlson and  Jackson.  Floyd came by my house.  He said, "Man, Carl wants to see you."  I said, "Hell  with Carl."  He said, "You ain't." I said, "I ain't going down there no more."  I said, "I ain't never going down  there no more."  And let me back up a little bit.  In the meantime, I had gave them the  dub, the tape, I had gave the tape to Floyd of 'Can I Change My Mind.'  He said, "You  ain't coming back no more?"  I said, "Never.  I don't like nobody talk to me like that,  man."  So, I'm laying in the bed, it's Friday morning.  My phone rings.  I pick up the  phone and say, "Hello?"  He says, "Let me speak to Tyrone Davis."  No, it's, "Let me talk to  Tyrone, the Wonder Boy."  I said, "This is he."  He said, "This is Carl Davis."  "What?"  "This is Carl Davis."  I said, "What's up?"  "Come down to the studio, I want to talk to  you."  I said, "Okay, when?"  He said, "Today."  I said, "Okay."  I hang up the phone.  I  said the hell with that, I ain't going down there, and I didn't go.  Monday morning my  phone rang again.  It was him.  He said, "Man I thought you was coming down here.  I  want to talk to you."  He said, "Come down here."  I jumped in my car and I went down.  No, I said, "The only reason I don't want to come," I said, "when I come up to the  reception, they make me wait two hours."  He said, "Hey, soon as you get here, tell her to  come get me."  When I walked up there, he was walking by and he seen me.  He opened the  door, and I came in.  He said, "Listen, I want to tell you something."  I said, "What?"  He  said, "I'm getting ready to go to Miami [Florida] to the disc jockey convention.  But you know  what?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "You know that song a 'Woman Needs to be Loved?'"  I  said, "Yeah."  He said, "Man, you kill me with it."  I said, "You said it was Jackie's [Jackie Wilson]  song."  He said, "The hell with that."  He said, "I want you to get with Willie Henderson,  go in the back, and y'all rehearse that song." Now, it's Monday.  He said, "Wednesday night  they're going to take you in the studio and record you."  I looked, "What?"  He said, "I'm  telling you, I'm ready to record you now."  So we go in the back and we works it out.  Willie said what are we going to put on the B side.  Floyd said, "That song Tyrone  brought down here called 'Baby Can I Change My Mind.'  That's the song to put on there."  I ain't got there another tape.  There's about 400 tapes up there in the closet with no label  on them.  Let me just tell you something.  I know for a fact that God works in mysterious  ways.  I know this.  All these tapes up here and no labels on the tapes.  Floyd went up  there and search until he found that tape.  He said, "I got it."  Brought it in the back.  Everybody listened.  Said, "Man, that song there is a killer."  So let's do this. They  rehearsed on the song.  Come Wednesday, we go into the studio, Universal downtown on  Walton Street.  Here I am again like this.  I can't be still, I'm like this.  We go down there.  They got all the musicians in the studio recording the stuff.  Now it's my turn to go in the  booth to sing.  I went in the booth and I sang this song.  By the time we got finished, the  phone rang and it was Carl Davis calling from Miami.  He said, "Willie, how did the  session go?"  He said, "Carl, you ain't going to believe this."  He said, "What?"  He was  on the speaker phone, okay?  I could hear.  He said, "What?"  He said, "Man, this Tyrone  the Wonder Boy is something else, man."  He said, "You kidding?"  He said, "Man," he said, "Carl  I'm telling you."  Carl said, "Play it and let me listen to it on the phone."  He played it.  I'm standing there shaking.  He said, "I'm coming home tonight."  He said, "I'm coming  home, man."  He got on the plane and came home.  The next day I came down to the  office.  They in the office playing it loud.  All I can hear is Tyrone, Tyrone.  So, I'm  outside because I ain't in the in-crowd yet.  They finally let me come in the office.  Carl  said, "Man, let me tell you something.  You bad.  You bad, man."  I said, "Well, you  know."  Because I knew I didn't know nothing.  I'm just doing what God put me here to  do, okay?  He said, "You know what?  Man, the only thing I hate," he said, "I got all  these other artists ahead of you."  He said, "It's going to take me eight months to get your  record out."  He said, "But you know what?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "I got a label  called Dakar."  He said, "If you don't care, I'll put it on Dakar."  I said, "I don't care what  you put it on."  He said, "Okay.  I'll put it on next week then."
Story_ID: 6388
Speaker 1: Got everything together,  put the record out, and he put out - only he put the A Side, 'A Women Needs to be Loved,'  and 'Can I Change My Mind' on the B Side.  Record starts playing on the radio, and it was  valley, valley, valley.  A dude down in Houston [Texas] at KYOK Radio Station, called  him 'Wild Child.'  I had met him with Wally [Roker], okay?  The guy that I told you was going to  manage me, but he went off.  So I had met him down in Houston.  They had the record on - he had the record on  KYOK, 'A Women Needs to be Loved.'  Wasn't doing too good, so he took the record  home with him to put in his stash.  He had a little boy two and a half years old, Bill Jr.  Bill Jr. - you know how little kids play the record.  He loved this record 'Can I Change  My Mind.'  So he was playing it day by day, I guess, at his house, the little boy.  He had a party at  his house on a Saturday night.  Everybody dancing, dancing, dancing.  I guess fifty or a hundred people.  Every time the player stopped, little Bill Jr. would go get 'Can I Change My Mind'  and put it on here and play it.  So, people started feeling it.  Somebody said, "I want to  hear that other record.  Where that other record at that was on?  What was the name of it?"  Don't nobody know.  Wild Child said to his son, he said, "Bill Jr. get your record."  He went and  got 'Can I Change My Mind and put it on there.  Everybody in the room got up dancing.  He said, "I'm taking this record back to the radio station."  This is why I'm telling you  I know God works in mysterious ways.  He took the record back to the radio station the next day  and played it and all hell broke loose.  He played it and backed it up.  He said, "All the  phone lines lit up."  So he jumped right on the phone and called Carl [Davis].  He said, "Carl,  Tyrone Davis got a smash with 'Can I Change My Mind.'" He said, "Man, that's the record."  Played it for  a week, now it done popped off.  Now all over the country everybody is going on it.  This record stayed number one in New York [New York] six weeks.  That's when they had the countdown one from ten, one to ten.  It stayed on number one six weeks in the biggest  station in New York.  So now they're picking it up all over the country.  When I knew anything,  the record was gold.  I didn't even know.  The Dells again, said,  "Tyrone -" We was on the plane together.  They had a billboard.  I didn't know what a  billboard was.  I don't know.  I'm new.  He said, "Tyrone?"  I said, "What?"  "Your record  done went gold.  Your record sold a million copies."  I said, "No it ain't."  He said, "Man,  look at this."  My record was in the Top 100.  In three weeks number 17 with a bullet.  In  three weeks.  But I still don't know what's happening.  He said, "Any time you see a  record in the Top 100," he said, "this ain't in the R and B [rhythm and blues] charts, this is the Top 100, Tyrone."  He said,  "Man, don't let nobody tell you no BS.  Your record done went gold."  I said, "Has it?"  He said, "I'm telling you."  Two, three more weeks I found out.  He said, "Man your  record is huge."  And this I really got off.  My next record was 'Is It Something She Got.'  It went to 15 in the top 100, but it went gold, okay?  I done had two gold records back to  back.  And guess what?  I ain't got no contract.
Story_ID: 6389
Speaker 1: It should have been on a business level.  If I would have known what I needed to do, I  could have right then - I could have said I want me two million [dollars].  They'd have gave it to  me.  They'd have gave it to me like this.  I'm thirty years old.  I got two gold records.  Both  of them went Pop.  Ain't no way they wouldn't have gave it to me, but I don't know this.  So, I gets on the plane and come back to Chicago [Illinois].  Said, "Man, you ain't signed no - you ain't got no contract.  Here's where they told me.  You ain't got no contract.  You know you did this song in  California with Wally Roker.  You know how slick Wally is.  What Wally going to do is  he's going to take all your royalties.  You ain't got no contract.  There was no way Wally  could have took my royalties.  So what you got to do is sign a contract."  I'm looking for  the contract to sign it, you dig?  Sign the contract. He said, "What kind of car you want?"  I had a [Cadillac] Eldorado, a 1968 Eldorado before I met them.  I said I want a '69 [1969] [Cadillac Eldorado] Brougham.  That's what they called them.  They say, "There ain't no problem."  "When you want it?"  I said,  "Now."  Let's go down to Rush Street Cadillac [Chicago, Illinois].  We went down there.  "Pick out what  you want."  I picked out, paid for it in cash.
Story_ID: 6390
Speaker 1: "Tyrone."  I said, "What?"  "You got to go  on a tour by yourself."  I said, "Yeah?"  I said, - I didn't know what to do.  I didn't know  nothing.  He said, "You got to have some kind of way to carry your band.  You need a  band."  I said, "Man, I ain't got no band."  He said, "You got to get one together."  Got it  together.  Went and bought me a station wagon, put a trailer behind it.  I started, he said, "Let me  tell you something."  He said, "Now you run around doing these little bitty dates what you  doing."  He said, "Now what you need to be doing is at home resting."  "I'm young, why do I need to  rest so much?"  I got two hit records.  I'm young.  I ain't fixing to - getting ready to go stay in no house.  I'm  doing this.  I'm doing that.  He said, "Man, you know what?"  I said, "What?"  He said,  "They got ninety-one one-nighters booked on you.  Ninety-one."  "What?"  "I'm telling you, you fixing to go  away from home and you won't be back."  "Where am I going?"  He said, "Everywhere.  Let me tell you something," he said. "Look, I got an itinerary, and you going to be  everywhere, man.  You won't come back to see your family in a long time."  "No kidding?"  He said, "I'm telling you.  So you better get all your stuff together."  I don't know nothing  about going to Louisiana, to Houston, Texas, to California.  I don't know nothing about  this.  But I got to go.  I pretty quick learned, you know?  So, I got out there on the road.  I  guess I lost fifteen pounds because they had me jumping sometimes a thousand miles a day, which  is ridiculous.  But by me not knowing to say I ain't doing that, I'm trying to do everything.  And believe it or not, I made them all.  I did all of them.
Story_ID: 6391
Speaker 1: Now when I come back, it's  time for me to cut another album.  My records done cooled off a little bit.  Now what I did, I  cut the third song.  It was called 'You Can't Keep a Good Man Down.'  It didn't happen.  So people start saying, "Uh, huh.  I told you he was lucky.  That's it.  He ain't never going  to get another hit record."  You know you're hearing that.  He ain't going to get no other  hit records because that little jealousy thing between the local entertainers and all the  people that I knew.  "Man, this man got lucky.  This man can't - this man ain't going to  get another hit."  Okay.  I came home and I got a phone call, and the phone call was from  a guy named Johnny Moore, which was a little local singer.  He called me at home.  When  he called me at home, I picked up the phone and said, "Hello?"  "Hey, Tyrone, this is  Johnny Mole.  And he bust out with the laughing."  I got an inferiority complex.  I'm  thinking he laughing at me because my career is from here to here, okay?  And I don't  like that.  I said, "What you want, man?"  He said, "I got a song for you.  What time  you coming to the office today?"  I said, "Two o'clock."  He said, "I'll wait here for you."  Now you know what I did?  I didn't go til 4:30.  The office close at 5:00.  I went at 4:30  because I thought he wouldn't wait that long and would be gone, because I'm thinking  that he laughing at me, okay?  And I'm pissed off about it.  When I got there at 4:30, he  was sitting back there at the piano.  My producer at that time was named Willie  Henderson.  He said, "Johnny Mole back there waiting for you ,man."  I said, "Man,  please."  He said, "Let me tell you something."  He said, "Man, what's wrong with you?"  I said, "What do you mean what's wrong with me?"  He said, "Bad as you need a hit  record, you just came off two smashes now you done flopped.  Now this man got back  there with a song for you and you don't want to go listen to it."  Something triggered in  my head and said, "Damn, you better go listen."  I went in the back.  He was sitting at the  piano.  I said, "What is the song?"  He went to playing it on the piano and he said, [singing] "And  leaving would be the last thing on my mind if I could turn back the hands of time."  That  was a wake up call for me.  I said, "Damn, that's bad."  I said, "Yeah, man, that's -" Then  something said to me don't let him know how much you like it because he'll sing it  himself and if he find out you like it, he ain't going to give it to you.  So I said, "You  know what I'll do with that song?"  He said, "What?"  I said, "I will put it in my album."  He said, "You will?"  I said, "Yeah."  So I come out of the back and I come up front -  Otis [Leavill] with me.  Otis said, "Carl [Davis], the man got a smash."  Carl said, "Shhh."  Because they  were like that.  "Don't let him know.  Don't let him know.  Just get this song from him  and don't tell him how much we like it because I want to hear it."  So Otis go back there and  said, "You got this song on tape?"  "Yeah."  Said, "Give it to me."  Gave it to him.  I got to  leave town tomorrow.  Willie Henderson and we all in the office listening, he said, "Hey  man, this is a smash, Tyrone."  I said, "I know it."  "How long you going to be gone?"  Well, at that time I worked Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,  Sunday, you know what I'm saying?  I think I left on Wednesday, and I was coming back  Monday.  I said, "I'll be back Monday, but I'll be back here in the office Tuesday."  He  said, "Listen, when you get back here, be ready to go in the studio." Said, "I'm telling you, don't blow your pipes this weekend."  In other words, don't sing too hard to get - but at  that time, my wind was strong as train smoke.  It didn't matter.  If I stayed up all night or  whatever, I still could do it.  I came back, came to the office.  They played the track.  "You hear this?"  I was so anxious to sink my teeth in it I didn't know what to do.  "What  time we going to the studio?"  He said, "We're going in tonight at 7:00."  Bingo. Seven o'clock we  went in, I sang this song.  One take.  I said, "Now I'm ready to record."  He said, "You  ain't ready to record for me.  I got what I want."  I said, "Man, I want to sing this song  again."  He said, "Hey man, I got what I want."  Made me a dub, I left the studio.  Honest  to God, the devil - I left the studio, got in my car, went to Johnny Mole's house laughing like a  dog.  I said, "Man, you got to be crazy."  "Why you give me this song?"  "I gave it to  you because I want you to have it."  I said, "I got the dub.  I'll play the dub."  He said,  "God, dog, that's a hit, Tyrone."  I said, "It's a smash."  Carl hear it the next day said,  "Man, we getting this ready right now."  In five days - the first five days they played it on the radio  station, it sold forty-five thousand units.  Do you hear me?  It sold forty-five - hey, I couldn't believe it.  The  record went number 5 in the nation in the pop charts, number 5.  The record did five million [units].  Hear what I'm saying?  So, you know it was like - it was just there for me.  It  was my time.  I didn't get platinum because at that time, there was no such thing as  platinum.  So that's how I failed - that's why I don't have a platinum record.  I got eleven gold, but I don't have a platinum, you know?  But that's - maybe what I do - maybe at sixty-two [years old] years old I'll get me a platinum.  How about that?  You with that?  I wish - but anyways,  anyways, that's what's happening with me.
Story_ID: 6392
Speaker 1: Of all your songs, which is your favorite?
Speaker 2: Which is my favorite?  I don't know.  I like a lot of my stuff.  I got a song called 'So Good  To Be Home With You.' That might be - and this song did not go gold - but that might be  one of the songs that I, I like more than all the rest of them that I got.  I might, I think I like that  song the best.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I don't know why.  Just because.  You know what I'm saying?  Just because.  I got way  more records than you think I got, than you know about, okay?  I've done throughout my  career about forty-some albums.  I know you don't know that.  I got some real good stuff.  Sometimes - I got a sister.  Her name is Pearl and she got everything I ever made.  Sometime I go to her house and we reminisce because she think I'm the greatest.  And I  have to say this.  I did some real nice work when I was younger.  I did some real nice  stuff.  I listen to it a lot of time and I can't believe it.  And you know what?  I listen to it  and I don't know where it came from.  I can't imagine that I was doing stuff like that, but  it was there and I didn't know nothing.  That's what makes it kind of strange to me  because I know in the back of my mind that I didn't know nothing.  Now I know, okay?  But then I didn't know.  So sometime I wonder how did you do this this good?  But then  that's why I'm a legend and I've been inducted into the Hall of Fame.  That's why.  They  don't just grab somebody and induct them into the Hall of Fame if it ain't justice due,  you know what I mean?  You know what I'm saying?  So, that tells me right there.  You  know sometime you don't think you as good as you are.  Okay?  Well, that's the way I feel.  I  just didn't know that, you know, but maybe that's the reason I can go and work now and make  a living.  You know what I'm saying?  I know I'm just - I'm just one hit record, one more hit record away  from what I need to do.  I'm one more away.  It might not come because the way the  radio situation is set up.  You heard what Herb [Kent] was saying.  The way it is, but you know I  go by - I hope you know what I mean.  I know he can handle it.  If it's meant to be, ain't  nothing can stop it, okay?  So that's basically what I'm living on right now.  I know when  it comes to a black disc jockey on V103 [radio station, Chicago, Illinois], they ain't going to give me no justice due.  They not going to do it.  But if He's (points upward) ready for it, they'll have to.  It'll happen.  Know what  I mean?  And the way that happens is you get a record that everybody likes, they can't  stop it.  Am I right or wrong or do you know that?  So, you know, I just - I don't like  recording no more, but this is what I do.
Story_ID: 6393
Speaker 1: And the reason I don't like recording is because of  the way it is, the way the situation is with black music.
Speaker 2: Tell me what do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: Michael Bolton wish he could sing as good as me. He wish he could sing as good as  Johnnie Taylor, but they play his music.  And the black disc jockeys will play it.  Why  they won't play Tyrone Davis and Johnnie Taylor.  They'll play Mick Jagger.  He can't  sing nothing.  But they'll play him.  Mick Jagger ain't no singer.  I don't care how big he  is, he can't sing as well as me.  I know that.  You see what I'm saying?  So why does it  have to be like that?  Tom Jones don't sing no better than Tyrone Davis.  I'm telling you  this.  Tom Jones didn't sing no better than Johnnie Taylor.  Why they have to be so big  and we have to be at a certain level?  Something wrong, ain't it?  If you good, you good.  You know what I'm saying?  If you're not, you're not.  But you know what I know?  I'm  good.
Speaker 2: Now what do you think - do you think - have you seen things get worse or better or not?  It's just all -
Speaker 1: I seen it - since I started, I seen it get worse, worse, worse.  You know why?  I was lucky  enough to get in the business when they was really playing - they called it at that time  soul music.  It's really rhythm and blues.  You know what Little Richard called it?  He  calls it real black.  That's what he calls it because Little Richard don't bite his tongue  and he says the way it is, okay?  If I get a record and I take it to the radio station, they  say it won't fit their format.  The same song, Michael Bolton can take it there and it's  platinum in three weeks because they made it like that.  My friend sitting over there told  me the other day, he said, "Tyrone, you know if a record is played and people hear it and  hear it and hear it, they like it more and more."  And that's the truth.  That's the way hit  records are made.  But they don't give us a chance no more.  We can't get our records  played.  Don't tell me that we got garbage because you know what?  I refuse to go in the  studio and record a record that's garbage.  I know it.  I been here.  I know what's right and  what's not right for me to record.  Someone says, "You act like your bitter."  I am.  It's not  fair.  It is not fair.  You know, baby, I have to eat just like everybody else.  If I got good  material, you play my record.  Why can't you play my record?  Because I'm sixty-two years old,  you won't play my record?  Don't nobody look on the - listen to the radio and tell how old  nobody is by hearing their music.  Am I right or wrong?  It's - if it wasn't a thing like - I  got some buddies that's in this business and they try real hard.  Some of them are real  good singers.  I would hate mighty bad to be in their shoes today because I couldn't make  a living.  Because if you got caught up in this - see, the deal is, people know me.  They  know Tyrone Davis.  I go all over the country.  People know me, okay?  If, if you do  something - if you do a concert and you advertise it right, people are going to come see  me because people still remember.  They remember all this stuff, okay?  But what if I  was just starting now?  I'd be in trouble.  Don't nobody know.  I got a buddy, Otis Clay.  Sang his heart out.  He's my buddy.  I feel sorry for him.  I got another buddy, Artie  White, Cicero Blake.  They got problems.  They don't - they wasn't lucky enough - they  wasn't lucky as I was.  Well, they wasn't blessed like I was at that time to get in the slot.  People know me.  They know Johnnie Taylor because we had all the records back then.  People still remember us.  Otherwise, we wouldn't have a chance.  You know why?  Because the radio station won't give us no chance.  It's ridiculous.  You know you go in  the studio and it takes a lot of work for an album, baby.  Or maybe I should say CD.  It  takes a lot of work to do a CD.  When you spent all this time getting your material  together, getting all of it laid out and you come out with the record and they won't play it.  Now you turn around and you listen to the radio and you hear Boz Scaggs.  What are you  doing so much more than what I'm doing?  He don't sing - he can't sing good as me.  Can't.  He don't have it inside what I got.  He's trying to do what I'm doing, okay?  Tom  Jones sing black.  Good singer, but he sing black.  You know why?  Because he knows  that what was happening.  He know that's what was happening.  And don't get me wrong,  I'm not - I don't have anything against these guys.  But I have it against the people that  are doing it to us.  And these are the radio stations.  That's what's doing it to us.  Well,  you got a record by Tyrone - well, that's blues.  You ain't even listen to it.  Why don't you  listen to it?  You know what?  I dare them - I dare them to give me a chance.  If they give  me a chance, I'll take off like wild fire.  I'm telling you.  And this ain't no brag.  This  facts.  This ain't no big head.  This is the truth what I'm telling you.  You hear me?  And I  know what I'm talking about.
Story_ID: 6394
Speaker 1: You were saying you had thought about self- publishing -
Speaker 2: My own stuff?
Speaker 1: Uh, huh.
Speaker 2: I got to.  Let me tell you just why.  Ain't no big record company going to take me now  because they say I'm too old.  I can't sell a million records unless I get blessed.  If I was  with a big record company and I sold 200,000 records, when I get finished wit the sales,  I'm in the red.  You follow me?  I'm in the red because I ain't sold enough records to  make royalties.  I might not - I might not get out - I might not be able to pay back the  money that they gave me to cut the record with, okay?  There's another term that I could  use, but I can't think of it right now.  I'm too old.  Okay?  But I broke it down enough for  you to know what I'm talking about.  If I did my own stuff, think about this.  Say if a  record company gave me a budget - that's the word I was looking for.  They gave me a  budget an the budget was $100,000.  I got to pay back that $100,000 before I make any  dime.  Now, $100,000 ain't no money.  If I don't get no more money in that whole year,  I'm going to starve, right?  But if I put my own record out and I sell 50,000, I'm going to  gross $400,000.  Does it make sense for me to put my own out or stay with them?  Now,  if I sell 100,000, after all expense, I'm going to make $600,000.  I can live good with this.  I ain't got the - I don't have to be - I would love to be $10 million.  You know that.  But I  don't have to be that if I can make this kind of money because I can make a decent living,  right?  But if I'm going to go and let somebody else count the money, I'm in trouble.  So  you gave me $100,000.  So I spent $40,000 recording the album.  I ain't got the $60,000  left.  My needs and my living, $60,000 don't mean nothing.  You know what I'm saying?  When cars cost $200,000.  You got me?  If you buy a decent house it's $550,000.  Am I  right or wrong?  I like to live like that.  So, ain't no sense in my being bothered with  nobody else with what they going to give me these peanuts.  Try my own thing.  On a bad  record, I'm going to sell 50,000.  On a bad record I'll sell 50,000 records.  It's $400,000.  Say I don't clear but $250,000.  It's way better than $100,000, ain't it?  That's why I'm  going to do that.
Speaker 1: Have you thought of the Internet or anything?  Have you looked at that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm going to do all that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: We going to do all - let me tell you something.  Excuse me.  I got a producer that's very  smart.  He's very smart, and I know this.  He and I been together for quite some time.  And all we have to do is sit down and get our heads together and do what we got to do.  And that's what we going to do.  This is my last album with Malaco [Records].  I wish I could jump  up and turn three flips before I hit the floor.  I would do that now.  That's how glad I am  to get away from this situation.  I been in this situation five years.  But with just a little  help from him and knowing what I know and doing what I got to do.  I be okay.
Story_ID: 6395
Speaker 1: Of other artists, who have you most admired and why?  I mean you  talk about Freddie King, but who - I don't know who have you most - you know who -
Speaker 2: Well, I told you Johnnie [Taylor] and I was good friends.  So you now I admired him.  We was real  good friends.  More than even people would imagine.  But you know who I really, really like is  Luther Vandross.  And I heard just the other day that he bad sick.  I heard that he's bad  sick and I'm feeling really bad about it.  I heard it on GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  I know he lost a lot of weight,  and I'm just praying to God that he's okay.  But that's who I really like.  I really like  Luther a lot.  He says a lot when he sings.  A lot of people don't understand this.  You  ever heard somebody say to you, "What is soul?"  Don't nobody what soul is.  It's  unexplainable.  But it comes out.  And when it comes - I'll show you.  You ever been to a Baptist church and  you look over there and everybody crying and people happy?  That's soul.  When the  preacher get up and preach like that.  It makes you feel good.  You can't explain the  feeling.  You say, "Oh my God.  I feel so good."  It's soul.  That's the soul.  When I hear  somebody sing, and I say, "Damn, this guy is bad."  Believe it or not when I heard  Luther's first song, I told my band, I said, "Hear this guy here.  He going to be here a  long time."  I knew it.  Because I know it when I hear it.  Don't ask me how.  God gave  me that.  To feel that.  And I could feel that.  I can't explain it to you, okay.  But I know it  when I hear it.  When a guy comes out, I say, "This man ain't going to be here."  There's a  guy came out with a song, a nice looking boy named Keith Jackson.  I said, "He ain't  going to be here because he don't know what he's doing."  I can hear it in his voice.  I can  hear it how he's singing.  He don't know what he's doing.  And he had one and he was  gone.  Luther's so terrible, it's unreal.  That's why he can come to the United Center [Chicago, Illinois] and  fill it up.  He was lucky enough he came along at the right time, and the people  promoted him right.  This is - you got to have all this.  Along with your talent, you still  got to have this.  Somebody's - you need a record company to spend 400 thousand [dollars] on your  album.  It ain't going to miss.  How many record companies going to spend that kind of  money on artists.  You got to be a guy like R. Kelly, number one of them.  He's right in  the slot.  He's right.  He sings good, but he's got promotion, what he needs.  He got it  right there.  He going to make a lot of money because of that.  You got artists come out  here, I don't care how good it is, if it ain't promoted right, it ain't going nowhere.  It's just  that simple.  And the only out - the only answer to that is to try to do what I'm getting  ready to do.  I can't make 5 million [dollars] off my album because I can't sell that many albums  because won't nobody play my record.  Follow me?  But if I sell me 200 thousand [records], I'm okay.
Story_ID: 6396
Speaker 1: What about producers?  Which, which person do you think had the most influence on  your career?
Speaker 2: On my - on what?
Speaker 1: On your career, which producer -
Speaker 2: Neal Well (ph) by far.  Now here's a guy - he and I we're real close.  Got a lot of talent.  He's got a lot of talent.  If you looked at him, you would think he didn't know nothing.  But he got a lot of talent, and I know that.  He kept me eating for two decades.  Know what  I'm saying?  So, I have to respect the man.  And then I'm loyal, I told you  that.  Sometime maybe I shouldn't be, but I mean that just the way I live and I been  successful behind being like that.  So I don't want to change nothing, okay?  I think he  and I still can go far together.  Now, he stopped writing for me because I signed for  Malaco [Malaco Records] and I could understand.  The man - he's a businessman.  They want to take all the  money.  They want to mess with his publishing.  They ain't writing no song, why should  they have his publishing.  Which is right?  So I have to go along with him on that, but  now that I'm getting out of there, we going - hey we going to be terrible again.  All I want to do is  stay healthy and keep waking up every day.  You'll hear from me.  Watch and see.  You're  going to say, "Tyrone told me that." You'll hear from me.  If - you heard what I said.  If I can stay healthy and  keep waking up every day, you'll hear from me.
Story_ID: 6397
Speaker 1: Legacy.  What do you want to be remembered for?  What do you want when they say -
Speaker 2: I want, I want to be remembered for being a nice guy that I am.  I want to be remembered for, for, for  doing good work.  Okay?  This is what I want to be.  I'm a nice guy and I know I'm a nice  guy.  People don't - sometime people don't really think so, but inside of me I know I am  'cause I know I don't mean nobody nothing.  And I ain't mad with nobody in the world.
Story_ID: 6398
Speaker 1: When you think of, you know, where you came from in Greenville in the cotton  fields - I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you ever look back on your life?
Speaker 2: Oh my God!  Oh my God!  And I just think about how blessed I've been.  You know, I  didn't know nothing about this and when you're a kid in the South, your momma get a  magazine and you look in the magazine and you see nice things.  You see nice cars, nice  homes.  You say how come we don't, can't live like that?  And then you say to yourself, I  wonder would I ever be able to do this.  And I was.  That's a lot to say.  I didn't go to  college.  I only got two years in high school.  You know what I'm saying?  I came a long  ways.  God done kept his arms around me.  So I have to be appreciative, you know what  I'm saying?  So I - hey, I don't know what else to tell you.  You know, I live the life I love  and I love the life I live.
Story_ID: 6399
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: It don't make no difference.  I'm a diabetic, I can't -
Speaker 1: Well, if you weren't a diabetic.
Speaker 2: If I wasn't a diabetic, let me tell you something.  My mother raised me off of greens.  Man this is - greens, pinto beans, okra.  Listen, corn bread.  What can I say.  Pork.  I ate a lot of pork.  I can't eat that no more.  I ain't ate none in I don't know when.  You know  what I'm saying?  So, you know, hey -
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: You know what?  You ain't going to believe this.  I ain't been on two vacations in my life.  You know why?  I'm always gone.  When I get a chance to stay at home, I don't want to  go nowhere.  You know, it might not make sense to you, but I don't want to go no place  because I'm gone all the time.  Where am I going?  Ain't nothing no more exciting to me. If --
Speaker 1: What about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer time.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color?  Black.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I love you
Story_ID: 6400
Speaker 1: [Photo -- Tyrone Davis Headshot for Malaco Records] [Photo Courtesy of Tyrone Davis]
