Story_ID: 531230
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, and I'm the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and Fred Viebahn is the observer.  Ma'am, can I get you to state and to spell you name please?
Speaker 2: My name is Rita Dove [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove].  That's spelled R-I-T-A, D-O-V-E.
Speaker 1: What's your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born on August 28, 1952 in Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Today's date is November 6, 2007, we are at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] on 42nd Street in New York [New York].  What's your occupation?
Speaker 2: An interesting question.  I am a writer.  I'm a poet.  I earn my living teaching in the English department at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Story_ID: 531231
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with five People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll just ask the question, and you just respond with whatever comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Potato chips.  That's not a food, is it (laughter)?  I love it.
Speaker 1: That counts as a food.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a particular type of potato chip that you like?
Speaker 2: No, I mean well I love Cape Cod, but--and, and otherwise I'll go with anything that has a rif- a ripple in it.
Speaker 1: A ripple?
Speaker 2: You know, ridges.  But, but then I rarely eat potato chips these days.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, October (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's--what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: It changes.  It changes.  What is it this week?  No.  I'd say right now it is turquoise, but it really does change.  I can't decide, I love them all.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: These things are supposed to pop up in my mind, and they don't.  No, I don't have a favorite vacation destination.  I would say Buenos Aires [Argentina] right now to dance tango.
Speaker 1: Fair enough.  What's your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one, you might have many?
Speaker 2: I don't have--well let me think.  This will mark me as a baby boomer.  I would say, "So it goes."  The Kurt Vonnegut phrase from 'Slaughterhouse-Five.'
Story_ID: 531232
Speaker 1: Can we start by talking about your mother?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What's your mom's name and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Oh, this gets more and more complicated.  No, my mother's name is Elvira, Elizabeth is her middle name and she was born a Hord, H-O-R-D [Elvira Hord Dove].  She was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about her background, about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I do know that she came to Akron, Ohio when she was young, and I knew my maternal grandparents.  My grandfather was actually a wallpaper hanger; he did that kind of thing, and a--also a custodian at times.  And my grandmother [Georgianna Jackson Hord] was a great hat maker and, and homemaker.  And so I know that my mother grew up with--well she had one brother [Anthony Hord], younger brother, she was the oldest of, of the whole pack, there were four of them.  So she had two, two sisters [Anna Hord and Doris Hord] and one brother, all of them younger than she.  And what do I know about her?  I, I also know that, that they were very musical, so when she was young they actually had a quartet formed of the children that sang with church functions and actually traveled in the Methodist Episcopal, you know, that kind of th- that circuit singing.  So--but I found that out very late actually.  I knew that she sang and she had a beautiful voice and that her mother, you know, that my, my grandmother played instruments and my grandfather too.  But I didn't know that they actually had a group, you know, that was kind of neat.
Speaker 1: Do you know any of their songs, you know, perhaps their most famous selection (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't know, I don't know any of their songs.  I mean they, they were the traditional kind of gospel songs they sang, but she never really said this was our, this was our hit so to speak.
Speaker 1: When did she tell you about it, you said you learned about it late?
Speaker 2: I--My daughter [Aviva Dove-Viebahn] was born before I knew.  It just kind of came out in conversation.  I'm like, "What?"  You know (laughter), after all of this music in our family, and she says, "Oh yeah, well, you know."  Shh, she said it as if, well, you know, everybody would do that.
Speaker 1: Perhaps everybody did--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --when your mom was growing up.  So let's talk about--a little bit about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your grandfather's name?  You said he was a wallpaper hanger, and what you know about him?
Speaker 2: Well, now we're only dealing with the maternal side, right, at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, right now.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Thomas Henry Hord [Thomas Hord].  And he came from Wartrace, Tennessee originally.  He came up actually when he was a young man, and when I say young man, I, he must've been early twenties, something like that.  He came up with a friend of his on a Mississippi riverboat and they, they were a song and dance team too, you know.  They, they kind of played the riverboat.  But they came up and settled in Akron, Ohio in the '20s [1920s], like so many people did at that time.  All I know about my grandfather, I did go back to Wartrace, Tennessee and meet so many relatives that I didn't know I had, which was really wonderful.  And all I know is that when they, they decided to stay in Ohio because there had been some kind of racial incident in Wartrace where it was best that young black men get out of town.  And so he decided, "Well, I'll just keep singing and dancing my way north."  So I do know that's what happened, but everyone was very mum upon, on the subject of exactly what had happened, you know, and it's one of those things.  It's like well that's bad water, you just let it flow away.
Speaker 1: And you said--you indicated that you, did you meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandparents, yes.
Speaker 1: And did your grandpa- did your grandfather ever tell you anything about his parents?
Speaker 2: No.  My--I knew my grandparents until my, my grandfather died when I was around thirteen, and my grandmother died when I was in, in, at the university [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio], so I was, I was nineteen.  And they, my grandfather was a very, very quiet man and he never really talked about his parents, except that the rumor went, and he would always say, ah, he didn't wanna talk about it.  The rumor went was that there was a lot of Indian [Native American] in the family, but everybody says that nowadays (laughter) so you never know how many.  I do know from my grandmother's side that there was a, that there were, there was Blackfoot, supposedly.  And, but, no, they were, you know, that's the, the tragedy of a lot of this, you know.  Before you get a chance to extract or even to try and get that kind of information out of them, you know, they pass away.
Story_ID: 531233
Speaker 1: Well, it seems that sometimes and even when you try to get the information out of them when they're here, they don't necessarily talk about it.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of why our parents and their parents are so mum, perhaps on their past?
Speaker 2: Well I think a lot of times, at least I can speak from what I perceive in my family.  I think a lot of times the past contains a lot of painful things, or things that they feel shouldn't--don't reflect as, as, as a good role model, I don't know.  So that they'd really rather forget about it and move forward.  I think their generations have this idea that, that in order to get forward, they had to think forward if that makes any sense.  So you just, you don't dwell on those things.  I also think that a lot of times they thought that these kind of things weren't important.  And when, I remember when I saw 'Roots' the first time, I, I was really envious that there was this family that actually said, "These were our, you know, ancestors," and said, you know, no, that was not the way it was in our family.  I would only, I'd hear it in the form of, of more like folk tales.  I'd hear about the, the six foot, you know, Indian [Native American], you know, with hair like a whip.  And I'm like, "Ooh, that's kind of neat."  But, that doesn't give me facts necessarily.  And I think on my, my mother's [Elvira Hord Dove] side, maternal side, it just never occurred to them to tell us anything other than in the form of a story, and I was far too, I think I was too young for my grandfather [Thomas Hord] to tell it to me in, in any other way than as a, a, a little folktale out of his past.
Speaker 1: Well, when you look at 'Roots' too, in my research I keep hitting places where I read this paragraph that says that 'Roots' presumably wasn't accurate, and that they've given Alex Haley a lot of flak for it.  So do you think in some ways that that too is a folk story and that--is there a possibility that that's all we can really get from memories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah I know what you mean.  I think that, that, my, my take on is this.  You remember how when we were children we would play telephone and you would--someone would start to say something and then it would go through the group and at the end it would end up to be something entirely different.  I think there's such a natural element of the telephone effect, if you wanna call it, in, in any kind of thing that's passed down.  So I tend to try to, I give Alex Haley a little bit of slack, and say, you know, okay, it's a long time ago and things are going to change.  And of course, the story gets more elaborate and gets more mythologized as it goes on and as the children sitting at your knee or whatever look at you wide eyed, you want to embellish it, I mean it makes sense.  It's human nature.
Speaker 1: I also wonder if people wanna criticize the story, I mean, you know, it might run both ways?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does run both ways.
Story_ID: 531234
Speaker 1: So what's your [maternal] grandmother's name and where was she from?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Georgianna Jackson [Georgianna Jackson Hord], and she came from Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about her upbringing or what do you know about her childhood and existence (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know--yes, I don't know a lot.  She did have, because when I came on the scene, by the time I came on the scene, her, most of her family was still in Washington, D.C. and I really didn't meet them until I was about ten, and all I remembered was many, many, many very loud people, (laughter) you know, who were wonderful, but they were just all, I mean they were all over the map and I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: And you said she made hats.  Did all the loud people wear hats?
Speaker 2: Oh of course.
Speaker 1: What kind of hats, were they fabulous?
Speaker 2: Fabulous hats.  I mean the women--you did not go to church without the biggest hat you could find, I mean and really, it had to match in every detail.  And one of my earliest memories of my grandmother is ha- her, you know, making hats on the dining room table and she clear it away, and it was like, it was like Rodin [Auguste Rodin], I mean 'cause she would walk around the table, and you know, and look at the hat from different angles and then put a pin in, take that ribbon and stick it over that way.  Oh it was awesome to watch because she was a very little woman but she moved fast (laughter) around that table.  No, she made these incredible hats and she sold hats, and did that.  And she was a very good seamstress and taught my mother [Elvira Hord Dove].  My mother was a seamstress and worked for a while as a seamstress, too.
Story_ID: 531235
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about your mom [Elvira Hord Dove] and where she came from?  You said she had a number of brothers and sisters, but I mean, she personally, you know, what was her background, where did she--her schooling?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was and is, remains extremely shy.  I'll just say that right off, she's very shy.  She's also extremely smart and when she was a child, well she skipped two grades of school--that I do know and graduated when she was sixteen and got a scholarship to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And her parents [Georgianna Jackson Hord and Thomas Hord] said she was too young to be sent off to the big bad city, Washington, D.C. so she did not go to college.  She went to business school instead, and also they thought, you know, she's a young lady, she should get married.  I mean it was really, and, and I do feel that, that upsets me still to this day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why?
Speaker 2: Well, this is a woman who was just, you know, phenomenally gifted and yet at the same, she was also though very, very shy.  She didn't fight for this right to go to school.  She loved her parents and she thought that they knew what was good for her, and she became a homemaker, and I just feel that there's a whole talent that was tamped, let's say it was, you know, pushed down.  And I know that this happens all over the world all, all the time, but this is part of my, you know, personal history.
Speaker 1: Did you ever talk with your mom about it?
Speaker 2: I have talked with my mom about it, but very delicately because I think she still--her whole life was built upon the fact that she, that her parents who were workers worked to give them a better life, and she went to business school.  She helped to put them through school, I mean she was, it was the end of the Depression [Great Depression] into the war [World War II, WWII] years, and so she worked and then she met my father [Ray Dove].  And you know, they had these four children.  She's so proud of the fact that they built, this is the way things are supposed to happen, you did it in little steps and your family, her family all went to college, you know, her children.  And I've always been afraid of saying, "Well mom, you know, all, you could've done this."  I think, you know, well why should I make her feel bad about it.  She's very happy, you know, she was happy with those kinds of accomplishments.  And so we've never talked in that way of, "Well, you know, you could've done this and how could they have, you know, how could they have stepped on your dream like this?"  I realize that, that this is where they, this was the milieu they came out of, this was, was the social construct that they believed in and it is a tragedy, but she had made her peace with it.  There was no reason for me to try to tell her, "Your peace is--I don't you to be at peace; I want you to be upset about it."  What's the point?
Speaker 1: Where and how soon after her high school graduation did she meet your father, and did she go directly to business school?
Speaker 2: She went, yes, she went--first of all she went directly to business school out of high school after she didn't go to Howard.  And it was only like a year or year or two business school.  I'm trying to remember when she met my father.  I'd have to go back through, you know, mathematically, but it was soon after that, (makes sound) '40s [1940s], I have to add it all up.  I could ask Fred [Fred Viebahn], no I can ask him later, do you know?  Which, I'm trying to add it up.
Speaker 1: (FRED VIEBAHN):  Was this before your father went to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (FRED VIEBAHN):  Okay, it must've been 1941, '42 [1942], he was about eighteen.
Speaker 2: Eighteen, yeah that makes sense.
Speaker 1: So perhaps once,
Speaker 2: That makes sense, she was about eighteen.
Speaker 1: So once she went to business school and met her husband, Howard became a nonissue really for her?  'Cause in my 2007 mind, I thought well then why didn't she wait until she was eightee-
Speaker 2: Eighteen, right.
Speaker 1: --and then get on the train?  But maybe that's not a part of her small steps plan?
Speaker 2: I don't think that it was an issue back then.  I think that, that the, the offer for the scholarship was there.  Everything that I've heard about it suggested the offer for the scholarship was there at that particular point when she was sixteen, and she turned it down and that they never thought that she could take this up later.  This was a big city, whether you were sixteen or eighteen, you were still a young lady, a young lady, a single young lady, what is she doing traipsing off to--?  You know, when I think about it now though, I am even more astonished because she had family in Washington, D.C.  When you think about it even more it wasn't that she was going to a totally strange city, but she could've lived with her mother's relatives, right.  So, and I think the idea was just that a girl didn't need to go to college, you know, she just--
Speaker 1: And it's 1938, '39 [1939]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: (FRED VIEBAHN):  No, to the '40s [1940s]--1940--
Story_ID: 531236
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And do you know how your parents [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] met?
Speaker 2: They met playing ping pong at the community center in East Akron [Akron, Ohio].  And my mother was a formidable ping pong player and so was my father, and he, he was three years older than she was and, and a very good looking young man who challenged her to a game of ping pong and they played.  I have never found out who won, but they played lots of ping pong.  I guess they, you know, kind of, and that's how they met.
Story_ID: 531237
Speaker 1: So your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Ray Allen, A-L-L-E-N, Dove [Ray Dove].
Speaker 1: And where is he from?
Speaker 2: He was born in Rock- near Rockmart, Georgia.  Moved when he was two to Akron.
Speaker 1: With his parents?
Speaker 2: With his parents, yes.
Speaker 1: And did you know his, your father's parents?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: And what were their names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Joseph Dove and my grandmother's name was Lucille [Lucille Nettle Dove], and I'm trying to remember her maternal name, and it just flew out of my head.  I'll--
Speaker 1: Take your time.
Speaker 2: I'll figure it out later.
Speaker 1: And were Joseph and Lucille, were they from Rockmart, Georgia?
Speaker 2: They were both from Rockmart, Georgia, yes.
Speaker 1: And wha- what do you know about what they did with their time and anything really about their background?
Speaker 2: What I know about their background is that, that they--as I said my, when my father, who, who was two when they moved up, he was, he's one of the younger children.  And I do know that they came up in search of jobs, rubber industry in Akron, Ohio, and some relative of my grandfather had come up earlier and said this is a good place to be and they went as well.  You know, you pack up the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go north young man.
Speaker 2: --whole family, you go north.  And so my grandfather worked as a, as a common factory worker in the, at Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio].  And my grandmother was a homemaker.  She had many children.  Ten? I always count we, we in our families, you know, we start counting and we always miscount, but there were many, let's put it this way.  For a long time we thought there were thirteen, and there're might have been, you know, there might have been a few who didn't make it.
Speaker 1: I see, and did you, did you experience those aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: So you, you just (laughter) they were just too numerous to, to really track down (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were too numerous, they were too numerous to track down and everybody had a nickname.  I mean there was, you know, there was Punk, and there was So and So, and I, and I could never.  But they lived in East Akron [Akron, Ohio] and a lot of these uncles and aunts lived in Akron.  Some of them, one lived in Chicago [Illinois], one lived in Cleveland [Ohio].  They would come down for the family reunions and it would be just beaucoups of people and several of them had many children, but one had about eight and the other had, you know, seven, so I had so many cousins and we, I still can't keep them apart.  And my brother [Ray Dove] and my sisters [Robin Dove Waynesboro and Rhonda Dove Harrison] will say, but, you know, "Well who comes after--who comes after Kyle [Kyle Coleman]?"  Oh it's too much.
Story_ID: 531238
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit more about your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I understand he has a very interesting background.  What, what did your father--what was your father's profession, and what did he do, if you could tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father is retired now.  He, he was a research chemist, and he was a research chemist employed at Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio].  He began, first of all he, he was legitimately or legally, let's say, he was the valedictorian of his high school class.  He was, however, not given that valedictorianship; they decided to, they said to him, well let's get--they, they gave it to someone else, a white person.
Speaker 1: In Akron [Ohio], where he later works for Goodyear?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the North--
Speaker 1: Fantastic.
Speaker 2: --this stuff happens all the time.  He was the one in the family that the rest of the family pretty much decided he was the smart one, they're gonna send him to school.  So in, in the Depression [Great Depression], his sisters, for instance, would put newspaper in his shoes and they would unravel old sweaters of theirs and knit him sweaters and mittens so he could go to school if they could make it because they didn't have any clothes to wear, that kind of thing.  They were very poor.  And I think for him there was a great sense when he was going to school that he was carrying the burden of, of his family and the progress of his family on his back.  So--and, and when, when they, they explained that this other person really was deserving to get the valedictorianship and all that stuff and they just, he didn't complain.  What good did it do in a way to complain?  I mean it is very curious, for me it seems incomprehensible that one wouldn't, you know, in true post '70s [1970s] fashion protest this stuff, but that didn't get you anywhere, even in Akron, Ohio then.  But then he went on to school, got his master's in chemistry.
Speaker 1: At the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the, I'm sorry at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], and actually tutored his, his fellow students.  He was part of a program that the United States Army had decided to do to, to tap into promising science majors and put them on an accelerated, accelerated program so that they could use them, you know, in the [U.S.] military.  And to that end, he was sent to the University of Mi- Michigan with a group of other young men.  As it turned out, all the other young men from all over the place were white.  And so when he arrived they're like, "Well, what do we do with him?"  (Laughter) He tells the story, and he laughs about it.  And I think that's a real gift to be able to laugh no matter what they did.  They had to house them in a, in a dormitory and they didn't know what to do with Ray [Ray Dove], because, you know, they couldn't, they didn't know if they could put him with a white, they didn't want to house him, have him bunk with a white guy.  So they gave him the entire third floor of the dormitory and the other ones were on the other two floors.  So they all went up to his place for a party.  They're like, "Ray has--look he's got the whole spread."  And he, he just laughed.  He said, you know, this was kind of amazing.
Speaker 1: So did your father give you a sense of Akron and perhaps Ann Arbor [Michigan], you know, at this time that he's going to high school and when, I mean, does he describe the literal tension--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or is there literal tension besides, I'm assuming besides not being named properly valedictorian?  I mean--
Speaker 2: (FRED VIEBAHN):  Can I quickly interrupt?
Speaker 1: Yes, did I do something wrong (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (FRED VIEBAHN):  (Simultaneous) I made a mistake that you picked up.  He went to the University of Illinois in Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (FRED VIEBAHN):  Sorry, not Michigan.
Speaker 2: Not the University of Michigan; Ray Dove attended the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Thank you, yeah, yeah, that's right, you're right.  Why Michigan popped in my head, I know why.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I also asked ar- anyway.
Speaker 1: Well let's go back and say that he was at the University of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Fantastic.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Where was your father (laughter), at university?
Speaker 1: My father was at the University of Akron and he got his undergraduate degree and his master's degree finally from the University of Akron.  But during the war [World War II, WWII], he was taken with a group of other young promising science majors to the University of Illinois for an accelerated program to try to feed them into the--to the war effort.  And the, the program was a, aborted, I think after about a year or so, because they needed more soldiers and, at that point.  At that point, he was then put into combat, but, assigned to combat.  But, but before that, they were going to train him as an intellectual force, and after that, they said, "Oh, we need bodies."
Speaker 2: And where did he go when he was sent into combat?
Speaker 1: That's a complicated question.  He went to Italy eventually.
Story_ID: 531246
Speaker 1: We're talking about your father [Ray Dove] in World War II [WWII].  Was your father already a military man before he was at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] and then transferred to Illinois?
Speaker 2: No he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He really was an intellectual.  And he, you know, of course with the war effort, this was not a question he was going to get into the war.  And when he was taken to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], they thought they were going to employ him as some kind of an intellectual force in the war.  After about a year, as I said, that was aborted and they--that program was aborted and all of those young men were then fed into the general [U.S.] Army.  So my father was sent to a--an Army base in, in the south of Alabama, and he, he got there and they were amazed and said, "Who?  You're not supposed to be black."  They had forgotten to mark that he was black.  He was the only black in that, in that accelerated program and I guess they just assumed that, you know, everyone in that was white.  So they didn't know what to do.  They could not, the Army was segregated of course still and they didn't have any black troops in that, at that Army base.  And so until his orders, his, you know, orders came through again, his reassignment, he was, he just stayed there.  He said it was kind of amazing because the other guys were going through boot camp and he was just hanging out, and they didn't have a place for him in the barracks so they put him in an officer's, a little officer's hut.  So he had it good again.  And then eventually he went to Arizona to Fort Huachuca right on the border to Mexico.  He said, he, he said, "Oh that hell hole."  That's the only thing he'll say about it, the tarantulas and dust, sand, lots of you know, black widows, and yeah ugliness.  But then he went to, he was deployed and went to Italy, and actually participated in that advance on Montecristo [sic. Monte Cassino, Italy], the coast and survived.
Speaker 1: How long before he came back to Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: He came back at the conclusion of the war and he went in and in '43 [1943], I think he went into combat.  Came back and my parents were then married in 1946, on Pearl Harbor day believe it or not.  I've often thought if you'd gotten married before Pearl Harbor day I would've beli- why get married on December 7th, but they did.
Story_ID: 531247
Speaker 1: What did your father [Ray Dove] do once he got back to Akron [Ohio]?  Now he's finished with school, and he's a chemist?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, what he did was what every young man is supposed to do, he wanted to get a job.  So he went and applied for a job as a chemist in the rubber industry.  That was after all the industry that his father [Joseph Dove] worked in, albeit as a, as a factory worker, and they were not h- they said they had no jobs.  And he became an elevator operator at Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio].  His former classmates, many of his former white classmates, classmates that he had in fact tutored in organic chemistry had jobs and he says that, you know, he would, he'd be in the elevator and he'd take his former classmates up to their labs and you know, let them off.  One of his former classmates, well several of them actually, began to protest.  They said, "This is insane.  This guy is smarter than all of us and he's running the elevator."  And one of my father's former chemistry professors at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] put, also put pressure on Goodyear, and so finally they hired him and he became the first black chemist in the rubber industry.
Speaker 1: And were these things that your father shared with you when you were a kid, or did you have to glean them?
Speaker 2: He did not share them.  This was not what his generation did.  In fact, I did not learn of this until I was in college again.  It was just, no, no he didn't.  And when I asked, I di- I asked my, my, my mother [Elvira Hord Dove] why, I said, "Why did he--why didn't he ever tell us?"  And she said, "He didn't want you to be bitter."  And said, "Why should you know this until you're ready to handle it?"  That also speaks thought to my father and the kind of man that he is, the kind of man who is able to keep things inside, and, and bear what he thinks he should bear.  It makes him a very difficult man to get stories out of, too.
Speaker 1: And just one other small point, do you have a sense of how your father became interested in chemistry?
Speaker 2: No.  All I can say is, I have, I've written about it.  I've tried to imagine what it was that made him interested in chemistry based on what I know of his life and what I've talked to him about his life and also his character.  My father is an intensely curious man, but he loves to, the way his mind works I think, part of the way his mind works, is that he, the way things fit together, the way things fit together and become something else is exceedingly interesting to him.  He loves history, but he studies history for, for instance, the Civil War, how a battle was fought and how these troops came over this hill and what happened here.  And how that battle plays out because all of these forces are certainly put into the, you know, the test tube, you know, let's see what comes out.  But it's in, and I can't tell of course if that's the way his mind works because he became a chemist, or if it was just that this was the natural fit was his mind.  But he's a, he's a scientific person.  He loves that, that delving into the, the, the essence of something, seeing how it's put together and how it works.
Story_ID: 531248
Speaker 1: So we've talked a little bit about the quietness of your family and attempting to learn, imagine, and imagine these stories, is that a place that really, that, that led you to poetry in part?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.  Yes, it is.  Because when the family is quiet, I'm quiet too.  I mean I think I have a lot of both of my parents' [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] shyness, my father is shy too.  So you wouldn't know it.  You would think of him more as being this strong silent, you know, very capable person.  He would never let you know that he's very shy.  When I was growing up I learned to listen very closely, not only to what was said, but what was not said.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I think that my family's quietness and, and the fact that stories were either embellished or not told at all meant that, I had this curiosity as a kid.  I didn't even know what it was, why I was curious, what I was curious for, but a longing to, to, to know more.  And when I began writing, when I, and I began writing when I was like ten or nine or so, it was really in a certain way to fill in blanks.  There were, at first it was, well there weren't any black people in the stories I was reading and I loved science fiction, I would read that stuff.  But, so I wrote stories in which there were black people.  But it was all very intuitive, I didn't think necessarily I will put black people in this, I would just put someone like me in those stories.  Later, when I began writing poetry in earnest, I was so intrigued by the fact that I, I wanted to understand how my [maternal] grandparents [Georgianna Jackson Hord and Thomas Hord] felt when these things happened to them.  Things that I didn't understand, such as how could, how could my father ferry his former classmates up and down that elevator without bitterness?  How could he keep quiet all those years?  How could my, my grandfather come north and then be such a gentle man after being basically driven out of his hometown [Wartrace, Tennessee] by, by events beyond his control.  To try to understand that feeling I began writing poems about them and trying to actually slip into their skin for a moment.  And that's in a way how 'Thomas and Beulah' [Rita Dove] started.  It started with my grandmother, after my grandfather died, giving, talking about his life as a young man coming north, and it was the--astonishing to me that this, this gentleman had been part of a song and dance team, I didn't know that.  I knew he had come north; I didn't know about the, the racial element, you know, and the, the threat of lynching that drove him north, but I knew that he had come north.  And I thought all of these unanswered questions, all of these things which were, are dramatic, that never broke the surface.
Speaker 1: Didn't your father lose his, your grandfather lose his friend on that trip up to Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Indeed he did.  He lost his friend on the trip because his friend, as my grandmother said, "Well, you know, he jumped into the river to, to swim after some chestnuts on the shore, to get some chestnuts, and, and the and, on an island he said, and the island sank."  And I'm like, "Grandma, islands don't just sink."  And all she would do is say stubbornly, "Yes, they do."  And I said, and I would start to argue with her with my, you know, thirteen year-old adolescence.  I know everything.  And she just got, she goes, "Well, believe it or not, I don't care."  You know, since she just said, "You don't want my story, I'm not giving you any more."  And that started me too, and I'm like he lost his friend.  I never knew that he lost his best friend this way and that he might in a certain way feel kind of responsible for it, 'cause he was the one who told him, "Let's go, go get some chestnuts.  See--I dare you to swim over there to that island."  That started me on the quest for 'Thomas and Beulah.'
Story_ID: 531249
Speaker 1: Would you mind reading a little bit from it ['Thomas and Beulah,' Rita Dove]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll be happy to read something.
Speaker 1: So I've chosen a couple of things, but you may choose--
Speaker 2: Oh, well--
Speaker 1: --what you like (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --let's see.  Let me, I'm gonna s- let me start with that very first poem called "The Event" [Rita Dove] because it, it not only deals with that very moment I was just talking about, the moment where my [maternal] grandfather's [Thomas Hord] best friend dies in the river, but it also deals with the process of rediscovering that moment, you know, in one's soul and also coming up with some factual explanations.  "The Event":  "Ever since they'd left the Tennessee ridge / with nothing to boast of / but good looks and a mandolin, / The two Negroes leaning / on the rail of a riverboat / were inseparable: Lem plucked / to Thomas' silver falsetto. / But the night was hot and they were drunk. / The spat where the wheel / churned mud and moonlight, / they called to the tarantulas / down among the bananas / to come out and dance. / You're so fine and mighty; let's see / what you can do, said Thomas, pointing / to a tree-capped island. / Lem stripped, spoke easy:  Them's chestnuts, / I believe.  Dove / quick as a gasp.  Thomas, dry / on deck, saw the green crown shake / as the island slipped / under, dissolved / in the thickening stream. / At his feet / a stinking circle of rags, / the half-shell mandolin. / Where the wheel turned, the water / gently shirred."  So I started by trying to recreate the moment as I had heard it from my grandmother [Georgianna Jackson Hord], and tried to slip into the sensibility of my grandfather and then in so doing, it kind of coming out on the other end realizing that he would look at all that's left of his friend, his mandolin, his clothes and he'd almost pick up and take on the burden of his life.  Hence, he gets, he starts to play the mandolin.  So part of that is, is, is that really what happened?  I don't know, I don't know if he picked up the mandolin that way or not, but it became a kind of a psychological truth.  And after writing the poem and deciding I had to believe my grandmother's story whether it had this factual underpinning for me or not.  After deciding to believe in it, I, and, and starting to write the poem, I realized that there was in fact factual underpinning.  That there was, there are mangrove--that the coast line of the Mississippi changes all the time because of the mangroves.  He probably swam over there, got tangled in the mangrove roots and was pulled down, and that was the sinking island.  But I couldn't go at it from the top and decide I'm gonna hack away at this and get the facts.  I had to trust and go in there.
Story_ID: 531250
Speaker 1: It makes your [maternal] grandmother sound like Zora Neale Hurston.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, she--well she was in a way, it's kind of stunning.  She was a stunning woman in that she was, she took over a room just by standing in it.  She was very short, she was like 4'11", and she could tell a story like nobody's business and she told it on her terms, and if you didn't like, no matter how outrageous something, if you didn't like it, then she didn't care.  That wasn't her problem.  But, but she was a natural poet in that sense.  She would, she had--she would use a metaphor when you had to use a metaphor because that was better than saying the fact, it explained, explained the emotional thrust of the moment.  So when I say that when I was, I was, I listened very carefully when I was a child because the, the nuggets were few.  And the, and yet what I heard was that both the musicality of the speech and the way that a story made emotional sense.
Speaker 1: And you got that from your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I got that from my grandmother, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how, why is it that you call her Beulah?  Do you know how she earned that nickname, or that perhaps not a nickname, do you know why she's called Beulah?
Speaker 2: Well, actually my grandmother was never called Beulah, and I'm just taking it straight out of my grandmother's book.  Her name was Georgianna [Georgianna Jackson Hord], but when I began writing the poems, my grandfather's name was Thomas [Thomas Hord] and that was I thought a perfect name to have for someone who had to carry this doubt his whole life through of whether he was guilty or not for, for his friend's death.  But my grandmother's name, poetically speaking, is too long.  It just takes over a page, she took over a room, but I didn't want her to take over, it's not a musical name in, in the same way.  And so I dec- I had to make this artistic decision, I was just gonna change her name.  And I decided on Beulah.  I'd known no Beulahs at all, ever, but you know, it is of an a--it's her generation and I worried about, I worried about changing her name.  I thought, you know, might be a disrespect of my grandmother.  So I didn't tell anybody until the book ['Thomas and Beulah,' Rita Dove] was almost finished and it was perfectly fine, of course (laughter), it was perfectly fine.
Speaker 1: It feels right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think she might not mind.
Speaker 2: I don't think she would've minded at all.
Speaker 1: Did writing about your grandparents, and as we'll continue to talk, writing about your family generally, does that leave you with a sense that you know them well?
Speaker 2: It does not leave me with a sense that I know them well.  It leaves me with a sense that I know a certain aspect--no I can't even say that I know a certain aspect.  I'll say--
Speaker 1: Did it fill in any gaps?
Speaker 2: It felt, it did fill ga- it did fill gaps, it did--it filled gaps in the way that water kind of rises to fill a space.  Not something that plugs a space.  In other words, I didn't feel like, "Oh, I've got the answer to why they acted this way or that way."  It, it, again I'll say it made that kind of emotional fit where I suddenly felt I understood them and I almost felt that they were saying, "That's, you got that pretty right."  But we're not talking facts now, we're talking about how it felt to be a black person with their particular personality at that moment in time in history.  So yeah.  And, and it's true that when I do write about, when I write about my family, I don't think of it as--in, in the same way that a historian does.  I don't, I'm not really concerned about getting all the facts straight.  It automatically goes into the storytellers well.  Oh this is for fable, let, let's go here and see what it yields, yeah.
Story_ID: 531251
Speaker 1: If you had to describe your mother [Elvira Hord Dove], how would you describe her in conversation with someone else?
Speaker 2: I would describe my mother as being a very, I would describe her as being a very shy, and I do stress this, very shy woman with a, with a, with a sharp wit that few people get a chance to see.  Because in public she is, she will smile and she'll be ju- but she be, she's so self-effacing in, in that sense.  She--and yet she has a spine of steel.  When I was a child, I remember my mother, all five feet of her, storming up to the school to confront these three bullies who were always teasing me because I was smart and they would call me brainiac and you know, step on my, heels of my shoes every time I came home and I certainly didn't expect my mother to come, I didn't want anyone to fight my battles for me, but she knew that I would come home in tears.  And she just came up there and grabbed one of these girls by the wrist and said, you know, you know, "You just leave her--," you know.  "You're tall, but I can cut you down."  I thought, "Whoa, this is my mother, this--," you know.  And she was not afraid.  There is a poem about this.
Speaker 1: Where you said you wouldn't get into the car?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: And I feel like I chose it.
Speaker 2: It is in--
Speaker 1: On the maybe--
Speaker 2: No it's in 'Mother Love,' "Primer" [Rita Dove].  "Primer": "In the sixth grade, I was chased home by / the Gatlin kids, three skinny sisters / in rolled-down bobby socks.  Hissing / Brainiac! and Mrs. Stringbean!, they trod my heel. / I knew my body was no big deal / but never thought to retort: who's calling / who skinny?  (Besides, I knew / they'd beat me up.)  I survived / their shoves across the schoolyard / because my five foot-zero mother drove up / in her Caddie to shake them down to size. / Nothing could get me into that car. / I took the long way home, swore / I'd show them all: I would grow up."  That's the thanks our parents get for stepping in for us, you know (laughter), but I thought well I'm not gonna get in the car (laughter).  You know, I'm gonna walk dignified down the street, thank you mother, but.  But, but that, that shows that she, you know, she was a stro- she is a strong woman and she was a strong woman at that time.  But to her, she just, she was also very content to let others have the spotlight, you know.  And yet, I can remember in, in her own home she could be really funny and, and I mean she would, she would do these spontaneous things and then not explain them, just like her mother [Georgianna Jackson Hord] actually.  Where she would do things like, we would say, "Oh tomorrow we've gotta go to school and have this test."  And she'd say "Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow creeps in this petty pace from day-to-day" ['Macbeth,' William Shakespeare].  And we'd go what was that, and she'd just laugh.  She wouldn't tell us, you know, or she would be slicing steak and say is this the knife I see, this the dagger I see before me and, from Lady Macbeth's speech.  And she just waited until we got it in school.  So that I would, I read 'Macbeth,' I said, "Oh that's where that's from."  But as a consequence, I knew that there were areas of her life which were, there were all sorts of, you know, eddies and undercurrents I didn't know about.  But I also knew that, that I knew that she was smart, I also knew that I just had to bide my time.  And I know that sounds curious, I mean you'd think I would be more--it wasn't that I wasn't interested to know, I just knew when I wasn't gonna get an answer anyway, so I might as well figure it out for myself.  Let's put it that way.  And literature then became part of my life too, you know, there's not only the stories that I heard, but it's also a little bit of Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] thrown in there, here and there, or some other poem that kind of got tossed in, because it's all, I think she, she has a real folklore sensibility.  It's all part of the pot.  The story you tell, the facts you got.  You know, the, the poems and the, and the written literature that you have, that's all part of the legacy, you just, you work with it.
Story_ID: 531252
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you, you gave a little bit of a description of your father [Ray Dove] as sort of strong and tall.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Let's hear the complete--how would you describe your father if you had to tell him to someone else?
Speaker 2: I think I've been spending a lifetime of, of writing--you know, whenever I've written by trying to describe my father, get an essence of my father.  He is, he is a very, very reticent man and yet he can be very charming in social gatherings.  People think he's the life of the party.  I'm like, "You don't know my father.  He, he can be silent."  He could be silent for days at--when we were children.  He, when we were children I would think, I would say that my, we loved our father, my, my siblings and I, but we were also a little bit afraid of him, because he was so silent and there was, and, and, and disciplined.  And if he got angry and you may not know why he was angry, and now I know, I can understand some of the reasons why he was angry, he was swallowing a lot of indignity.  He was swallowing a lot of stuff and not telling us, but then he would, he would start to smolder inside, but, and, and if he got angry you just tread lightly around the house.  He was, he was extremely disciplined in the sense that there were, you know, there were chores to be done on Saturdays, and we knew we had to do our chores.  Our main job was to, to grow up and to study, and we kind of knew this.  He never said we had to be one thing or another, so it wasn't that he was so military, let's say that he said, "You will become a doctor or this is your program of study."  But he said, "You do the best you can."  He did--I, I think he was very, very rigorous that we establish our own rigor.  So to that end, he gave us freedom as to what we wanted to do, but we better do it the best that we could.  And though I always felt a pressure to get good grades it was because--it wasn't that I had to get straight A's or anything like that, it was that I had to do my best.  And his question would be, "Did you do your best?"  And he'd look at you, and you had--
Speaker 1: You'd answer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you said the truth; you'd say whether you did the best or not.  So you learned, you know, once you never.  So in other words, in other words he really made me into my own worst and best taskmaster, because I have a high sense of rigor and guilt (laughter), you know, to this day.  He, if we were to stumble on a, you know, on a homework problem particularly in math or in science, and I didn't know the answer to it, at first I'd go to my older brother [Ray Dove] because he, you know, was two years older maybe he'd know this algebra, you know, answer before I went to ask my father.  Because, not because I thought my father would say, well, you know, that you're stupid or anything like that, because I knew that he would sit down and for an hour he would give me every possible way, not give it to me, he would make me learn every possible way it was to approach that problem.  You know, read the two trains approaching and it would not only be x and y, but then he'd get out the slide rule and then he'd talk about density and I'm like, "Don't do this to me," you know, "I can't handle all this," and so it'd take forever.  So my brother and I would then figure it out, which means that we learned how to do it ourselves, sometimes we'd ask my dad, and then he would take it, you know, to the limit.  And if I were to ask him, for instance, what a word meant that he used, and he was capable, you're shaking your head, you know this story.  This is what our parents did, I mean, but it was good in a way.  He would drop in a word like zephyr, he'd say, "Oh what a wonderful zephyr there is today."  And he wouldn't gi- there's no context, what a wonderful zephyr we have today.  You don't even know, you can't even make sense of that.  What's a zephyr?  How do spell that?  'Cause I have to look it up, because to ask him that he'd say, "Look it up."
Story_ID: 531258
Speaker 1: Zephyr?
Speaker 2: Zephyr.  My father [Ray Dove] would say, "Look it up," and we did.  You know, you start with Z and you, you know, look it up and figure out how to spell it by looking it up and you know, I--I've never used that word to this day.  It's a very hard word to drop in a conversation, But what it did do--I'm using it as an example, there were others--but what it did do was, was actually start me on loving words because I would look a word up in the dictionary and see other words around it and think gosh that's kind of neat, and then I look up how they were--their origins.  And so in a certain way he, he started me on being a writer too.
Story_ID: 531259
Speaker 1: Who are your siblings?
Speaker 2: I have an older brother Ray Thomas [Ray Dove], and we called him Tommy.  And he's a computer scientist, and we hung out all the time.  He's two years older than I, and he, he was the greatest big brother that anyone could have.  He never denied me, you know, like big brothers do.  He always--he would, he would watch out for me, he took me in, you know, he w- so I always felt protected by my brother.  We were, you know, we hung out together when we were younger, I mean, I wanted to do everything that he did.  So I think I kind of grew faster, because I was always trying to, to do what the two year older brother was doing.  He loved science fiction, so I read all the science fiction magazines right after he read them.  So--and that I think certainly started me on wanting to write stories and things like that.  We started a newspaper together, you know, during, during the summer.  And, and we had arguments 'cause he would be the head guy and I'd be the chief reporter or whatever, and then I would quit.  Yeah well, of course I'd quit because he was the head editor and I wanted to be the head editor and you know, and so I'd quit and then I'd start my own little magazine called Poet's Delight usually featuring a somewhat--I'd pe- spent hours drawing the cover with lots of falling autumn leaves since that was my favorite time of year, has always been.  And never really got beyond writing one or two poems in it, but then we'd start over again, we'd make up and you know, the whole cycle would start again.
Speaker 1: What did you cover in your newspaper?
Speaker 2: Neighborhood events, mostly neighborhood events.  We also when my, my next sister was born, I have two younger sisters.  The one immediately under me, Robin [Robin Dove Waynesboro], is--was born in 1958, so she was six years younger than me and then eight younger than my brother, and my youngest sibling is Rhonda [Rhonda Dove Harrison], who was born in 1960, so two years after that.  But when Robin was born, there she was the, the little kid and we, of course, naturally ganged up on her.  To my shame, we, we did it with words, which is really kind of awful.  We loved her (laughter), and this kid of what, we, we started doing this satirical thing.  My brother and I were great fans of Mad magazine.  So a lot of times we would write little plays which, little musicals, which then featured different words to, to songs of the day.  And we started calling my sister a buzzard, because it made her angry.  And my sister Robin is very fiery, she has a very fiery temperament, and even at age three she was always doi- glowering in the camera like this.  And so she had perfect teasing material, right someone like that.  So we would kind of say, "Oh Robin, you know, you're hanging around like a buzzard."  You know, we didn't even know what a buzzard was practically.  So she would cry and run to mom [Elvira Hord Dove].  So then we were forbidden to call her buzzard, so we started calling--we made up stories about a buzzard named Blank, like fill in the blank, but it was five letters and her name was, her, her, we'd do all sorts of things with that, that, you know, blank, blank, blank, you know, five dashes and the buzzard.  And then we'd say but (unclear) it's Blank, that's the name of the buzzard and at the end of the story the buzzard's name would be Blank.  And we would do all these terrible word plays, but we were being creative I guess.  And that she doesn't hate us to this day is a miracle actually.  No we, you know, we got over that after a couple of summers worth of that, but, yeah so.  That was my, yeah that was my next sibling.  And then Rhon- by the time Rhonda came along two years later, we were old enough to, to want to have a little baby doll to play with.  So she was our, she was the baby that we could tease.
Story_ID: 531260
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your--where you lived [in Akron, Ohio]?  Maybe you could describe it.  What street did you live on?
Speaker 2: We lived on--we moved when I was in second grade.  It--when I was--the house I remember from my earliest years was a small narrow house on a, not on a hill, but well it was on a hill, on a brick street that went down this way and then the house itself also was elevated.  It had a porch, a little porch, a wooden porch, gray porch, and inside a lot of dark wood.  This is what I remember, a lot of dark wood.  Very steep stairs and it was narrow in the sense that it was like a room and a half wide.  You know, you'd have a living room, what was supposed to be the dining room, but usually we just had a television in ne- next, and then a very small kitchen off of that.  Stairs, very steep stairs that went up only was, you know, my parents' [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] bedroom in the, the front facing the street and then a little room for me and my sister Robin [Robin Dove Waynesboro] who was just born by that, by the time we moved away, was young.  And then my brother [Ray Dove] was in the built out attic space.  So--and it, I just remember wood, lots of wood because it was one of those old houses where they have old wooden floors and things like that.  And the stairs, my earliest memory is jumping down the stairs, because--and I must've been, what, was I could've been four, maybe.  I remember jumping off the first, the bottom step and then trying two steps, and then trying three steps, and doing this of course when my parents weren't looking.  So it's a miracle I'm still alive too because they were so steep and so, you know, and I just wanted to do it.  That was our first house and I had--it was quite a neighborhood.  So that I could walk to my best friend's house, I had two best friends.  One lived up the street, around the corner, three houses around the corner.  And the other one lived down the street and three houses around the corner.  I don't know how that happened.  The one up above was a white girl named Kathleen [ph.], and around, at the bottom of the hill was Angela [ph.], who was black.  So, and I would just say, "I'm going to Angela's. I'm going to Kathleen's," and you know, and off I went.  Those were the days when you could do that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 531261
Speaker 1: So then we moved when I was in second grade, and we moved into a neighborhood [in Akron, Ohio] which at that time I think, I'm try- I think we were the, yeah we were the first black family in the neighborhood.  I had to hesitate because other black families came so quickly after that (laughter) that, you know, you hardly know.  But--and also because my parents [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] didn't talk about it, we didn't know that.  And in fact, we really never s- we didn't see the house until we moved into it, that was the way it was then, you know, parents made the decision.  We were told we were gonna move, we were all excited.  And I still remember driving over to this place and being quite, just terrified, too excited, but I was leaving my house.  I don't think I was quite aware of how much I was leaving, you know, at that point, but still this was a very new things.  And the house seemed so big and so--it seems like we couldn't fill it.  It seemed like we didn't deserve it, because I knew what I had before and this seemed.  And the neighborhood was so white.  There was a--also when we moved to this house there was, there were two vacant lots on either side of the house, maybe that's why we got it (laughter), no I'm just, no, two vaca- so on one side actually belonged to the house, we bought with the house, and the other one my parents couldn't afford and which was on the other side of the driveway.  And eventually they buil- someone built a house there.  But for a while, we had all the space around us and it just seemed like a miracle, a very strange and wonderful kind of paradise, but at the same time very lonely kind of paradise.  But as I said, it filled up very quickly with other mu- people to play with and stuff like that.  My childhood after second grade is filled with lots of play in all of that greenery that was around us, which now seems very small, but then it seemed like a lot.  Beautiful back, you know, small backyard but it had a maple tree, and it had, you know, had a cherry tree and it had a tulip tree, which I'd never seen before.  And then there was a huge willow that grew on the, far side of the driveway into that vacant lot where my brother [Ray Dove] and I spent entire summers, I think, like in the branches of the willow tree, because the willows like it touched the ground and it formed, you could almost form rooms out of those willow leaves, you know.  So we would, I would spend just all afternoon sitting in there making, making up my own house.  My house of leaves I guess, you know.  Here I am with my doll and there's my kitchen over here and I'd go through, so, and, that, so there was a lot of green in that childhood interestingly enough.  It was fun, yeah.  We did junior Olympics and stuff like that in those side yards.
Story_ID: 531262
Speaker 1: What were the most important holidays?
Speaker 2: The most important holidays, the ones that, that really fueled me and that I remember are what I call the picnic holidays, 4th of July, Memorial Day, Labor Day, because then you had to have a picnic.  You had to have a grill.  And all of those relatives would, they'd just kind of sprout, I don't know they came, they came down from Cleveland [Ohio], they came from north Akron [Ohio], and they would usually congregate at my paternal grandparents' [Lucille Nettle Dove and Joseph Dove] house.  Sometimes they came over to our house and somet- and, and also the maternal and paternal would mix, so you'd have all these people.  And it was just so much fun, particularly for a kid because suddenly there would be all these cousins.  And cousins that we usually didn't see during the week, but the thing about family, you know, who said that, "The, the thing that family is they have to take you in," you know.  There's always a feeling of being loved and included by, and accepted, let's say, by all of these, these cousins and I had a cou- I think I had about four cousins about in my age.  And when I say my--within six months of my age.  So that was our group.  You know, we had this, and you'd get together and you'd just say, "Okay here we are, we're cousins, we have to do--.  Well, what are we gonna play?"  And you'd learn how to play together.  So, and then you'd sneak around and listen to the grownups because as they had more beers, interesting things would come out.  And if you're very quiet and so that they wouldn't notice you were eavesdropping, you could hear some incredible stories as all of us were trying to figure out being an adult meant, and, you know, what all this stuff is they were talking about.  So, I, again I started to listen.  I started to listen to these stories.  And it was as much what was said as how it was said that interested me.  So when I was younger, you'd know, So and So was a good storyteller, you had to listen to his stories or her stories.  And the way, the reason why they were good story, they knew the value of pacing, they knew how to make the languages sing.  In the essence, I think they were, you know, they were storytellers, they were poets.  They knew how to take that story and, though they've told it a thousand times, add another detail, twist the detail, you know, tell that gossip so that you could really, you know, get a sense of who that character was.  Right, attitude all over the place, yes.  It was and, and I, I loved that.  I just loved that.  It was something very different from what I was getting at school, though I also loved reading poetry at school.  I loved reading stories, a, a, you know, and novels.  But that didn't have that mustard, you know, that I was getting from the oral rendition of the story.  So you combine the two in a way, you know, and I, as I began growing up, and I would read voraciously and, and at the same time I wanted to hear that, that music I think that, that I became a poet was almost a done deal at that point.  When I look back on it, it feels like that.  I thought how could I be anything but?  At the same time though, I'm ver- I was very close with my brother [Ray Dove] at that time and so we hung out a lot together but he became a scientist, so, and most of my family are scientists.  My sisters [Robin Dove Waynesboro and Rhonda Dove Harrison] are both scientists.  My youngest sister is a computer scientist, and my middle sister is a trained chemist.
Speaker 1: Is your brother a chemist?
Speaker 2: No my brother is actually a computer scientist as well.  So they--but they all have this scientific bent.
Story_ID: 531263
Speaker 1: You said you did chores on Saturday?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you have to do?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, besides the fact that every day of the week you didn't go to school without having your bed made almost military style taut, a good taut bed and, and that kind of thing.  We had to clean out a clos- make sure the closet was clean because it gets messy during the week, and clean the room.  And usually about once every six weeks or so, you know, you had to clean the windows in your room, at least the inside of the windows, mow the lawn.  This was my brother [Ray Dove] and my task, and we would alternate Saturdays.  On Saturday--and there was a lot of lawn to mow 'cause we had those, those side yards.  And then of course in fall, even though it is my favorite season, the dreaded raking of the leaves was not my favorite thing to do, but we had to do that too.  Now my father [Ray Dove] loves to garden and so--though he never trusted us to weed, thank goodness--he would occasionally, he raised roses too, and occasionally we would have to help in, you know, help him with the roses, which I really hated.  Because in, in the '60s [1960s] there was a plague of Japanese beetles that infested roses particularly, also other kinds of things like blackberries and things like that.  So, and I was terrified of these Japanese beetles.  And so it was no fun to have to help my father to hold the jar of kerosene while he would drop the beetles into the kerosene.  In fact, I have a poem about that which, you know, I think kind of talks about it.  I guess I should read it actually.  Let me--I haven't, my, I've got to find the poem first.  I wonder where they are.  This poem is called 'Roses' [Rita Dove].  And the year is 1961, which for me was always that magical year, because it could be turned on its head (gesture).  'Roses':  "It's time you learned something.  Halfway outdoors he pauses, the flat dark fury of his jaw, one eye, a shoulder in torn blue cloth, the pruning shears, a mammoth claw resting between meals.  I scramble up terrified and down the drive, the gravel's brittle froth and stand completely helpless as he parts a thousand pinkish eyelids to find the beetle's nested at the root teeming disease.  They came from Japan, 1961.  They were nothing like the locusts we hadn't noticed until they were gone.  The husks, sheer tuxedos snagged on bark, the rafters, the dying bayberry.  It's easy, pop them between your nails.  In the tool shed's populous shadows, I hold the Mason jar instead with both hands as he shakes the flowers above the kerosene which is shivering now like the ocean I have never seen.  And I, and I bear on a tray in doors the inculpable blushing prize."  Ugliness and beauty kind of wrapped up together, you know, these, these beetles.  It's true though, my father did say, "It's time you learn something," which is very interesting since this is a man who is highly intellectual and, and who had been, you know, all of our lives has actually drummed into us that we should learn, learn, learn, you know, and read.  And yet, he wanted us to learn something practical as well, which is something that he had to do in life.
Story_ID: 531264
Speaker 1: Yeah, reading that poem ['Roses,' Rita Dove] reminded me of something and I was going to--what was it?  I'll have to go back and look at it again.  It's interesting.  You're, you're stirring up all of the, the memories now.  Ah, the ocean.  And yet this same father [Ray Dove] who could be so stern and so let's shall we say non-comprehending of his own children's, you know, terror at that point, could do something, could do things which were quite spontaneous and fun, and, and things that I, as a parent, would never have done.  Just because I, I don't think would've had that kind of carefree attitude about it.  I remember when we were--when he got a new car, and it was a used car, but he got this new car and he wanted to test it out.  And he came home from work.  We had dinner at five [o'clock] every day, and at dinner there was a certain ritual, too.  He would go and ask each one of us what we had done today at school and we had to tell what we had done in school, so we had to contribute to conversation.  And so after dinner was over, he looked and he said, "Let's, let's drive to Niagara Falls."  And the whole family just kind of looks at him and my mother [Elvira Hord Dove] says, "Okay but we got to put everything in the sink."  She put our pajamas on.  I was--I'm trying to think 'cause I was very young, so I must, it was right after we moved, it was about the same time actually.  I got into, so I was about nine, ten, nine.  We got into the car, had no idea where Niagara Falls was, it's just the other side of the moon as far as we knew.  It's about five hours away from Akron, Ohio.  And we drove up to Niagara Falls.  I remember being woken up, it was dark, it was almost midnight, walking out in my pajamas with a coat over it and seeing this incredible thing lit up, had no--I mean it was just magic.  And then after we walked around it for about half an hour, we got back in the car and we drove back home.  And it was the week--it was Friday so, you know, we slept in the next day.  I woke up the next day thinking, "Did this happen? Did this--?  What was this?"  Yeah so he drove, you know, basically yeah ten hours, but he wanted to see Niag- he wanted to test the car, but he also, let's go to Niagara Falls.  He could've tested that car just going to Cleveland [Ohio]; he didn't have to go to Niagara Falls.  That was the one thing, you know.  And then, and then later a couple years after that, he decided with a cousin of mine, an older cousin who was about his age, to take the two families to Mexico.  So we had--it was totally insane when I think about it.  Now we drove from Akron, Ohio to Mexico City [Mexico] in two cars.  You know, four children in each car and two adults, and they did that.  See I could not, I would've been a basket case by the time we reached Cincinnati [Ohio], but we did, not only did we do that, we drove a kind of a family roots route.  We drove down through Georgia and visited some cousins that I had, or third or four- I don't even know who they we- had never known they existed, but we visited some cousins in Fort Valley, Georgia, and then we went on to Florida.  We visited some more cousins.  They were odd co- you know, cousins around three corners or something like that and they were on my mother's side actually and I think they were, I have no idea; it was very strange.  And then we drove to New Orleans [Louisiana], we drove through Texas, we went to, to Mexico and spent two weeks and drove back.  And I thought it was kind of normal, but later when I grew up I realized that was, that was very strange.  But it was also very, it was, it was like Kerouac [Jack Kerouac], like 'On the Road,' let's just do it.  And we did, we just kind of, we packed up for this trip, you know, we threw our things in the trunk and we got ready for it and, and off we went.  It was a great adventure.  You look speechless (laughter).
Story_ID: 531265
Speaker 1: You said that your brother [Ray Dove] got science fiction magazines?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other kind of media at your house or what did you guys watch on television?  What does your mom [Elvira Hord Dove] get in the mail, what kind of mag- you know, are you getting Highlights and Ebony, and watching, what?
Speaker 2: Oh this is great.
Speaker 1: And what music was playing in your home or in the car on the way to Mexico?
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Let's, I'm gonna go through this, literature first.  There were, as I've mentioned before, the science fiction magazines, the Mad magazine was one of our chief forms of entertainment.  I got--I would go down every other week or so and buy a comic book.  I loved comic books, Superman, I didn't like Batman that much, I actually didn't like Batman, but Superman, Wonder Woman, and yeah those are my favorites, whereas my brother liked 'Archie.'  And then--but I also was reading the books that were on the shelves.  So that meant--and there were lots of books on the shelves.  There was the complete Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], so I started reading that, because it was there.  I didn't--it was a big book, give it a shot, you know.  No one told me it was going to be difficult, so I didn't think it was difficult and I think that's one thing you have to realize with kids if you don't tell them it's difficult they'll figure out a way to figure it out.  So that was the literature aspect.  Now, on television, we weren't allowed to watch a lot of television, not that there was a lot of television, but we really weren't, we had, we had to lobby for every program and we couldn't watch any television before we had done all of our homework in any case.  The shows that we watched were 'Twilight Zone' ['The Twilight Zone'].  On Saturday we, we watched 'American Bandstand' and then 'Soul Train' a little bit later on.  We had to do all that.  We watched 'The Prisoner' which was a British series, I loved that.  And my parents would watch more adult, my father [Ray Dove] always watched 'Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] and then they would watch, what was it called, 'East Side/West Side,' what, yeah, that crime drama.  But that was something that we're not allowed really to watch.  We would sneak in and try to watch it.  Those are basically the stories.  Highlights magazine definitely, and, and getting all of those, those books later on, you know, from Highlights and that was, that was magic to be able to get some books.  Going to the library was where I got most of my other reading material, and we were allowed to go to the library no matter what, you know.  That was the one place we were allowed to go no matter, yeah, without any kind of elaborate excuse, and the only excuse, the only thing we had to do was finish the books we had checked out before, or else come up with a very good reason why we hadn't finished them.  So, and we could only take out six books, but you know, I could go to the library every week and just read those books.  And so I got to the point where I would go to the library, oh that's from the time I was about twelve or so, I'd go to the library and just wander.  Oh it was wonderful, just go through the stacks and just pick out a book because I liked the title.  And then look into it to make sure I was gonna finish it or else I wouldn't be able to get another book out.  But, that feeling of having, of freedom that came with the library.  To--the idea of going into this space by myself and choosing what I wanted to read and not having anyone judge me on it, even when I went to, I wandered into the adult section, and I remember the very first book that I tried to get out of the adult section was Francoise Sagan's 'Bonjour Tristesse.'  I didn't know what that meant, so I wanted the book.  And it's a--the, the librarian wouldn't check it out to me because I was underage.  So I went home and told my parents.  And my parents wrote a note saying, "Let her take out anything she wants."  I thought well, you know, and I though ooh this is fabulous, so I was in the adult section all the time.  I think they thought or believed that if I didn't understand it, you know, if I wasn't supposed to get it at that point, I wasn't gonna understand it.  And I think they were right for the most part.
Story_ID: 531266
Speaker 1: What about music?
Speaker 2: Music was such a part of my life that it was, it was, it was absolutely unconscious in a way because it was always there.  First of all, music was always playing in the house.  It was--and on Saturdays, it was a ritual.  My father [Ray Dove] would get up before us--he was always an early riser--and so by six or seven o'clock the music, the phonograph would be put on, the LP would be put on.  And my brother [Ray Dove] and I would be in bed thinking, what's his mood today?  So if it was Josh White, he was in a very good mood.  If it was Bessie Smith, he was in a melancholy mood, but he was still okay.  If it was classical music and it was, could go all over the board, if it was like Corelli's [Arcangelo Corelli] flute sonata, we'd say "Uh-oh.  We're in trouble."  It's interesting, you know, that that part would be, it's almost as if he was building up his mask by putting on the classical music and it just, you know, I just.  So we knew that he was going to be a little prickly that day and, and in- un-, incommunicative, uncommunicative actually.  So--but there's the background music happening all the time.
Story_ID: 531267
Speaker 1: We were encouraged to take up a musical instrument and at that time music was in the schools so you played the tonette for, you know.
Speaker 2: What's a tonette, like the recorder?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, the tonette was a plastic recorder.  And they would issue them to kids.  You'd have un- you'd have your regular music classes where you'd sing songs and stuff like that.  If you declared yourself interested in learning an instrument, they would give you this tonette first and then you would play, and they were horrible, they sounded terrible.  But, actually I think they gave them to the whole class and then people could decide whether they wanted to do a musical instrument.  So you actually had the whole class, you know, third glade--grade class playing this tonette, and then you could decide if you wanted to learn a musical instrument.  And so it went without saying that we were gonna try a musical instrument, you know, it was kind of unspoken.  So my brother [Ray Dove] took up clarinet, I took up cello.  I took up cello not even knowing what it was really, but out of a kind of defiance, I wasn't gonna take up a wind instrument, because my brother did that.  I wasn't gonna do violin, 'cause everybody did that.  You don't do--you know, I didn't wanna do what everybody did.  And cello sounded interesting.  It sounded interesting, I like the word.  Then I saw the instrument, I thought, oh my god it's as big as me, you know.  But, but I, I had decided to do it and I have been trained as a chi- you, you take on what you say you're gonna do, and you do it.  And so I started to learn the cello and I loved it.  I loved the, the quality, the sonorousness of it.  And so, from the time I was ten, I began playing the cello, and so that's where classical music entered.
Speaker 2: And did that end up translating into the viola da gamba which you--?
Speaker 1: Eventually it did.  I began doing, taking viola da gamba actually 1977, so a lot later and I started taking viola da gamba because I couldn't take any more cello lessons where I was.  Again, it was a situation where I played cello all through high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio], played in the orchestra.  I actually played a solo at my own--at high school graduation they had me play a solo, and I was quite serious about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're a real cello player.
Speaker 1: I was a real (laughter) cello player.  And in fact when I went to college, I, I took private lessons and played in the orchestra at, at the university [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio].  And there was a point where I was actually thinking of becoming a performance major until I discovered that I was, I assumed nerves would go away.  But then I real, no, I was too nervous and my knee would shake.  Not that anyone else noticed that I was nervous, but if my knee shook I could not play the cello because it would shake the instrument.  And so I thought no, that's, that's nuts.  I don't need to go through all of that struggle.  So--and there are other things I loved to do as well.  But my natural shyness kind of cut in, I could not jump over that to learn to become a performer.  But I still played the cello all my life and then when, in 1977, I just graduated from University of Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa] where I had gotten my M.F.A. in poetry writing and Fred [Fred Viebahn], I met my husband, though we weren't married yet.  And he was teaching at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], it is a great conservatory of music.  I wanted to go and continue taking cello lessons.  Marched over there in all my naivete, asking if I could take private cel- cello, they laughed at me, said this is, you know, students are trying to get in here all over the country, you can't do that.  But I did talk to the cello, to the cellist who, she looked at me and said, "Well, I'm starting an early music group.  Would you like to play the viola de gamba?  We'll teach you how to play it."  I had no idea what it was, but I thought they wanna teach me, I'll go with it.  I wanted music in my life, not just hearing it but making it un- and I've always loved that whole, both the rigor and the improvisational quality of it.  When I was in high school, I played in a jazz group, we made a jazz group. I played my cello like a bass.  It was all, I guess what I'm trying to get at is that it's all in the same pot.  I never made this distinction, I never felt the need to make a distinction between classical music, jazz, blues, you know, or anything else.  It's all part of it.  Just this, I think simila- similarly I never really made a distinction between poetry and fiction.  I mean, they're all writing, they require different angles and all that, but it's all writing.  It's all the same.
Story_ID: 531268
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Grace Elementary School [Akron, Ohio] until I was in second grade and then I went to Schumacher Elementary School [Akron, Ohio].  And Schumacher which was named after Ferdinand Schumacher who was a German immigrant who discovered oats, oatmeal.  So we were kids and this ide- that this guy missed his mother's oats and so figured out how to make rolled oatmeal here, was a typical story that you would give to kids to show them, you know, both resolve and imagination.  But when I look back on it, it fit so perfectly in all of the things I was interested in because he had to be a bit of a chemist to make, to figure out how to get these oats this way, but he also had to be a bit of a poet to miss them in the first place and to miss them enough to want to, to make, to, to duplicate them.  And Quaker Oats [Quaker Oats Company] was also in Akron, Ohio.  Akron, Ohio had two major industries when I was growing up, they were both--they polluted the atmosphere.  But they both were very rich in, in, in the ways that they fueled a child's imagination.  One of them was the rubber industry, there's nothing worse than the smell of burning rubber, except for the smell of burning oats.  That's really bad, but, but rubber, we made, Akron made all the tires that rolled all over the country and of course they, they really played this up in school and you'd say, "Yeah, but you wouldn't get anywhere without us," you know.  So there was incredible sense of pride of that, in that.  And then the oatmeal, I mean Quaker Oats, this was fabulous.  Everybody loved Quaker Oats, it was on every table and the Quaker Oats meals were right there looking like big Quaker Oats cereal boxes kind of lined up.  That was wonderful.  So, but it smelled terrible in that part of town.
Speaker 1: You didn't live near there?
Speaker 2: No.  My, my father's parents lived there.  My paternal grandparents [Lucille Nettle Dove and Joseph Dove] lived in East Akron [Akron, Ohio], which was where the factories were and the, on wh- when you had to go past the oatmeal factory to get there.  By the time I was about ten or eleven, the oatmeal factory had moved to Iowa, but the, but the silos were still there.  But every time we went over to my paternal grandparents, and we usually would go over on Sunday nights, Sunday evening, there was that smell.  You, you'd know when you hit the industrial part of town.  So when my parents [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] moved to, into the second house they moved into West Akron [Akron, Ohio], to the better side of town.
Speaker 1: And what's the racial sensation, for a lack of a better word right this moment, in Akron, east, where there's the east side or the west side, and do you, as a child, have a sense of it?
Speaker 2: East side was pretty, even when I was a child, was mostly black and poor white.  And when I say poor white, also, mostly West Virginia, Appalachian that, who also came up at that time during the factories.  When I was a child, I remember the first house I lived in I had the white neighborhood, the white friend on one side and the black friend on the other side, and it was an area which was pretty much--it was in flux, mostly poor Irish, yeah poor Irish Catholic and blacks who were trying to move up in the echelon, who were just, you know, moving up, 50/50 I'd say.
Story_ID: 531269
Speaker 1: My first school [Grace Elementary School, Akron, Ohio], I can't remember very much.  I, I remember that I had white teachers.  I had a mix of black and white, but I, I didn't really take it in, but I did remember very clearly moving into Schumacher Elementary School [Akron, Ohio] because I was a new kid in class.  And when I was stood in front of the class and the teacher said, "This is Rita [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove]," and you know, I remember looking out and thinking that it looked--there were less black people then I was used to seeing and now I think it was about 30/70, so about 30 percent black, 70 percent white.  I was sat right next to a white boy who was very friendly.  It sounds like, you know, it sounds like May- what was it called? Mayberry [ph.], you know, it sounds like kind of idyllic and it wasn't by any means, but I think the, the racial change was happening.  It was so new to everybody that the kids didn't really play into it so there was very little racial prejudice going on at that level in second graders.  He was very friendly, he said, "Hi, my name's Jimmy [ph.]," and he kind of, kind of helped me around and stuff like that.  But I felt very shy because my color palette was different suddenly.  And--but within a year, it had already gone to 50/50, and by the time I left elementary school, it was 70/30 the other way around.  Now I was so--I was aware that I was black.  I was aware that, that prejudice existed because even though my father [Ray Dove] didn't talk about his trials and tribulations, my grandparents would let out the little comments.  You know, when they got together and talking, you know, that's all that stuff.  So I knew it was there.  I also--it had been impressed upon us that we do our best and that you do 150 percent because you don't know if, you know, wh- the idea was basically you would do, give 150 percent, always have 150 percent in your belt because you may be required to give 150 percent even if somebody else next to you has only done 90, you know, you can do that.  Now, I was never given an explanation for why I should do that.  Now I see it; later on I understood why.  I also see from my father's point of view that he had given 150 percent and somebody else, you know, got, you know, the, got the accolades for it.  But that all tied in though nicely with the idea that, that you, you have to be proud of yourself and you, you know what--how--you know the best you can do.  And so even if you slide by, you've just actually dissed yourself (laughter), you know, by sliding by.  So I was aware of all of that.  So there was a certain tension, a kind of like unspecified tension, you know, why do you have to do this?  I think part of me associates that with growing up, this is what happens in the adult world.  Part of me knew it had to do something to do with race, but I wasn't sure.  I was reading a lot by this time in second grade.  So I would read, you know, poems by Langston Hughes, I read, so I know, oh yeah this stuff happens, but I think I thought it didn't happen anymore.  Until I had a very good friend in this new school, a white girl named Karen [ph.], and we would walk home together because she lived, you know, on the way and so we always walked home together.  And one day we were walking across the, the playground, and I had stopped because I was daydreaming, I don't know, you know how you dawdle.  And she turned around and she said, "Hurry up, nigger."  And I remember it very clear, I was standing by the swings and I stopped, and I turned to stone on the outside.  I mean, I just kind of, I felt my father's armor growing around me; it was very weird.  I suddenly thought, this is what it means.  Obviously I didn't put that in any kind of words, but--and it was my shock and I didn't, I mean I knew I was black and all that, but I didn't real- realize that it could come from any corner at any time, someone who's your friend, that you know, and I didn't, I think I was probably strong enough at that time I didn't get bitter, I just, she, she said, "I didn't mean--I didn't mean that, I didn't mean that, I didn't mean that I'm sorry, it just came out."  And you know, and I just looked at her.  I didn't say a word.  I became in a way like my father, I became silent.  I, I looked at her, I didn't say, "That's all right," or, "Let's go on."  And in the end, she walked on, and then I walked home alone.  And it didn't make me hate white people or anything like that, it just made me be wary, let's just say.  I was just now and for a while, yeah.
Story_ID: 531270
Speaker 1: Which teachers influenced you at Schumacher [Schumacher Elementary School, Akron, Ohio]?  Do you re- you know, is there anybody specific?  The answer may be that there was no one, was there anyone at Schumacher who is memorable?
Speaker 2: I--yes, two teachers in particular.  One of them was my, for some reason my fourth grade teacher, and I don't know what she did, Mrs. Woods [ph.].  Except that I think that in fourth grade, that was a period where, where they started making us, you know, we would write little poems and stories sometimes, like you know write this.  And though there are events that really happened that I remember, it wasn't the teacher that influenced me.  I mean, I loved spelling class and I mean even in, in second grade and in third grade and up to fourth grade I would write stories using my spelling words, and I'd finish up my spelling homework in class, and then I'd write these stories, and that started me on writing like a long novel about robots taking over the earth called, you know, 'Chaos' of course, 'cause that was one of the spelling words.  But, but Mrs. Woods was, I always felt that she was, she encouraged--she looked kindly upon our junior efforts at writing, you know, and one of my breakthrough moments in that year was to write a poem about Easter called 'The Rabbit with the Droopy Ear.'  And I say breakthrough because the poem, I didn't know how it was gonna end and the writing of it helped lead me to the end, and it was immensely exciting.  So instead of writing by formula, you know, I wro- I and, I, I wrote toward discovery.  But, and then Mrs. Ford [ph.] or Miss Ford I should say was my fifth grade teacher, and she was my first black teacher.  She was new to the school, and she was brought in and that was an amazement to me.  It was, I just had never--I didn't know I had missed it, but I idolized her.  This was something.  I wanted to be her.
Speaker 1: Was she the only black teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was from?
Speaker 2: No, I know nothing about where Miss Ford was from (laughter).  Isn't that terrible?
Speaker 1: Not at all, not at all.  I mean you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because you know, but it's not--
Speaker 1: --in the third or fourth grade looking up at the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Story_ID: 531271
Speaker 1: But the teachers that really began to make influence on me happened in my junior high school years.
Speaker 2: Where, what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 1: My junior high school was Simon Perkins Junior High School [Akron, Ohio].  I had to be carpooled there; it was, you know, so that was kind of interesting and exciting.  My brother [Ray Dove] had gone before me so he could fill me in, you know, he was in ninth grade.
Speaker 2: So, it's the mid-'60s [1960s] now, perhaps?
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me, let me put it all,
Speaker 2: You, you graduated high school in--
Speaker 1: In '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: --looks like 1970.  So it's maybe--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty, yeah, nineteen sixty, what '4 [1964] to '67 [1967], something like that, uh-huh.  That's right, that's where we are.  We, we--what did I know at that time in my life?  Well I do--I knew that we had gone down to Washington [D.C.] to, so that my father [Ray Dove] could march in the March on Washington in 1963, which occurred on my birthday actually.  So I felt like it was, it was a very special day, it was my day, you know.  And the event, of course, the whole thing with Karen [ph.] had happened already.  I was quite aware of, of, of inequities at that point and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and I was also very moved by the fact that my father was gonna march in this--he was gonna go and march, and we drove down there.  And I wasn't quite sure what he was, exactly why he wanted to march.  But it, it meant a lot and I, so I of course was not allowed, was not allowed to march and my brother [Ray Dove] and I and sisters [Robin Dove Waynesboro and Rhonda Dove Harrison], my sister, both of them actually, were, were kind of put in with some of those cousins--those relatives from, from Washington, D.C. who, all I can remember is that my mother [Elvira Hord Dove], is my mother playing cards with her generation of cousins, and they're all talking and they're smoking and they're having a great time and the, you know, television is going and we're thinking my dad's out there marching.  And gosh D.C. is fun, and you know, it was just a strange thing that that was happening.  And The Beatles were coming the next year which I remember.  And I remember learning by heart parts of Martin Luther King's speech, I Have a Dream, just playing it over and over again and learning it by heart.  At the same time, my two transistor radio memories are that listening to that over and over again, and also listening to The Beatles over and over again, so it's all kind mushed together.
Story_ID: 531272
Speaker 1: So off I go to junior high school [Simon Perkins Junior High School, Akron, Ohio] where in eighth grade I have a teacher--.  Well, first of all in seventh grade I have a teacher who says that she's not going to teach us anything about poetry.  We actually begged to be taught poetry.  I was put in an experimental group of, like my father [Ray Dove], an experimental group of students in accelerated program.  They wanted to see what happens if they actually tracked kids, and so they put a group of us together.  We stayed together until we graduated high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio].  And when I say st- it meant that we took English together and math and science and history.  Which meant actually that I had this group of friends, and it was, there were about twenty-five of us, and out of that group about five blacks, which isn't bad for that time.  So we, but we were put together in seventh grade and we had heard through the grapevine that poetry was really difficult, that you had to interpret it.  Now I had been writing poetry and I loved reading it, but I was terrified of poetry because I was gonna have to interpret it.  And I couldn't put into words how a poem made me feel.  See. I could read it, I could understand it or whatever that meant, you know, I, I felt something from the poem.  But I felt completely inarticulate when it came to explaining it, which I think often happens.  I mean, I think that if you're really into a poem, kids can be moved by a poem and not be able to tell you why they're moved.  And it was that fear that there was some kind of trick, there was some kind of language of explanation that we have to get in order to be able to be worthy of poetry that prompted the entire group of us to beg to be taught poetry.  And the teacher said, "No, no, I don't wa- yeah, I don't wanna teach poetry."  Basically she didn't understand it either.  She was intimidated by it.  So we got to eighth grade together, wanting desperately to get this poetry under our belt before we were found out as the frauds that we all thought we were, because I think a lot of times intelligent kids think they're really stupid, because they know how much you don't know.  We had a wonderful teacher, a new young teacher, her name was Wendy [ph.].  She told us to call her Wendy.  That was the time, you started to call--.  And every, one day a week we came into English class and all we did for the forty-five minutes was to write.  She didn't give us any guidelines.  She said, "I want you to write.  You can write stories, short stories, poems, whatever you like, and you don't have to show it to me.  At the end of the month you can choose what you want to show," you know, so you had to do something.  You had to be quiet, and we sat down and we wrote.  It was amazing, it was amazing.
Story_ID: 531273
Speaker 1: Now did you know at this point that you wanted to be a writer?
Speaker 2: No.  I knew that I loved to read everything, and I knew that I liked writing, but I think in my head, I thought that writing was something that you did, you know, childish scribbles and that eventually I would figure out what it is I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: And if you were asked in junior high school [Simon Perkins Junior High School, Akron, Ohio] what did you wanna do, would you've said you didn't know or did you have sort of a repertoire of--
Speaker 2: You never say you didn't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) things you chose from?
Speaker 2: I put, I had repertoire.  I would say that I wanted to be, I said either I'm not sure if I'm going to be a chemist or if I'm going to be a lawyer or a doctor.  Those were the three.  Now teacher I could been, I, I was too shy I figured I wasn't gonna do that, but the--this is what I was gonna do.  And nothing in the humanities really because you, you can't earn a living.  No one in my immediate family ever said anything like, "You have to be a doctor or a lawyer and be a credit to your race," or anything, but it's in the water you drink, it's in the air, you hear, you know, "Oh So and So did--their son did really well, you know, and he's in, you know, he's, he's studying to be a dentist," you know.  So, you know, oh he did well, dentist, I should be a dentist.  So that kind of stuff happens.  You put it together.  That's what I said I was gonna be.  I had no knowledge of--I really didn't wanna be a doctor.  When I think about it now, I didn't stop to make, let myself think about it but I was doing my job, which was to be a student.  And I was encouraged to keep taking--to have that well-rounded education so you did the, you did the music and you know, I did, I did that.  I became a majorette, oh that's a long, I'll back up, I'll tell you that later 'cause we're still in junior high school, but in high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] I became a majorette.  But to have this English teacher who said we could write for one day of the week without any obligations to show it to her and have it be judged or anything like that was a true revelation.  That was, I mean, it really was an incredible thing.  And I think that it, in fact changed the lives of that whole class because I do, I see those, I see those, those kids, and we're all of age now.  But we get together for reunions and all of them are extremely articulate, even if they've become something else, because they were able to put all of that torture to adolescent angst into words without fear of recrimination, because you could choose what to show her later, you know.  And, and by the end of the month, you know, people were saying, "Can I show you?"  'Cause they want to show everything of course because Wendy [ph.] was cool.  And I think our parents didn't mind because we were the accelerated class so this must be, this was part of that new learning stuff that, you know, kind of '60s [1960s], you know, engage your child learning methods, which, you know, which actually worked out really well for us.
Story_ID: 531274
Speaker 1: So after eighth grade [at Simon Perkins Junior High School, Akron, Ohio] we went in, as a group, into ninth grade and, where our teacher was Mr. Hicks [ph.], who was also incredibly influential because he, he had a master's [degree] in drama, he had a master's in English, and was teaching, as he said, he was teaching the young before they got spoiled.  He said, "I wanna catch them before they, you know, get spoiled."  And he actually, he just pushed us, he pushed us.  He demanded of us, because he said, "I know you can do it."  He--we begged to learn poetry and he did the smartest thing I think anybody could've ever done.  He divided us up in groups, gave us pieces of, passages of poems to discuss and to present to the class.  Didn't tell us who they were from.  They were absolutely incomprehensible, French, Greek, and original Greek, you know, scattered through this stuff.  I thought, we, we didn't know what it was.  A lot of it was Ezra Pound.  But what happened is after a week of trying to figure this out and we would go home and I, my mother [Elvira Hord Dove] had, had taken French when she was in school.  So I'd say, "Mom what does this mean in French?"  You know, 'cause I knew German; I had been studying German.  And then somebody else had a Greek like half cousin, they, they'd try to decipher the Greek.  We tried to figure out what these things were using all the resources that we had.  And then we finally kind of came up, we got so angry that he would give us this impossible poetry as a group that we just decided to make up a meaning and say, "Oh well, this is probably what it means," and we presented our things at the end of the week, our reports.  And after the report, each report, he would read a review or an analysis by someone, some noted critic just to show us we weren't far off, and no one was far off.  And after that we thought oh, so you do, you gotta, yeah we can do this.  And also, you know, you do, you, again you gotta trust, you gotta dive in and trust that what you're getting out of it, what touches you is what you're meant to feel.  So that was really influential.
Story_ID: 531275
Speaker 1: So while all this high education was going on, because we were reading 'The Brothers Karamazov' [Fyodor Dostoyevsky] and, and you know, and Pound [Ezra Pound] and all this stuff, there was also another section of my life that was going on and that was a life of, you know, the private sector, the life of family and home.  It, it did seem to be like one was the mainstream world in which most people were white.  There were few blacks in the accelerated program and that was that world that we were trying to enter, and the other world was predominantly black.  It was church based because we went to church every Sunday.  It was A.M.E Zion [Wesley Temple A.M.E. Zion Church, Akron, Ohio] and, and which, which meant that people could get happy, but you also had some--you know, you also had your doctors and lawyers there.  But, you know, there were also the other ones.  See you had all levels, it wasn't Holy Roller and it wasn't the Baptists, so everyone kind of said, "Oh, the Baptists, you know, they're just too wild."  But they were supposedly dignified, but we would, my brother [Ray Dove] and I would sit there and wait to see, lay bets on who was gonna go off, who was gonna get happy.  So it was, it was fun.  Where there was lots of singing, lots of really good gospel singing, a preacher who was, the minister when I grew up listening to was a really good preacher, in the sense that he could start out with one thing and end up with something.  I mean and, and let it grow and he would, yeah he would improvise without just kind of punching you know the, the, the standard buttons, and he would ground it.  It wasn't just emotion, but he was actually talking.  So, so I grew up listening to the way someone could fashion a, a soliloquy actually, 'cause that's basically what it was.  And that was the way that world was happening.  In the meantime, underneath all of that was the, you know, the war was growing, the Vietnam War was just beginning to--things were not quite right with the world, but you know.  But, but we were young and we were part of this growing youthful dream that any, anything can happen if you just, you know, if we band together we're gonna fix the world somehow.  And so all that was vaguely in my, my--on my horizon.
Story_ID: 531276
Speaker 1: I went on to high school, which was right down the street, Buchtel High School [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio], and again, it started out about 30 percent black when I entered and ended up 30 percent white when I left.  Many whites fleeing to Firestone High School [Harvey S. Firestone High School; Harvey S. Firestone Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] and to the cake eaters as we called them, the cake eaters because they were the ritzy ones like Marie Antoinette, "Let them eat cake," cake eaters that kind of thing.  So--but I had a, actually all in all a phenomenally positive experience in public school, and I think that part of that is because this racial mix was so odd.  It wasn't, it hadn't tumbled yet and we actually got along.  And I don, it sounds odd, but we did get along.  There were tensions, but we most of the time got along and, and even now when I go back for class reunions I'm, I'm struck by how we got along and get along still.  At first I thought it was just nostalgia that I must be dreaming that we really did get along, but no, we did.  Blacks and whites were joking still, you know, with each other and talking and it, it happened in a window of time, I'd say two or three years of time a gen- a little mini generation at least in Akron, Ohio where people actually did communicate with each other before it got tense.
Speaker 2: Did it get tense in '68 [1968], by '68 [1968]?  Did the se, the rise, particularly those in Cincinnati [Ohio] at all affect you in Akron?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It got tense, but not tense among me, among ourselves.  We weren't tense in ourselves, we were tense for the nation.  Most of the white friends that I had, and even white acquaintances in school that I had, were basically saying, "This is awful, you know, what's going on."  It was curiously, I find myself apologizing for it as if no one will believe me, but curiously enough, we were all on--pretty much on the same page.  All the cake eaters, they were over there, you know.  We were, this was a group of, of pe- kids who, whose parents started out working class, became either small business people or early professionals.  So th- they had done this trajectory of working their way up.  They understood what that ladder was about.  Yes, there were, there were, there were some tensions in terms of, for instance I did join the majorettes, there had not been a black majorette since I think there had been about I think four or five years there had been one black majorette and then none.  There had been black cheerleaders, but this was the, a, a color barrier that needed to be broken.  And a friend of mine, a black girl who played the, flute came to me and said, "Rita [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove], we really need to, we need to try to do this.  We should become majorettes."  I'm like, "Majorettes? I mean I don't--," you know.  And she said, "Oh it's easy; it's really fun."  She had done it in a camp somewhere.  So she taught me over the summer a little bit and then we went to the general tryouts because in a good democracy everyone gets a little, not only a tryout, but they taught you for a week at school but we already knew a little bit.  So both of us became majorettes.
Speaker 2: Did majorettes throw the baton?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Majorettes do the, the twirling and the--now I loved it.  I tr- loved it not only because of well it was music.  It was a way of dancing to the music, but also it required a certain kind of skill that reminded me of playing the cello.  There's a certain way of moving your fingers and doing all of that, and I just had a blast.  And I--you know, trying to become a majorette.
Story_ID: 531277
Speaker 1: Also I wanted to be popular, and I was so shy and so--and, and, and I had gotten this reputation of being smart because I had straight A's and 4.0 average and all of that stuff, and in that way of high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio], it was never cool to be smart.
Speaker 2: Not even in the, the exclusive, special chemistry group?
Speaker 1: In the exclusive special, like accelerated group it was cool to be smart, but we were--this was the uncool nerd group.  I mean we weren't, yeah, I mean, you know, it was, and you can't be too smart.  I mean we were all--it was also a new thing.  No one had aspired to be in this group.  We had been chosen to be in this group, and so there were kids in there who in fact were very intelligent, but had no intention of following up on that really in their lives, you know.  And so they were, so they were still popular and I, also you know, there's another thing, there's another subgroup, this is a subgroup of, among blacks it was never too cool to be smart.  So even--so to be in that group already you would say, "Oh man, you're in that group."  You're hanging out with those white kids, well how can you help not because you're in the same classes.  So prove to us that you're still black by, you know, don't talk over our heads, and don't you know it--but it gets to a point you don't know what's over someone's head.  So you know, it's very tricky.  And it's one of the reasons why I think one of the other black girls in the class and I got together with a friend of ours who wasn't in the class, but was black to start this jazz group.  We wanted to prove that we could be cool, you know, and so and, and when we played 'Take Five' at the school assembly it was for us, oh it was thrilling because they were going like, "Wow, look they can do this," you know.
Speaker 2: What were your other instruments?
Speaker 1: We had drums, flute, piano and cello and voice.  So we did Nina Simone, you know, and we did, you know, and we played a couple jazz clubs.  It was crazy, it was a crazy time, you know, but things were breaking out all over the place, you know, so we would, we played for the school assembly and then another girl said that her dad had this friend who had a jazz group, you know, join and we could play there, you know.  We said okay and our parents let us, I can't believe it.  You know, we went over there and got together.  And then as the protest songs began to come in you, I still remember when Cindy [ph.] brought in Nina Simone's, you know, 'Four Women,' you know, "My name is--."  And we're like, "Wow, this is incredible."  So there all these layers of identity that were going on.  You know, I would get together with my jazz group and we'd get, let down our hair and we, and our accents and, you know, be black.  And then I go into calculus and you know, and joke around with my black and my white friends, you know, and you know, but we had a different level of communication.  But as, you know, W.E.B. Du Bois says you have, if you are raised in this country as any kind of minority, you develop binocular vision, because us have to learn to speak the language of the mainstream and then you have the language of the tribe, and you learn the differences.  So you pay attention in ways that someone who is of the mainstream does not pay attention.  They don't even know what's happening there, they're deaf to it.  And I always felt very, I felt lucky to be able to have that binocular vision.  You know, so that's what was going on in high school.
Story_ID: 531278
Speaker 1: Were you clear that you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  There was never a question.  My brother [Ray Dove] had--he, he went off to Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and he was going--he majored in, you know, computer science and there was never a question that I was gonna go to college.  I was, in fact, ready to go.  And part of the reason why I wanted to go was not just for the college experience and how exciting that would be, but also because I was looking forward to the freedom of college.  I was raised very--my parents [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove] socially, they were very strict on us.  I couldn't date 'til I was sixteen and I still remember with chagrin my sophomore year in high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio], my brother was a senior.  We talked our parents into letting us go to a New Year's Eve party.  All vetted; it was all fine, blah, blah, blah, and my brother was going and stuff.  And I went to the New Year's Eve party and at 12:30 my father comes in the door saying, "It's time, it's early enough, I mean late enough for y- you have to come home."  Me, because I was the younger.  He walks in and takes me out of the arms of someone I was dancing with for the first time in I don't know what I, I was, had been asked to dance.  And all I can remember thinking was that I am going to--I'm going to grow up as I said in that poem.  I'm going to get outta here and go to college so I can be my own person.  I was not gonna be stopped like my mother, you know, told that you're not, I'm getting outta here and brains was my ticket.  So I was biding my time too.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense about where you wanted to go?
Speaker 2: No, I did not have a sense of where I wanted to go, and in fact, though I was the valedictorian of my class and had the perfect 4.0 average, it never occurred to me to apply to an Ivy League school.  Now what does that tell you about even in this quote, unquote well-meaning accelerated program, what does that tell you about what people thought of the aspirations of a black woman in 1969?  I had a counselor who I thought was wonderful and I think she once said, "You know you, you know, you should think, think about Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], you know, these places."  But she didn't push it, and she should've pushed it.  You know, now she said that then, you know, why, I was terrified of the idea of going.  I was terrified of the idea of going to--that far away from home because I was shy, and it would've required someone to push me actually at, at that point.  My parents were concerned, they had one child in school and financially they were going to fall in that emerging middle class bracket where they wouldn't be, you know, available in the, eligible for financial aid.  And so I looked at, you know, I would look at the tuitions and think we can't possibly afford anything except for a state school, not thinking, 'cause I'm only a high school student that you, you get financial aid for Ivy League schools, you know.  But doesn't matter, I'm glad I didn't actually because I had a great education where I went, which was Miami University of Ohio [Oxford, Ohio].  It is the flagship state university of Ohio, a great education, as far away from Akron [Ohio] as I could get without leaving the state, you know.
Speaker 1: If you could just make the, make the T chart with your fingers perhaps and show us in Ohio the difference between, where is Akron and where is Miami?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'll try to do it in mirror image.  (Demonstrates) If this is, if this is Ohio, we'll make it a square and it pretty much is, Akron is going to be in this corner with Cleveland [Ohio], a little bit higher.  But Akron is going to be in this corner and Miami was way down here just north of Cincinnati [Ohio] and about four miles away from the Indiana border.  I mean you--you're talking, it's really over there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Far.
Speaker 2: It's far, it's far.  It's four and a half hours of steady driving far, and Akron, it's only five hours--I mean, Ohio is only five hours wide at its most distant point.  So that's where I was.  But it was also the best state school in, in Ohio--let's say liberal arts or general education state school.  And I chose them instead of, for instance, Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], because Case Western was much more towards the sciences and math.  And though I did well in science and math, and I actually liked science and math, I wanted it all and I think it's because I really wanted--I loved literature more than anything else, but feared somewhere inside that that was not what you did to be a credit to your race.  So I was hedging my bets for as long as I could.  I went to Miami and--
Story_ID: 531279
Speaker 1: Well, let me back up a little bit to say--'cause we were talking about racial tensions, and I was saying that, that it, it wasn't really apparent.  There weren't that many, but, but occasionally it would emerge, like for instance with majorettes and the fact that there had been no, that we were breaking that color barrier.  And also the fact that when it came time to choose a head majorette, I, I was a majorette in my junior year [at John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] and then also my senior year.  So they had to choose a head majorette for the senior year.  Now I probably should've been the head majorette, because I twirled as well as everybody else.  The other black girl also twirled better than anybody else, but she had no--she, she wasn't as graceful, let's put it that way.  But anyway, it doesn't matter.  There had been a white girl, who was a friend actually, you know, but she had been a majorette since she was a freshman or sophomore, I'm sorry, sophomore.  So that means she was, it would've been her third year.  So she had seniority on me, but she really wasn't very, she couldn't twirl very much at all.  She had been a, mostly a switcher.  She switched from side to side.  So they hit upon the idea that they would have co-maj- co-head majorettes.  This is true, you know.  They, they were gonna have co-head majorettes, and though she was actually the majorette, the head majorette, she wore the white uniform, but I would, but, but we really were co-chairs.  And it was a bunch of bleh, yeah.  Isn't it amazing how history repeats itself?  I mean this stuff just keeps rolling over and over.  And, but on the other hand, what was really wonderful was that there was a tradition that, they used to have assistant, they'd have an assistant head and then the head majorette.  Now they had these co-heads in name only.  But the tradition was that the assistant head would have one game where she would be the head and the other one would, you had your chance to wear the white uniform, and the game that I played, that I was the head majorette for, the entire--it's terrible--the entire yearbook staff was mostly white, but some of them were my friends, they came out and took lots of pictures.  I know, you feel kind of sad for the other girl, but I mean on the other hand, you know, and it wasn't her fault that they chose her over, I mean it wasn't her, she wasn't even lobbying, but you know, but, but basically the yearbook is full of me in the white uniform and her not.  And you know, it's just the way that things happen, but.
Speaker 2: Perhaps you were the head majorette?
Speaker 1: Perhaps I was the head majorette, yes.  And, but, what is so interesting is things the, all of this stuff is so complicated and kind of mixed up, because on the one hand it was racism and I think it was mostly fear of what parents would say if there had been a black majorette when I think about it now.  But the racism made it so that I wasn't head majorette, but at the same time there were, there was the white contingent who actually made me head majorette then at the end, said, "Oh, we can get around this.  We can do this; we can get around this" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very similar to your father [Ray Dove] and his colleagues not letting him stay in that elevator--
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --which would have been totally inappropriate.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But nonetheless, and I'm glad they were so embarrassed--
Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) that they managed to get it out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's true.
Story_ID: 531280
Speaker 1: And I mean it's, it's--I think my life, most of my life and acquaintances is, is just might be, has helped to foster my belief really, it strengthened my belief that, that I'm not gonna say people are basically good, 'cause I'm not sure I believe that.  But there are people who are good, let's put it that way.  And that I choose to believe that people are good and will do the right thing until they don't.  That doesn't mean that I'm not prepared in case they don't do it, and that it doesn't mean that I'm naive.  But let's just say that I prefer to live my life hoping and believing that people will do the right thing, but at the least little--I'm vigilant though, and at the least little moment, I just watch, that's all.  And I mean 'cause there have been moments where people have done incredible things, you know, in my life.  And because I had that, that, that experience growing up in that public school where actually white kids and black kids played together and had each other's back, odd.  I don't think my sisters [Robin Dove Waynesboro and Rhonda Dove Harrison] had that.  And it's very curious when I, when I talk with my sisters, and, though they bo- they both have had black and white friends, and my brother [Ray Dove] does too.  But when I talk to my sisters, they don't have the same kind of symbiotic relationship with, I guess you know, with, racially with their friends.  They tend to breakup into the whites and the black friends.  Whereas almost everybody that I know from my high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] who grew up in those two years, they have that relationship, it's very strange.  We were the lost mini generation, too.  And I mentioned this before those two years spent, but also just in terms of where this country was going, because my year and those who were a year older than I, we were too young for the guys to really feel threatened by the Vietnam War.  They--the draft came in just in time to threaten my brother, who luckily had a very high number, you know, I mean three hundred and something or so.  But by the time the next year came around, it, things were turned, the tide was turning.  We knew it was happening, it was beginning to affect our older brothers and sisters, but not a lot and then by the time we got up there, it was over.  So we, we were, not over, but we were too young to suffer from it first degree, you know.  At that same time, we felt a little out of the loop.  We weren't quite, we couldn't march in Washington [D.C.].  We couldn't, you know, march in the war protest because we were undera- we were like sixteen, you know.  And then, and then we weren't hippies; we're too young to be hippies, but we were old enough to, you know, buy some beads (laughter), you know what I mean?  And to know when to take on that language and all that stuff.  We just got the tail end of the Black Arts Movement, but we benefited from what the Black Arts Movement did in terms of raising consciousness and we had Afros like you can't believe it.  But we didn't have to--we weren't on the front line, and I think that also helped forge a sense.  And that happens, that happens across the board.  Of course with, with blacks, it was the Afros and the Black Arts Movement as well.  But with the white kids that I knew from my school, you know, they felt the same thing about the Vietnam War, that they weren't, so.  That did help forge a bond.
Story_ID: 531281
Speaker 1: When you went to Miami [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you said you, you were hanging in there to try to see how long you could (laughter) not not be a writer.  Did--you know, what did you do in order to do that and what did you think you were gonna default to had you been forced into a position that you must choose some other reality?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, when I went into Miami, it was really wide open in terms of what I wanted to do or what I could do, because I had good grades in, you know, math and science and in, and in the humanities.  And I changed my major at least six times in the first semester, I mean I was just I said, "Oh I'm gonna do psychology.  No--."  I would always go back to pre-law, couple reasons.  One of them was that--
Speaker 1: That was a major option?
Speaker 2: Well, you could say, it wasn't a major option, but you could say that I was pre- I, I was in, okay let me put it this way.  At Miami they had a thing called the core curriculum, and for the first two years you had a whole slew of courses that you had to try to get in, you couldn't graduate without them.  They give you, say you know, so you had to do a whole selection.  Scientists had to take more than just freshman English, they had to take advanced composition and another literature course.  And if you were going to go in the humanities, you had to take a whole year of, of math slash science.  So that gave me a lot of leeway.  And I would fluctuate between English and psychiatry and everything like, and mostly on the humanity side, but doesn't really matter.  And I would say that I'm doing this because I want to go to law school later, so I'm pre-law, I'm getting myself ready.  Because English was a viable major for a law student.
Story_ID: 531282
Speaker 1: Well, when I was in college [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] that broad core curriculum base gave me a chance to try out a lot of different fields and certainly delude myself that, that I really was going to do one of these socially-approved vocations instead of going off and becoming a writer.  And it took a very--a wildly serendipitous event to convince me that I was going to be a writer.  In, in a certain way, this is analogous to what happened to me in, in high school [John R. Buchtel High School; John R. Buchtel Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] which was also a, a crazy little moment which alerted me to the fact that, that writing and being a poet was not just a childish thing, but that in fact poets live and breathe and walk among us.  And just to kind of backtrack, my high school English teacher, the one in eleventh grade, eleventh and twelfth grade was a woman by the name of Miss Oechsner [Margaret Oechsner] who is still alive, and I still visit her when I go home.  And she--we didn't write in her class, she wanted us to learn how to read.  So we read Thomas Hardy and we--but she would go through Thomas Hardy and show you how the music of the lan- lines would actually help influence how you felt about a, a landscape for instance.  So she was teaching us how to read.  And yet one Saturday she took three of us to a book signing of a poet, John Ciardi, and she called our parents, asked them if she could take us out and years later I asked her, "Why did you choose me to do this?"  This made--you didn't know I wrote.  She said, "You had a look."  That's what she, you had a look.  And it turned out that she loved poetry and she read it all, you know, all her life and had gone to readings before, and she took us three to see John Ciardi and to meet him and get a signed book.  And I thought, I didn't know who John Ciardi was, but at that point this was a live poet and he said some pretty amazing things.  He had just done a translation of Dante's "Inferno" ['The Divine Comedy,' Dante Alighieri]. And that, that put it on the radar screen that this, this is also an option, you know, if you wanna be a--this is vocational option perhaps.  But I went to school, to college thinking that I had to be a credit and bring the race forward.  Not that anyone told me I had to, but I knew that was my, my task.  And so I said pre-law and, I went about taking my core curriculum courses.  Now I had tested out of freshman English, so I started with my advanced composition requirement and, which meant may- basically writing essays and things like that.  Six weeks into the class, our teacher fell ill and had to be hospitalized and they asked the fiction writing professor to take over because he was gonna be out for the rest of the term.  So in walks Milton White in an electric blue Italian suit.  I'll never forget this.  He came into the class.  He said, "I don't know about advanced composition, but we're gonna write stories, 'cause if you can write a story, you have enough about the principles of composition."  And he was, of course, flying by the seat of his pants being asked from one day to the next to jump into this class.  But we wrote stories and I thought, you mean there are classes and I can do this for, and he can teach it, you know, and it all began to come together.  I started writing stories.  The next semester I took a poetry writing class, and after that it was simply a matter of me admitting to myself that, that this was what I wanted to do.  And eventually by the time I was a junior I did finally admit that it was something I was willing to actually come out and say and not just do the little pre-law thing and, and fudge around anymore.  So I went home and said, at Thanksgiving, and said, "I wanna be a poet."
Speaker 2: What did the people think?
Speaker 1: Well, my father [Ray Dove] took a deep breath.  He was reading the paper.  He took a deep breath, he lowered his paper, he looked at me, he said, "Well, don't be upset if I don't understand it."  End of that (laughter) discussion.  I thought I'd gotten off pretty well.  I, I thought that was good and some people, since I've told friends and they're appalled, they said and he didn't encou- I said no he didn't encourage me, but he didn't discourage me.  He just said actually, he told me go ahead that's your field.  I don't know anything about this field so don't be upset, don't take it as a, you know, that I don't love you if I don't read it.  That's how I took it.  Went to my mother [Elvira Hord Dove], you know, who was cool with it because she's the one quoting 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare] at me all the time.  But I think also they thought somewhere that I was a girl, and it didn't matter quite as much.  I took whatever leeway, you know, if that's what they wanna think, I mean, I do think that there was a feeling of well it won't matter much anyway at some point, you know.  Maybe she will, and not that they thought I was going to become a housewife and a mother and do nothing else, but that I might have a career and that I'd get married and then I might still could do a career, but I wouldn't be the primary caregi-, that kind of thing.  That's fine, I didn't, you know, I just wanted to be a poet and that's what started it.
Story_ID: 531283
Speaker 1: What did you write in the, in the beginning?
Speaker 2: In the beginning, I mean, in, in college I would, I don't know what I wrote, I wrote, I wrote lots of poems, I wrote lots of stories.  They were not necessarily--let's say that someone reading a few of them would not know if I was black or white or what, but they were about being my age in the world that we lived in.  And I remember feeling very nervous about being accused of not being black enough.  You know, I wasn't telling black stories, because of course the Black Arts Movement was coming through.  [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni came and read at Miami University [Oxford, Ohio].  I thought she was amazing.  You know, it was just incredible.  But I also knew this was not my voice.  I, I couldn't talk like her, I couldn't write like her, it wasn't my experience, it wasn't my, my voice.  And, and worrying that perhaps there wasn't a, a place for my voice, it's what you think at that age.  And, and I, I know that I, I've talked with other black poets around my age and we've talked about this, this really curious thing because even five years made a difference.  If you were five years older, indeed you, you could be accused of being not black enough.  They say, "Where are the black poems?" You know, if you're gonna write about a flower or whatever.  And because of that I think finally I got to the point where I, I wrote a poem in which, in which I take on the Black Arts Movement and it's, it's, it's because I needed to, my own freedom.  It had little to do with whether I thought that, you know, I didn't believe at that poi- I, you know, I'd listen to The Last Poets.  You know, I knew all those songs by, and all those poems by heart, it just wasn't my music, you know, in terms of a poet.  So I had to, had to kill it off, had to kill them off in a way.
Story_ID: 531284
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a sense that the Black Arts Movement po- poets were using poetry more as a tool?  Or--you know, it seems as if it was a liberation tool, it was a--
Speaker 2: It absolutely was a tool.  I mean it wa- but it was also, I mean it was also an aesthetic statement and, and I think that it was absolutely necessary at that time, because first you have to say, "See me; look at me.  I am here."  Do not gloss around me.  Then you can say, "Okay, now see me in my entirety."  But first you gotta get someone to see you.  And what the Black Arts Movement did for me and a whole generation, and generations of writers and for themselves too, is to say, is to insist that we were not invisible.  And that--and also, that also required to tell the mainstream, "You have to hear my music, to hear my voice.  This is what--," and then, and then to lay out over emphasizing, of course, but that's in the nature of any movement that starts out is to say that, that, you know, "We can, we can use language this way.  We can use aunt, ain't.  We can use, you know, B.  We can do all of this stuff and--," but, of course, what happens when you get anything like that is that the media takes only the most the, the, I wanna say the grossest and the discern- least differentiated sense of that and they, they go for the big stereotypical moments.  So if you're black, you're angry, and it's power to the people, and it's (makes sounds).  You know, and there is no room for doubt, you know, or self-reflection or sadness that, that sadness of you know, unless it's sadness with anger, you know, but sa-.  And if you take all those emotions well you only have a shell of a human being.  So that's the first, again it's the front line and then after that come--it, it made it possible for people like me, when I was starting to actually write poems that dealt with roses, you know.  But also being able to hear and understand all the tensions that are behind that poem.  So, it was a tool and it was an incredible tool.  I mean it was, t- Afros, people were in Afro, god, or color.  My mother [Elvira Hord Dove] told me that when she was a child she remembered her mother [Georgianna Jackson Hord] making her a coat, making her dress out of a lining of a coat.  And the lining of the coat was blue with white stripped, and it was all they had, and so she made her this really beautiful dress that she loved.  She took, wore it to school and her teacher read--chose to read 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman] to the class that day.  And read, and in this version of 'Little Black Sambo,' he had a little blue and white stripped thing, and how utterly crushed she was and embarrassed she was.  And she and, and she would often say, and my grandmother would say too, you know, if I like something red, "Don't wear that red.  You don't need a red dress, you know, that's just, you know, nigger red.  You don't want people to say--," and they were trying to protect us from hurt.  But I never wore bright colors.  A whole generation didn't wear bright colors until the Black Arts Movement said, dashiki (laughter) we were out there, you know.  Oh, what, what a joy.  So, yeah.  But I was writing my poems, the poems that I could write, terrified that if I would ever try to publish those poems that I was gonna fall into this, be accused of being white or being an Oreo, all these things.  And thinking that I wasn't strong enough because I was so shy to stand up to that.
Story_ID: 531285
Speaker 1: Did anybody in your circle or your professors [at Miami University, Oxford, Ohio] really like your poetry?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: So you got good feedback, but you still felt closeted?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I got good feedback, but I still felt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you ended up going to Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa], which meant somebody thought it was good, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes, they did.  They were--
Speaker 1: They're sending you--
Speaker 2: No, they rea- no they thought it was good.  But then after all these were the white people who thought it was good.  Maybe I was, and yet I thought I can't be anything other than what I am.  Also at that time, but I went to Iowa and then I went to the library, I was doing my thing that I always do in libraries which is to go through and just start picking out books.  And I was in the fiction section, I picked out a book called 'The Bluest Eye' [Toni Morrison], because it had this blue print and the ti- I didn't know.  And I start, I opened it up and there's that see Spot, see Jill [sic.] and I thought, I gotta get this book.  And I started reading this book and I didn't know anything about Toni Morrison at that point, but I, what, she came from Ohio.  She came from, you know, twenty miles up the road.  And I suddenly thought, it's all right, I can be a Midwestern black.  There are midwes- you know, I can write about this experience, this is who I am.  So it didn't, that, that gave me an incredible permission to start, excuse me, to start writing about more--edgier poems which dealt also with the black experience.  'Cause I would write about being black at times too.  But the, I also think, you know, I thought, well the whites won't like the black poems and the blacks won't like the white poems or the poems that don't have black in them, so what am I gonna do?  And I still remember the poem, the first poem that I wrote when I was at Iowa, which was (air quotes) explicitly black in the sense that it was about slavery.  And I had a--and I applied to it all the rigor that I always do and turned it in and one of the students said, "Wow I feel like you can have an apple a day or you can get castor oil, and I've just been given castor oil."  Luckily, by this time in my life, I was strong enough to say, "Screw you."  That's your problem if you think this is castor oil.  It happened.  You see, that's what I was afraid of, you know, earlier that I would just be frightened away, 'cause everybody wants to be liked, right?  So, yeah.  And at that point, you know, more and more I began to come out.  And I think I, I've resisted labels all my life.  Well, everyone should resist labels, but, but one of the things was I realized that my experience was, in life, in everything, in music and in, in literature and, and in all of my, you know, growing up, my educational experience, it was so not black and white (laughter) you know.  It was so interwoven that I would be blind to myself to pretend otherwise.  You know, I'm not, I couldn't give anyone any easy answers.
Story_ID: 531286
Speaker 1: You earned a Fulbright scholarship [Fulbright Fellowship] after Miami University [Oxford, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which took you to Germany to a school that I'll let you pronounce, the Eberhard Karls [Eberhard Karls University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany]?
Speaker 2: Tubingen.
Speaker 1: University of Tubingen.  So I guess my first question is, why did you choose German?  Which you had chosen already and must have been quite proficient at it at that point, and you gone, you do your Fulbright scholarship in Germany. I assume that you met your husband [Fred Viebahn] in Germany, but earlier you said you met him somewhere else, I don't remember exactly, you know.
Speaker 2: How does this happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain?
Speaker 2: Explain how this happened.  Well, again luck and serendipity come into the mix.  I ended up in Germany and ended up with my German husband because I came from Ferdinand Schumacher High sc- junior, I mean grade school [Schumacher Elementary School, Akron, Ohio] and there's a very high number of German immigrants who came into Akron, Ohio earlier even than the '20s [1920s] and Schumacher [Ferdinand Schumacher] was one of them.  That meant there also were a lot of people who spoke German, and so in the grade school, at the grade school level there were wives who wanted to do something, would come into the schools and just teach the kids languages.  You know, they'd teach them to sing songs, I mean native German speakers.  So when I was in fourth grade, fifth grade, I think we had a French teacher come through once (laughter), and then we also had a German person come through and she taught us how to sing German songs, we're singing all these songs and, and I, you know, so that was one of the languages that was in the playing field (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Percolating.
Speaker 2: --percolating, right.  Also my father [Ray Dove] had, before he went to the war, World War II [WWII], decided he would learn the language of the enemy.  He didn't know whether he was gonna be deployed to Germany or to Italy.  So he taught himself German and Italian.  Yeah, he taught himself German and Italian.  There were books on our shelves, there were Italian books and there were German books.  There was one little German book called 'Das Lied von der Glocke,' the, 'The Song of the Bell' by Schiller [Friedrich Schiller].  It's a, a book about the making of a bell, it's about freedom too and all that, but it's a poem in German, a beautiful little book with that gothic script.  When I was a kid, I'd, I'd gone through all the books on that shelf and I looked at the Italian, and mostly the Italian were more like, you know, there was a, a, a grammar and stuff like that.  But there was this gorgeous little book with illustrations in a language I couldn't read.
Speaker 1: German books have good illustrations. It's like, very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, they have those beautiful etchings and stuff.  And so I, that stuck in my head.  When I was asked what language I wanted to learn to go to, you know, for college prep courses.  And the choices were Spanish, French or German in our, for some odd reason, those were the three.  But we were told Spanish wasn't college-y enough, and that's another, a whole 'nother ball of wax.  But I took German because I'd sung German songs, and I wanted to be able to read that book.  That made German my language that when I got to college it became my--one of my minors.  It became my minor by default.  I had the core curriculum, I had to have some language, I had to have a year of language, regardless of what level I entered in on.  So I had to do an advanced language.  We were reading stories, we were reading novels.  It was incredible, 'cause I love literature, so what I was reading it in German so what.  And I had a great German teacher at one point who said to me, "Why don't you apply for a Fulbright?"  And I said, "Well, 'cause I don't wanna be a German professor."  And he said, "Well you want to see Europe, don't you?"  I said, "Yeah."  He says, "Well who cares what?  Just make up something," and this is a good guy, he says, "Just make up a project.  Think of what you would like to do, what would get you to Europe."  And I, and he wrote me a postcard over the summer saying, "Have you written your proposal yet?"  So I knew I'd better come back with my proposal and I did.  I came back with: I wanted to learn to translate German poetry.  That made sense, and I got a Fulbright.  And 'cause I wanted to see Europe, not because I was gonna be this raging German person.  But of course it changed my life and it kept changing my life.
Story_ID: 531287
Speaker 1: I met my husband after I came back from Germany.  I was, and--yeah, I was at Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa] and yeah I was at Iowa and I took a translation seminar where we translated things.  My husband is a, is a novelist, and he had been invited as part of a program called the International Writing Program.  They invite about twenty-five writers from all over the world to come and live in Iowa City, Iowa for a semester, and each of them gives a lecture on their country and they form a class about international--they wanted to raise awareness about international comparative literatures.  And I offered to translate the lecture of the German writer.  I knew they were gonna bring one in, I didn't know who it was gonna be, and it was Fred [Fred Viebahn].  And so I met him the very first day he came into the country and I guess we just never stopped after that.  I mean, we just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started talking.
Speaker 1: --we started talking.  And we started, you know, translating his lecture.  He spoke English very well actually, but couldn't translate to some work.  And yeah, it just started happening.  He called me, I remember, after the first week.  He discovered that I work late at night, and I'm very nocturnal and I would work until four.  And he would say, "Oh I work 'til five."  And I thought, "So?"  (Laughter) You know, so he said, "I'll call you up to see if you're awake at four."  And so he called at four and we would talk for an hour and then, on the phone, and then he'd go to bed in his bed over there and I'd go to bed in my bed on the other side of town.  And that went on for, you know, a little while until we finally decided to take the telephone (laughter) out of the way, you know.  But, that's how life can do things to you.  That's how I ended with German such a big part of my life.  (Pause) It's wild (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 531288
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Germany when you're there doing the Fulbright [Fulbright Fellowship], seeing Europe?
Speaker 2: It's one of the best things that ever happened to me in terms of my shyness.  Because I got to Germany, they put me in a two-month program they did with all of the Fulbright people where they--you had a kind of crash course in langu- speaking, speaking the language 'cause I could read it; I couldn't speak it.  And, oh gosh was I afraid because this meant you had to talk, and I remember trying to get out of the class they put me into 'cause they tested me and they put me into the highest class.  I'm like, "I, I can't talk, I don't know how to say anything in German.  I can only think it."  And I went up to the teacher and tried to explain that I was in the wrong class (laughter) and they should put me down a level.  And he said, and he said, "You sound fine to me," and he kept me.  'Cause he understood that no one, none, none of these Americans knew how to speak German.  What that did--once I learned how to express myself in German, everybody else in this class and they were from Finland and you know, Soviet Union [Russia], I mean they were from everywhere, the students.  We had no common language but German.  Everybody was stumbling around, making mistakes, accents were all over the place.  So it bec- I began to lose my self-consciousness.  And once, I mean I had to give in my final project I had to give a fifteen-minute talk on a subject in German, and I came out of that, I went on and went to school in Tubingen [Eberhard Karls University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany] and did all these courses in German.  Coming back to the states it just seemed like the easiest thing in the world to speak English now, and, and so though I was still shy, I knew I, I can do it, I mean how hard could it be if I'd done the German part?  But Germany was really fascinating because I, I came to Germany at a time when there were very few black women there, and those who were there were African.  They did not see black American women.  They didn't know what a black American woman was.  The curiosity was not tinged most of the time with racism; it was the curiosity of the exotic, a very different gaze that you get then what you get here if you enter in a room where there are no black people.  You know, it's a different thing.  So I was always standing out and I always felt when I walked out on the street people were just gonna (gesture).
Speaker 1: Did they touch you?
Speaker 2: They didn't touch me.  They didn't touch me.  That they learned that I think from the African students who (laughter) probably said, "Don't touch me."  They didn't touch me, but they would look.  And kids would say, you know, "Look, look," you know, "a Negro, a Neger."  Occasionally, you'd get, you know, bizarre.  On occasion I would lose my temper, you know, I mean.  It, it gets tiring.  You're walking around and there's a little group of kids walking beside you going, "Oh look, look, look, oh she's brown.  She--," I mean you get tired (laughter), you get tired and when we, I still am ashamed in fact one day I actually turned to this little group of kids and went, "Ahh I'm a witch too," and they ran.  But I could walk in peace.  You know, I thought oh well.  I probably traumatized those little kids.  Anyway, it was--but it was a very interesting experience because the community that I moved around in at the university was mostly the international community because all of us were struggling with our language.  And so I, I got a chance to meet other students from all over, mostly Europe, mostly Europe and that broadened me to, and we were all outsiders, but a different kind of outsider, a different kind of other than being in the states.  A very different kind of other, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 531289
Speaker 1: When you were there [Eberhard Karls University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany], had you already decided you were going to Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's sort of all ready to go and then you--
Speaker 2: That was already (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you do the Fulbright [Fulbright Fellowhsip] and you take that time and you come back?
Speaker 2: That's right, because I had been, I had been accepted into Iowa and then I got the Fulbright so I deferred for a year and I could do all that kind of stuff, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what about Iowa?  Are there any black people in Iowa?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I keep going to these very white places, right.  Are there any black people in Iowa?  Wet me think, was, well I was the only black student in creative wri- in the M.F.A. program.  And everybody was very, very friendly.  And I had a couple of really good friends.  Iowa is a whole other kettle of fish, just so competitive and weird and all these people who wanted to be poets and, and had competed to get into this really hard to get into program are set down into the cornfields.  And you, something's bound to go awry.  I had (laughter)--they all treated me really nicely and, and I found out later, I'm so glad I can be so blissfully ignorant of some of these kind of currents, and I think that comes from my growing up in the way I did in, in that accelerated class.  But I had had a couple of poems published in the only anthology of contemporary poetry that had come out in ten years.  And I was a, the youngest entry, and that was another one of those absolute, I mean serendipitous things.  Before I graduated from college, the editor of that magazine happened to come for a, the, a mini, you know, like colloquium and saw some of my poems and asked if he could take them and I said, "Fine."  I didn't even know, I didn't even know to be excited, that's so sad (laughter) you know.
Story_ID: 531290
Speaker 1: So there I was at Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa] with already a publication in a pretty major publication, because I was the youngest entry in this anthology of contemporary American poetry.  And I think that that's one of the reasons why everyone treated me--they were so friendly to me all of my classmates, who were not above backbiting and sniping all over the place.  But I was--I thought at that time the, the reason why they did this was because I was like their little mascot.  I was their, their black member and you just don't wanna diss the black member.  You know, you kind of slide outside all of the judgments because they don't wanna hurt your feel- that, yeah so.  But I--at that point in my life I thought I don't care why they treat me this way, I'll take it for whatever it is and just write my work.  And, and you know, there were some people that I really liked there and we had a good time, but as I said I was the only black person.  In my second year there, there was one Hispanic and one Native American, both who are poets, wonderful poets now Sandra Cisneros and Joy Harjo.  And we were completely, you know, we felt isolated, you know, it, it was a very strange atmosphere.  Iowa was--the best thing that happened in Iowa was that I met Fred [Fred Viebahn], and I had a couple of good teachers, but it was a very rough place.  I, I have often felt that I--all of my training for what one of my professors called po biz, you know, the poetry business instead of show business, po biz.  All of my training, my steeling for any kind of jealousies and internecine warfare happened at Iowa.  I got my armor on good from there, so.
Speaker 2: You were there until 1977?
Speaker 1: I was there until 1977.
Story_ID: 531291
Speaker 1: And I know that you then--you eventually go to Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but I was under the impression that you got there in 1981.  Is that true and if--if it's not, what did you do and if it is, what did you do in between--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --(laughter) nineteen seventy-one [1971] and 1981?
Speaker 2: I'm glad you reminded me because it's true, I did not go straight to Arizona State University out of college.  What happened was, there Fred [Fred Viebahn] and I were there--we're trying to figure out what to do.
Speaker 1: Oh, and you marry in 1979?
Speaker 2: I married in 1979, so we got two years, you know, trying to figure out what to do.
Speaker 1: Are you honeymooning (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened--well we didn't, you know, we had just met in 19--in 1976 in September.  So we've had like, you know, we didn't know each other that long.  We're still trying to figure it out.  I got a job offer, I mean, in fact it's one of the only job offers tenure track for creative writers in Tallahassee [Florida] at the university [Florida State University].  And I turned it down.  Everyone said I was out of my mind, but I hated Tallahassee, I'm sor- I just--I wasn't a southerner and Tallahassee was like the worst--sorry, Tallahassee is so worse of the South to me.  And I said I can't be happy here.  And so I turned down this job offer, which was a little bit of independence I think from, you know, always feeling you have to make money and do things.  But then Fred and I said--we were--decided that we were going to go to Germany and he lived as a freelance writer, which is possible in Germany doing a lot of stuff for radio and, and things like that.  And so we were gonna do that when the--when an offer came up for him to teach at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] as a sabbatical replacement.  It was one of those curious things.  We went to visit my parents [Elvira Hord Dove and Ray Dove], we--they live an hour away from Oberlin.  Fred called up a German friend he knew who was at Oberlin for a visiting writer's position just to say, "Can we come up and say hi?"  And he said, "Yeah come on up the--it's my farewell party," and then they decided to hi- they liked him and decided he'd be a great sabbatical replacement.  It happened within three days.  Suddenly we weren't going to Europe anymore, we're going to Oberlin.  And so actually we spent two years in Oberlin [Ohio].  Fred was a sabbatical replacement for two years, and that's when I wrote, you know, and finished most of my first book of, of poems, and--'The Yellow House on the Corner' [Rita Dove].  And that yellow house on the corner is a house that was in Oberlin actually.  And people from Oberlin said, "I know that house, I always wondered about that house."  No (laughter), it's just one line in a poem ["The Yellow House on the Corner," Rita Dove].  But you know, that's--but it was wonderful because it gave me this chance to take all of the, the hurt and the hothouse atmosphere of Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa] and work it out of my system.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: At Iowa, there--people used to joke that there was an Iowa poem.  Meaning that there was a certain tone, a certain kind of subject matter, a certain way of looking at the world that, that was an Iowa poem.  It was a kind of poem that got into The New Yorker.  It was a kind of poem but it was a--a polite erudite but sensitive poem, and it's very hard when you're in that kind of atmosphere and you're--Iowa City [Iowa] is in the middle of nowhere.  All of these incredibly gifted and anxious poets--it's very hard to know if you're writing that po- if you're writing--it's hard to hear your own voice because there's this overwhelming sense and also you're learning so much just in terms of literature and then writers come in and give readings, but they're all reading Iowa poems too, so it's just one sound.  It's a--it's a mainstream language that I was getting, shhh.  So like German, I had to learn it.  So you immerse yourself and you figure it out.  Then I had to figure out okay, what of this was good for me in terms of my own voice, my own stories and what of it is a bunch of junk?  Those two years in Oberlin, back in the Midwest, which is my, you know, baseline.  But ultimately really on my own because I didn't have class, suddenly I was a faculty wife kind of.  It was a time to really try things out, listen to, you know, myself, see what, you know, could happen.  So actually I wrote lots of short stories the first year we were there, really getting away from poetry, and then the poetry started to come back in and then it felt like mine.
Story_ID: 531292
Speaker 1: Is 'The Yellow House on the Corner' [Rita Dove] black poetry?
Speaker 2: It's poetry.  It's poetry written by a black person, a black female, and it's every bit black poetry as it is anybody--it's human poetry.  It's--what's wonderful about what happened in that book for me was that I was not ashamed to write a poem where there was nothing at all to indicate whether I was black or female.  And there were poems where you--it is immediately obvious and there are poems where it just kind of seeps in, and--
Speaker 1: Anything you would choose to read from there?
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to think what would be a good one to read from there (makes sound).  Okay (laughter) okay, I'm just thinking, how can I get one that's both of them?  The whole middle section of poems about slavery and--and yet.  This poem is from a sequence of poems, it's called 'A Suite for Augustus,' a fictional character, a kind of love interest of the speaker who goes to Washington [D.C.] and becomes a kind of a politician and things like that.  Now you don't get any indication that Augustus is black or white, you know, ex- unless one wants to look at the poet and say, "Oh, maybe he's black."  But here's a poem called "Augustus Observes the Sunset" [Rita Dove] where everything is patriotic.  "Augustus Observes the Sunset": "July, the conspiracy of colors ketchup, marshmallows, the tube of ice, bacon strips floating in pale soup.  The sun like a dragon spreading its tail burns the blue air to ribbons.  Eastward the corn swelling in its sockets, a wall of silence growing.  What are you doing in your own backyard holding your coat in your arms?  There's so much left to do, you pack above spare ribs and snow-puffed potatoes, the sky shakes like a flag."  Now there's Augustus at the--one of those barbeques, you know, those--the 4th of July barbeque and everything in the poem in is a, is a parody of, of, of red, white and blue and flags.  I mean you've got the ketchup which is red, and the marshmallows are white, and the tube of ice which is kind of bluish white and bacon strips are stripped, and you know, so everything is doing this flag stuff.  You could say this is just a poem about someone trying to decide this po- if he's going to go back and be a politician or not.  And yet there are certain things like the conspiracy of colors or that wall of silence which is the corn gro- which suggests there is some kind of adversity, that there's something that you have to--it's not that easy, it's just not flag waving and oh let's go.  And that doesn't necessarily mean that you have to be black, but just that you don't have to be sailing along on the, you know, the, the mainstream.  And, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well you could also have been at Iowa's creative writing program [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is true.
Speaker 1: Once you wrote this book, did you feel that it moved you along in a way that you've indicated you wanted to be moved which was to sort of purge some of that Iowanism?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  I felt like I had--it's like an apprentice.  I felt that I had done my, you know, my part of the mural, you know (laughter), and I done my little stuff I did, you know, and now I was ready to go off and start my own studio so to speak.  And then came the book 'Museum' [Rita Dove] which to a large part is really jumpstarted by my European experience, where suddenly there was not only the influences of, of all the influences up to that point in my life, but there were--there were writers and, and artists from all over the world were impinging upon my reality and opening it up.   And yet that--always that sense of I think what there what really starts to emerge is this sense of the individual against history or the individual embedded in history and how history is there all around you, but in your personal life it only touches in brief moments, and that happens to all of us.  But, I would say to a minority you have a heightened awareness of it happening, you're aware of it happening more often than someone who doesn't have those kind of otherness issues.
Story_ID: 531293
Speaker 1: And this is a more general question which I probably could ask at any point, but you know, we brought you through your education.  Who are the poets that you admire?
Speaker 2: It's--this is a question that I actually avoid a lot because I--it keeps changing--
Speaker 1: That's okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and I'm always afraid I'm gonna leave somebody out.  Let me just say chronologically I would say that it started with Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], went through Emily Dickinson and Langston Hughes, Robert Frost then because these stories were so amazing.  Then it--and there's many fiction writers as poets who influence me, because certainly Toni Morrison influenced me and--and Dostoyevsky [Fyodor Dostoyevsky] really influenced me at a certain point in my life.  And then when I began writing and revising and studying and going to Iowa [Iowa Writers' Workshop, Iowa City, Iowa] and stuff like that, Garcia Lorca [Federico Garcia Lorca], Derek Walcott, Gwendolyn Brooks, Robert Hayden and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) June Jordan?
Speaker 2: June Jordan did not influence me aesthetically, you know, but just in terms of bravery.  She--you, you heard the quality of life.  There are two women poets who really buoyed me I think and that--three--and that were--they were June Jordan, Adrienne Rich and Audre Lorde.  And it was as much their writing as it--actually more their life, but--but their writing is an integral part of their lives, you know.  But just how they would not let living get in the way of their poetry, I mean they, they incorporated into their poetry, they pulled it through, the insisted that, that a poem was about real life and that it can matter, you know, which is something that most Iowan poets wouldn't do.
Speaker 1: Spell that out, I'm saying--
Speaker 2: They insisted that life would--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, not that part--I, I--but the part where in Iow- the Iowan poem--poet is not allowed to do that?
Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I don't even know if it's they're not allowed unless they're trying to get out of it, but it wouldn't even occurred to them to (laughter)--your eyes get big, yes--wouldn't even occur to them to that--that--that that was something that one needed to talk about whether, you know, one was alive.  That sounds odd, but, but you know, I--I get so tired of reading a certain kind of poem which sounds very, sounds very good but has no ounce of life in it or no sense of a joy of life.  It's as if to, to stumble into life in a poem, to awaken that kind of life would be to admit that, that you weren't in control of the poem.  The Iowa poem takes you out of life.  It takes you out of the moment, it's a moment for you to look down on what God has wrought or whatever the world has wrought, you know, and say, "Isn't it lovely?"  And it's not gonna be anything.  "Isn't this great?"  You see I wanna be in it, I don't wanna be above it.  It's strange.
Story_ID: 531294
Speaker 1: Where are we?
Speaker 2: You've written your second book, 'Museum' [Rita Dove].  And you are presumably at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], although physically I'm not sure exactly where you are.
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me see where I'm at.  The second book, 1980--1983 it came out.  What happened was that Fred [Fred Viebahn] and I after the two years at Oberlin, '77 [1977] to '79 [1979], we went to Germany.  At that point, I decided that I wanted to go and--and live freelance for a while and really see what it was like to be a writer.  Fred wanted to get back to Germany.  And so we went and lived actually in Berlin [Germany] for a while, it was wonderful, in a little one-room place with a big tile stove in this corner and we earned our living by--well I had gotten a National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] grant which helped, and he had some savings which helped, and then we would write things for the radio stations--radio plays.  Fred had a very secure, you know, system there--network, and that's what we did.  It was amazing, and, and we would--and I learned that things were not that far away that you could get to different places in the world with little money if you needed to.  That, that every summer we would go--even when we were at--in Oberlin, every summer we went to a different place.  Fred had gotten a grant to go to Jerusalem one summer, so we went there.  Ended up staying five months, it was at the end of his time at O- at Oberlin.  And because we could, we were young, I mean we were there for three months and then people that we had met, old German Jews, you know, who had immigrated to Israel were going on a, on a trip and needed someone to house sit and we had nothing, we had nothing on our calendar, we had no, no one who wanted us, so we said, "Okay we'll house sit."  So we stayed for an extra two months, it was incredible while, while we talked to people and learned and made friends, and, and you know, yeah.  So I was expanding my horizons exponentially because it--and I'm talking about those American blinders when we think we're the only country in the world and where you don't even know that things are happening and that there're incredible earth-shaking events happening all over the world and how interconnected they are.  And living, for instance, in Jerusalem, in the Middle East to see just how it's all interwoven so tightly.  You know, someone clips their little fingernail here and the thumb flies off over there, it--that--that was--that was an amazing experience.  So this is what we were doing.  I, I, I, I lived freely for a while and wrote the second book, and started 'Thomas and Beulah' [Rita Dove] there too.  I was writing up a storm.  There was--in publishing you know, various places and then I'm try--I'm mushing things.  Fred's good at keeping time apart; I mush time together.  But to stay on track, finally I--I told Fred that I would--I wanted to come back to the states and because I was getting tired of the rain.  It had rained, and rained and rained, it was one of the rainiest, you know, years in Germany.  And all summer I think they had thirty minutes of rain one summer and I said that's it, I can't handle this anymore, it's just gray every day.
Speaker 2: Thirty minutes of sun?
Speaker 1: Sun.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: Thirty minutes of sun.
Speaker 1: For the entire summer.  That was--it was extreme, but okay.  I was getting a little depressed and Fred--and I was getting tired of hearing German because I tended--I, I couldn't remember what English sounded like anymore.  I was afraid of losing my voice.  Fred said, "Well, you have to get the job because, you know, I can't."  So I applied for jobs and we went to Arizona [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].
Story_ID: 531295
Speaker 1: Every summer we'd go back to Germany, but we went to Arizona [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and I started there in '81 [1981] I guess it was.  Yes, in '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: What city are you in?
Speaker 1: Tempe, Arizona which is near Phoenix [Arizona].
Speaker 2: How did you feel about Phoenix?
Speaker 1: You know, what was wonderful about Tempe slash Phoenix at that time was that practically everybody was an immigrant.  They were all from other parts of the country, except of course for the Yaqui and the Hopi and the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People that actually lived there?
Speaker 1: --a total.  Yes, a total different sense of discrimination going on here.  I'd never been in the--in the Southwest.  It was a trip.  I did feel like I was in a very interesting kind of Disneyland, because it's so different from the Midwest and was ju- just in everything, even the sense of the people were incredibly friendly in that, "Howdy, how you doing?" thing, but you know, they didn't know anything about racial relations.  Again, they were very few blacks and we tended to be a kind of novelty.  I tended--my mother [Elvira Hord Dove] said once to me, when I told her that I--when I was going to go on to college [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio], she said to me, "You realize, I just want you to realize that the more education you get, the harder it's going to be to find someone to marry."  This is her sen- this her world, you know, but she was saying you will educate yourself into increasing difficulty.  She was thinking of course of finding a black guy to marry.  I wasn't thinking either way, anyway, I just, you know, wanted to get more education.  But one of the things that does happen is that you start--in academia is that often you will be the only black or one of the few blacks in your field.  The higher you get, the more rarified the atmosphere, because there's only room for a certain number at the top of any persuasion.  And that basically is what, what happened in Arizona.  There are very few blacks, but you know, we meet across disciplines.  You know, you'd have that.
Speaker 2: And was the atmosphere of the city and the state extremely conservative or not necessarily noticeably (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No it wasn't noticeably conservative, not at the academics slash intellectual level.  Otherwise, that's--it's like Texas, it's another thing altogether, altogether.  I would say that people in everyday conversation when you meet them in the street actually seemed more liberal then the eastern seaboard where everybody is so tight and where they're very class conscious, class in a certain kind of way.  But there isn't--class was a very, very fluid thing in the Southwest.  And though politically they are incredibly conservative and it was an embarrassment to be from this state you know, to have to vote in this state.  In terms of social--socially, they weren't very strange, unless you happen to be Indian [Native American].  So and you know, I had lots--I had friends, I mean who, who--on the Pima Indian reservation [Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, Arizona] just forty miles down the road.  It was a reservation.  It was a ghetto, and it was hopeless.  You know, so, yeah, this is our country.  But Arizona was a, was a great place to be able to write, because we were traveling so much anyway.  I had started to publish more and more and get invited places to read, so I could always travel.  And we would go to Europe or someplace else in the summer, and I was not in Arizona; I was not in any one place.  I often felt like my home was my--not just my body but my consciousness, that's where my home was.  And with Fred [Fred Viebahn] too and with our daughter [Aviva Dove-Viebahn] eventually.  But that--though I had friends and I did have lots of friends and had a great life in Arizona, I also had friends in Berlin [Germany] and I had friends here, and that entire network was my home.
Story_ID: 531296
Speaker 1: You finished 'Thomas and Beulah' [Rita Dove], Beulah, while you were at Arizona [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did it feel to get that recognition of the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Poetry]?
Speaker 2: It was astonishing, because I was writing the--these poems or finishing them in this sun-drenched desert and talking to my mother [Elvira Hord Dove] every week, you know, asking her questions about her childhood.  She knew I was writing this book about her parents [Georgianna Jackson Hord and Thomas Hord], but she didn't ask me to read any of it.  She trusted me; it was cool.  And when I published it, I was mainly concerned that people would think that this was not poetry, because it told a story in verse and all that stuff, but I felt very happy about the book and I had no idea that it was up for a Pulitzer.  I didn't know I was nominated, and so when the call came and it came from my chairman of my department, English department, who called me.  It was Fred's [Fred Viebahn] fortieth birthday, I didn't have to teach that day and I said, "I'm, I'm not gonna be in, don't even touch me."  So he called me and I--my, my chair, Nick [Nicholas A. Salerno], and, and said, "Rita [HistoryMaker Rita Dove], I know you're there," and I'm angry because he's bothering me at home, it's my husband's birthday.  And he said, "Pick up the phone," and I did, and he said, "You have the Pulitzer."  This was really like a--it just came out of nowhere.  It's a great way to have something come at you actually.  And it was astonishing, it was astonishing.  And the thing that kind of got me through it, because here you have someone who is--learned to talk and to teach and all that kind of stuff, but certainly not learned to be in--under lights, you know.  And still having to fight shyness all the time, just get up there and do it.  Remembering my father [Ray Dove] practicing his talks, you know, when he had to give a speech somewhere, you know, with some scientists and he had no cards and he would practice at home very quietly.  And he looked and he then, he would just go and do it.  I know what--and I remember 150 percent, you got it, go out there, do it.  You learn, keep learning.  So I learned.  I learned not to look into the lights.  They blind you (laughter) no.  It was incredible though, it was really--it was really--and it felt--.  I called my parents.  It was the only time in my life I actually heard my father's voice crack.  I mean he went, "What?"  You know kind of went, and he was, you know, their--they were just so astonished and so proud and that kind of made it all, that was--that was enough.
Speaker 1: This poetry really can do something?
Speaker 2: It can actually, hey.  I guess I better start reading it (laughter), no.  So--so that was wonderful and then actually Akron [Ohio] gave a Rita Dove's day (laughter), I know, in October.
Speaker 1: Oh your hometown?
Speaker 2: My hometown decided to have a Rita Dove's day because Akron figures in the book as much as my, my grandparents.  And that was a trip man.  I mean they, they really did a great job.  They, you know, and they had a talk here and a signing there, and a celebration at night and, and it was, it was wild.  Yeah, it was really good.  It was a great feeling, I said it can't get much better than this, you know.  And our daughter, Aviva [Aviva Dove-Viebahn], who was at that time four, almost four, she was running through it all, you know, just kind of scampering around, it was great.
Story_ID: 531297
Speaker 1: So you win the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Poetry].  How do you end up going to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] such a short time after?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A loaded question.  I hadn't intended to move right after the Pulitzer, though I don't think I ever dreamed of staying in Arizona for the rest of my life.  I would wake up in the morning and say, "Oh my gosh, blue sky again."  I mean, there's just not enough variety and, for me, and I missed fall.  I missed all these changes of the seasons.  But what happened basically a combination of jealousies among other poets in the program at Arizona [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] made life a little uncomfortable I mean, you know, a little uncomfortable, a lot uncomfortable.  And then the university had some new Regents professorships they called them, chair professorships, two new ones and they didn't give me one even though I was their biggest asset since the Rose Bowl [Rose Bowl Game], as the president had said, since winning the Rose Bowl.  And so I said, "Well okay that tells me where you're at and I don't have, I had had enough of that kind of stuff," and then I went to UVA to visit and thought, this is a gorgeous place.  And the intellectual spark was so great, you know, just to be in that, so (shrugs).
Speaker 1: And was UVA recruiting you?
Speaker 2: They were recruiting me, they went after me.
Speaker 1: As the intelligent school might do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they really did.  I mean they we, went so far that--'cause I was resisting and they had sent an emissary to Rita Dove day, this day that, that my town [Akron, Ohio] had given in my honor.  They sent this emissary, a man who, Charles Rowell [Charles Henry Rowell], who ran a magazine Callaloo, it was a magazine for African diaspora.  And I had corresponded with him and in fact had published a book with short stories under the imprint of Callaloo, had never met him and he said, "I want, I wanna come up and meet you," and I'm thinking, I can't deal with this.  I have Rita Dove day don't, you know, mess with--.  He came up anyway and he just came up 'cause he had been told, "Go and get her."  I didn't know that, and, and in fact he printed out, he kept asking for my resume and I didn't have one with me.  And in the end, Fred [Fred Viebahn] figured out how to print it out on my father's [Ray Dove] printer so that he could take it back.  We didn't know why, that's how naive we were.
Speaker 1: So Charles Rowell was at UVA also?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: So perhaps you might talk a little bit about Callaloo now just because you mentioned it?
Speaker 2: Just because I mentioned--well you know, Callaloo was, it's, Charles called me up out of the blue one day in Arizona and said that he'd love to do an interview with me.  He was with Callaloo and I had seen Callaloo and I knew all of that.  And, and, and he's really such a pioneer and he, and a go-getter in terms of finding new voices and an utter charmer.  And so when we were talking, we did, we did an interview.  Eventually, I did a collection of short fiction under that imprint and we became friends, long distance, so we didn't know each other really, we had never met.  And that was one of the inducements to go to University of Virginia.  It was certainly the inducement for me to go to look the place over because he said, "Come out and do--," you know.  And I said, "I'm not interested in moving right now.  Come back in a year if you want."  And he said, "Oh, just come and just take, have a, I'm gonna have a party anyway, you know, come."  And he gave good parties, you know, where, where all sorts of blacks and white faculty members were dancing, I mean these were dance parties.  So I, I decided to go, even though I didn't feel like going right then 'cause life was crazy, there was too much, you know, media and blitz and stuff.  But I decided to go because he was a friend and because his magazine was great.  And I said, "I at least owe him that," and I, and I went to visit thinking I'm not gonna go here and ended up loving the place.  So they did a good job.
Story_ID: 531298
Speaker 1: Now, during this period, what are you writing?  You know, what about 'Grace Notes' [Rita Dove] for instance, which I'd love you to read "Canary" [Rita Dove] from?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But if you might just talk a little bit about just, you know, you're still writing through this--
Speaker 2: Right.  Oh yes, I'm writing through all of this.
Speaker 1: The blitzkrieg.
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), you know, the thing is that with every book that I've written there's always another half, at least half a book, I'm at least half a book into something else by the time the book comes out.  And so that's helpful (laughter), you know, that's really helpful to know.  But, but by the time 'Thomas and Beulah' [Rita Dove] came out I was already writing the poems that would make up 'Grace Notes.'  Our daughter [Aviva Dove-Viebahn] was born in 1983, and all of that, that--the, the feeling of being a mother, a new mother and stuff, those poems were starting to come out and would form part of 'Grace Notes.'  And yeah, so I was writing 'Grace Notes' which came out in, when was, in 1990 [sic. 1989] I think, right.  Yeah, 1983, '87 [1987], yeah I think it's '90 [1990].  And after 'Thomas and Beulah' when I finished that because it was such a cohesive thing, such a cohesive narrative, albeit two sides of a narrative, you know, the [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Hord] and then the, well my grandfather and my grandmother's [Georgianna Jackson Hord] story, but it did tell the story of their lives.  I thought I wanted to, to stretch myself as a writer and do something that didn't have that narrative thread.  So 'Grace Notes' is mostly a collection of lyrics.  There are individual brief moments of song.  And one of them, I wanted to make these poems kind of sing on their own, just be there in the air.  So this is a kind of ars poetica to me, this poem I'm gonna read to you now, which is "Canary."  It's an ars poetica because it, it both, it sings in itself.  It's about a singer and it's also about, it's about the artist and it's about the black artist, and it's also about singing under pressure, it's all those kind of things.  It's dedicated to Michael S. Harper, a poet, because he's such a jazz enthusiast and he can talk about jazz like nobody's business.  But he is also the one who told me that, reminded me that the female vocalist is called a canary, but the canary is also the bird that the miners take down in the cages, to the caves to test for gas leaks, and if the bird dies, they know it's not safe.  So it's also, this poem is also about those front runners, those front line people who get destroyed so that the rest of us know where the unsafe territory is.  And it's about Billie Holliday.  "Canary": "Billie Holliday's burned voice / had as many shadows as lights, / a mournful candelabra against a sleek piano, / the gardenia her signature under that ruined face. / (Now you're cooking, drummer to bass, / magic spoon, magic needle. / Take all day if you have to / with your mirror and your bracelet of song.) / Fact is the invention of women under siege / has been to sharpen love in the service of myth. / If you can't be free, be a mystery."  It's both that beautiful and brave facade that she gave us, Billie Holliday, that Lady Day, that grace concealing a life of pain and hunger and missteps, you know, and discrimination and the whole thing.  But she could get out there and sing, and bend those notes and bend your heart.  And then the poem, it's about her, but it's also about my father [Ray Dove] putting his brave face on things, and also the price of mystery, if you can't be free, you know, if you're a mys- then be a mystery then turn it a little bit.  But mystery can also be a kind of a prison of, of--something you can't break out of.  It's about masks too, yeah.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 531299
Speaker 1: Now we are at 'Grace Notes' [Rita Dove] and I go to Virginia and discover that I love the place, and I love the sensibility.  What it is, is that Virginia is not quite the South, and it's not quite Washington, D.C., but it's a place where a lot of American myths collide (laughter) or intersect.  [President] Thomas Jefferson made the school [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia].  If ever there's a character, a conflicted soul, that's Thomas Jefferson.  And you have, so you have that idea, you know, Washington, D.C. is just a hop skip up Constitution Roadway [sic. Constitution Route], it's called actually the back road, and the old road.  And at the same time Richmond [Virginia] is just down the pike, capital of the Confederacy.  It's an incredible place, it's full of all of that, you just feel it in the air.  And people would say, "Why would you want to go to Virginia when you had all that sunshine?"  I'm like, "Well, it's boring (laughter) and I'd rather go someplace where I can feel all of these--." I say this is where all these myths, you know, collide or intersect, but I felt often in my life that all these things are intersecting, you know, and that's how I'm made.  So, it, it's a good fit.  Though I can get mad at them sometimes (laughter).
Speaker 2: So once you publish 'Grace Notes' are you already into 'The Darker Face of the Earth' [Rita Dove]?  Are you, you--
Speaker 1: Oh my gosh, yes.
Speaker 2: And how are you moved to write a novel ['Through the Ivory Gate,' Rita Dove] this time?
Speaker 1: You know, the lead time is so different.  The no, oh I have to back up a little bit.  Sometimes an idea takes a long time before it even makes it into that room where it might become something else.  I can tell you that the play began back in Jerusalem in 1979.  As I looked out over that valley, Kidron Valley [Israel] over to the Old City and suddenly thought that's wild, that's so old and yet we're standing here.  I began thinking about Greek myths, I don't know why but I begin to, well classical myths in something that old, and the idea of the, the play began.  And I did write a first draft of it in Jerusalem, put it away.  Sent it off to a few places, got a couple of really nice notes but nothing, and then thought I don't, no, I can't deal with a play right now I'm writing poems and besides nobody wants a play with twenty characters in it and I put it away.  Periodically, my husband [Fred Viebahn] would drag it out and say, "What are you gonna do with this play?"  He was always nagging me, nagging me.  So it was, and it went through many rewrites over the years.  The novel, I started back in Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] same time about, because I had, I had the character I wanted to let her talk.  I wanted to let her move.  But it took a long time before it became where it is.  And it was wonderful to write this novel because it was wonderful to sit down every day and write a certain number of pages.  That was--it's different than poetry where you're mostly pacing the room and nothing gets on the page for a long time, you know, because it's not the right word, it's not the right line, but with a novel you write lines and lines and lines and then you, you know, play with them.
Speaker 2: And is there a difference in the way, in the process by which you write prose and by which you write other types of writing?
Speaker 1: It was a different work process for me, yeah.
Speaker 2: And do you do one by hand and--
Speaker 1: Actually with the prose, I do it, that was one where I went right away to the, at that time, typewriter (laughter), you know, a Selectric [IBM Selectric] or whatever.  I went and, and now I with, with all prose I would go directly to the computer.  With poetry I always start by hand and I write by hand until I can't make sense of it anymore and then I put it into the computer.
Speaker 2: Do you read your work out loud?
Speaker 1: I read it in my head out loud.  Sometimes I read it out loud.  Sometimes I, but usually just a line or two, not the whole thing until the very end.  But I hear it, it's definitely, I hear it all the time.
Speaker 2: Is it your voice that speaks it?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It's not my voice, it's that voice, yeah.
Speaker 2: But one that you're familiar with and used to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, it's--
Speaker 2: It's not like some new person or--
Speaker 1: No, no, it's not like,
Speaker 2: --some--
Speaker 1: Buddy (laughter).  "I'm gonna read this poem to Rita [HistoryMaker Rita Dove]," no.  No it's not that.  Unh-uh, no to, to, I hear it though, yeah.  It's stra- but you know, in every, in, in writing the play a totally different sensibility too and that was both by hand and by the computer.
Story_ID: 531300
Speaker 1: Now just to pull a string, you said at home that there was always music.  What are you listening to once you leave home and do you still listen to music on a continuum?
Speaker 2: I listen to music all the time.  All the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you listen to?
Speaker 2: Depends (laughter), it really does.  Lately, I've been listening to a CD with Joshua Bell, the violinist, playing with a group of, of guys who are kind of West Virginia mountain music, you know.  It's amazing thing which is very jazzy and it's different for him too.  But I also, I think I wrote the entire play ['The Darker Face of the Earth,' Rita Dove] on Keith Jarrett; for some reason I was playing Keith Jarrett all the time.  Then there's the Marion Williams' stages.  It, it's, it really goes all over the board.  Usually things don't have a lot of words.
Speaker 1: Do you match music to your plays?  One thing that we didn't talk about was your matching of food to your childhood reading?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: So is the music similar to that in that you or--?  Explain.
Speaker 2: It's not, it's not a conscious decision, oh I'm gonna write, I need an angry piece of music or whatever.  But I do instinctively, I mean I'll stand in front, you know, the iPod and try to scroll through and try to figure out what, what I feel like hearing.  Also, but so, so it's instinctual.  I mean, far more, I will pay it over and over again too until it becomes almost like white noise.  It drives everybody else mad, but that's what I'll do.  But I also, and probably more importantly, color plays a big, you know, part of my, my composition process in that with poems I will type up different drafts, you know, I'll put, you know, you're working on different drafts and then to store them, I'll store them in colored folders.  And I'll put poems in the red folder or the blue folder, and sometimes they switch colors.  And so when I go and sit down to write, and I will write every day if I can without trying to, without necessarily going to the desk saying I'm going to write on this poem, I'm gonna do that.  I go in sometimes without any idea, but I'll go in thinking I feel like the blue folder today.  So I'm matching my subconscious, you know, receptivity to this, to the color, and color has always been really important in my life.  Right now I'm working on poems and I'm actually, I actually wrote them on different colored pieces of paper, so things are getting (laughter) very serious here.  Yeah, I don't know why.  I don't know why it works, but it does.
Speaker 1: Well last week we were talking with [HistoryMaker] Bebe Winans, and I don't remember Sasha's [Sasha Daltonn] last name, but she is one of The HistoryMakers interviewers, and she made a comment to me that all music has colors if you listen to it.  So I'm thinking that maybe color is just a lot more prevalent then we tend to notice?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I think you're right.  I mean I think that all of our senses are much more conjoined then we give them credit for, and that if you were to ask someone, you know, what color Beethoven's [Ludwig van Beethoven] Third Symphony ['Symphony No. 3'] was, someone would say, "Yellow," or, you know, then we'd all say, "Yeah, yeah, that's right, that's right," you know.  Or you know, you, you'd come up with your idea of what that color is almost immediately.  So why not.  I think what's happening in my creative process, though I try not to analyze it too closely is that I'm trying to open up all, all the sensi- senses.  And to do that I, instead of going for the obvious ones.
Speaker 1: So what about other elements like food?  I mean are you, do you have a limited diet when you write some things, you know?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't get that ritualistic about it that I have to have certain things in order to eat, you know, or any, in order to write or anything like that.  But I will--I don't eat when I write.  I might--the only thing I might eat is nibble on something like Necco wafers or something odd like that, you know, something a little, a little, some kind of hard candy or chew gum, but I don't eat while I'm writing, oddly enough.  But afterwards, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Then it's time.
Speaker 2: Time to celebrate.
Story_ID: 531301
Speaker 1: Will you tell us about becoming poet laureate [poet laureate consultant in poetry] of the United States?
Speaker 2: Becoming poet laureate was similar to getting the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Poetry] in that I was completely unprepared for it.  And in fact, it was so odd because I was--I remember that it was May.  I was in Chicago [Illinois] giving a reading with Gwendolyn Brooks, a two-day kind of thing, which was wonderful to, to be able to read with her, and it was the end of the semester.  I had taken all of my students' portfolios with me.  I was going through their poems and dreaming of finishing them and getting my grades in so that I could really write full time.  Life had begun to be--get so complicated it was hard to write while I was teaching because there are also so many other engagements and so many public appearances and things like that.  I--this was my watershed.  I was going to do this reading, I was going to go home, finish those portfolios that weekend and then I had the summer and, and I had a sabbatical in the fall so I thought okay, I've got this whole space.  And the phone rang in the hotel, I was packing to go home.  The phone rang, it was my husband [Fred Viebahn] saying, "Rita [HistoryMaker Rita Dove]," I'm sorry it wasn't him, but it was the guy from the Library of Congress who had called my husband and he said, "Oh this is where she is."  And he said that they would like to make me poet laureate and I thought to myse- but this time I thought it was wonderful and horrible at the same time.  I thought it's a great honor, but it's gonna wreck my writing (laughter) life.  You know, I wanted to write.  And I said to him, "Well, oh that's fabulous, I mean, gee I don't know what to say."  He said, "Well, can I come and talk to you this weekend about the duties?"  And I'm thinking, well I have to finish my grading.  And I said, "Well couldn't it be like next, like Monday?  I could come up, you know, to Washington [D.C.]."  He says, "No, I'd rather do it this weekend.  I can come down tomorrow."  So there went my weekend.  But that's--and they, they, they were actually working they just wanted to get it out in a press release by Monday which was why they didn't, you know, wanna wait.  But it was also, I though, you know, I've always thought and always said that poetry, people are intimidated by poetry, and it isn't that they don't understand it, but they are intimidated by it.  They think they can't understand it.  Children cannot--.  I always said that.  I said well this is your chance to put your money where your mouth is, get out there and see what you can do.  And that's basically what I did.
Story_ID: 531302
Speaker 1: My understanding is that the charge of the poet laureate [poet laureate consultant in poetry] is to disseminate poetry, not literally necessarily, but to raise the awareness of poetry, to put it out in, you know, on the national green such that other people might absorb it, and you were excellent at that.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: If you could te- tell us about some of the things that you did, that in fact caused you to become poet laureate in poetry to the Library of Congress for two terms, based upon the fact that it was found that you had so many good ideas that it could not be satisfied in one year.  What were you doing?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I was one of the youngest poet laureates, and before that, a lot of the poet laureates, though Joseph Brodsky had done some wonderful things, but it was a fairly low-profile position.  Most poet laureates seemed to take it as an honorific role.  There certainly wasn't enough money attached to it to be (laughter), you know, much more than that.  But, but the, and, and just to kind of be there, you know, as a, as a, as a what are you gonna call it, a lightning rod perhaps for concerns, but not necessarily evangelical or anything like that, you know.  You're not gonna go out there and convert people.  But I thought that there was a reason why they had chosen a younger person, and that I couldn't face myself again in the mirror if I didn't give 150 percent, you know.  I simply decided to say what I believed.  And, and as a result of the first few interviews when I said that everyone can understand poetry and this is a bunch of, you know, crap that they can't.  People began to write me, and people had incredible suggestions, they would tell me what to do.  I just had to listen.  And people said, "Well, you ought to mix in some other, you know, disciplines like music or so."  And I said, "Yeah, poetry and jazz, that's good, we'll do that.  We'll do an evening with poetry and jazz at the White Ho- at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]."  Or I had been in touch with these Crow Indian [Native American] children who were writing poetry, and amazing poetry under the most horrific circumstances, and I thought I am going to bring these kids to Washington [D.C.] 'cause they can read their poetry too and how that then mushroomed into all sorts of meeting the congress people.  But sometimes all you have to do is listen to people and say, "Oh okay," and pick up on it.  But it, it, it was one of those things that just started to roll, you know.
Speaker 1: Now do you take time from your teaching schedule [at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] in order to do this?  So are you essentially now on a forced sabbatical, a sabbatical from your writing time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well originally when I lost, my--I had that sabbatical that kind of, you know, okay well I had this time off that became the first half of my first year of being a poet laureate.  And when they asked me to serve for the second te- actually I was off for that entire year.  They gave me the entire year off to--the entire academical year, so from October through May to serve as poet laureate.  And then the second year they were going to say I could be off again and not teach, but I decided, I asked them if I could, I wanna teach just one course, and that was the graduate writers because there were students who had come in, it's a two-year program, they had come in wanting to study with me, and I thought, you know, I have to do that.  It was hard.  But I said, you know, I, I'll teach the one course for this, you know, semester and then be poet laureate.  After which it was time, it was time.
Speaker 1: And how does being poet laureate affect your own writing?  Did your writing have to become public writing now?
Speaker 2: No, but I do think that the writing--being aware of a larger world and a larger audience expands the voice and makes the voice, you know, more expansive.  I didn't write very much when I was poet laureate.  I had no time to write.  I was hospitalized twice for exhaustion.
Speaker 1: Did you house burn down?
Speaker 2: That was afterwards (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah my house burned down.  But you know, but it's one of those things after getting out of the poet laureateship where I wa- you know, and I was ready to write, I'm ready to go man.  And then a couple years later the house burns down.  But, good things come out of these things too.  We built it back up again and we started dancing, ballroom dancing.  Life occurs, it happens to you, and you happen to it.  You just have to keep it rolling, I really believe that.
Story_ID: 531303
Speaker 1: Once the--your time is up, what do you do?  You go back to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], I'm assuming, but even maybe on the smaller level.  Like what, that last day when you are leaving, what happens next?
Speaker 2: It's very funny.  When I left I, I concluded with a reading.  I read from the book that should've come out the year before but didn't get finished which was 'Mother Love' [Rita Dove] actually.  I read from 'Mother Love,' and--which was a Thursday night.  And then I came home and that Sunday there appeared in The Washington Post maga- Sunday magazine a big spread about the genesis of poem.  I'd had a journalist actually, he didn't follow me around, but I, I gave him some notebooks so he could see how a poem happened, you know, came to be, which was a really sensitive and wonderful article ['Rita Dove: The People's Poet,' Elizabeth Kastor].  So I--that came out on that Sunday, I remember that.  I had a few days of coming back home and just sleeping.  That article came up, came out and then I thought, ah now I can turn and start to work again.  But that didn't happen, I forgot, I couldn't tur- I couldn't turn off the spigot of interest.  In other words, I assumed that you stepped down from being poet laureate [poet laureate consultant in poetry] and some of the media stuff settles down and I could write.  But it didn't, it just kept going and people were still calling me and wanting interviews and writing.  So it took me about a year to figure out how to set up shields and secretaries and you know, answering machines and all this kind of and, and form letters which I could get the secretary to draft, all that.  It took a long time just to get the, the mechanism in place and then our house burned down.  But, all right.  But the mechanisms were in place.  So up we went again.
