Story_ID: 364789
Speaker 1: We're going to start with an interview.  And I'm going to--we are going to interview [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash.  But I'm going to start by asking you to give us your full name and spell it, each name. So we can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My real name is Julia Ethel Dash.  That's J-U-L-I-A, E-T-H-E-L, D-A-S-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born October 22nd, and the year will be sometime in the 1950s.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in New York City [New York, New York], in Manhattan.  I was born--actually in the wrong hospital.  My parents [Rhudine Henderson Dash and Charles Edward Dash] were in a cab and they couldn't come in from Queens [New York], and they couldn't (laughter) make it all the way and so I think I was born in New York City hospital, but I was supposed to be in a, born in another hospital.
Speaker 1: What other hospital was that?
Speaker 2: I c-, I forget the name right now, but I just remember that it was a short cab ride over the 59th Street Bridge [Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge, New York, New York] and the--and my mother always said, you know, the cabbie just kind of dropped them off and said that he just, you know, took the cab out for the evening, it was like three A.M., and he didn't want it messed up by someone having a birth in there and so he dropped me off at the first hospital (laughter) that they passed, and that was it and that's where I was born, New York City hospital (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When your mother tells you that story, does she say they--the cab driver put them out, or--?
Speaker 2: He put them out nicely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he put them out (laughter).
Speaker 1: But he did put them out.
Speaker 2: He put them out, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the second surprise that night was that I--when I was born I was a girl because everyone was just sure I was a boy.
Speaker 1: All right.  We're going to digress just a little bit.  If you would, can you tell us what day this is and where we are?
Speaker 2: Today is Monday the 20th of November [2006].  We're in Los Angeles, California, better known as Hollywood, at the Hollywood Gower Studios [Sunset Gower Studios] at Karat Films Incorporated.  And I'm here with Mr. Paul Brock [HistoryMaker Paul Brock].
Story_ID: 364790
Speaker 1: And now I'm going to ask you some Parade magazine stories.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Our people say that's just to relax you, although you seem very relaxed to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: But what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  I should say foods, I love to eat, seafood.  I love to eat seafoods.  Anything with shrimp or crab in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are my favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Okay.  To wear, the favorite color that I like to wear or that I like to look at or that I like to design with (laughter)?  'Cause it probably changes.
Speaker 1: If they're different, let's go to each one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My favorite color overall is yellow.  But then I have other favorites, too.  I don't wear yellow, see that's the thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's my favorite color that I like to look at and I like to see in flowers, on walls, et cetera.  But the favorite color that I like to wear would be salmon color.  Kind of a peachy salmon color, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we would say that your favorite color is yellow, but your favorite wearing apparel is peachy salmon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: See, seafood, salmon (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The--your favorite season, time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, now, autumn, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Feels like the first of the year for me.  It's the season in which I was born too, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 2: I would say that was Tahiti, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Have to think about that a second.
Speaker 1: All right, I'll give you time to think.
Speaker 2: You're gonna give me real time?  (Making sounds).
Speaker 1: I'm gonna give you three seconds.
Speaker 2: Three seconds.  Well my mind just goes blank because (laughter) the pressure--
Speaker 1: Then take ten seconds.
Speaker 2: I, I don't wanna just come up with anything trite.  There's so many favorites--
Speaker 1: Most, most people do.
Speaker 2: I don't wanna say anything trite.  Let me get back to you on that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Let me put a--let's put a pin in that one.
Speaker 1: All right I will.
Story_ID: 364791
Speaker 1: Now what I'm going to do is--I want to see how far back we can go with your family.  Let's start with your maternal family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your, your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Rhudine Henderson Dash.
Speaker 1: Spell Rhudine.
Speaker 2: Rhudine is a very interesting name, it's R-H-U-D-I-N-E, Rhudine.
Speaker 1: Henderson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Dash.
Speaker 1: Dash.  And spell, well actually we, we, we know the spelling on that.  I'm going to ask about when she was born and where.
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Date of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, August 18th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how far back can you trace your mother's family?  Your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Well, there are her sisters and brothers, and her mother would be, it would be it--Irene--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother.
Speaker 2: --my grandmother, her mother, Irene Carmichael [Irene Carmichael], and--
Speaker 1: Okay, let's get into your mother's sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, if we can, the oldest down to the youngest.  If you can't do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow.  The oldest would be Jim Henderson [James Henderson]--
Speaker 1: Your bro--
Speaker 2: You wanna start with the sisters? Or the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yes, let's start with the sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay, Mater, there's was my Aunt Mater.
Speaker 1: Spell Mater for me.
Speaker 2: M-A-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many sisters were--
Speaker 2: She had two.
Speaker 1: Two.
Speaker 2: And then her younger sister was Ola Anna Lee [Ola Carmichael], who later changed her name to Peggy [ph.] to be more jazzy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, Ola, spell it for--
Speaker 2: Ola, O-L-A, Anna, A-N-N-A, Lee, L-E-E, Ola Anna Lee Carmichael.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also known as aka Peggy, Aunt Peggy (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Carmichael.  And Mater did not have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I'm sure she did, everyone had middle names.  But you know she's passed away and, and I can't think of what that was, her middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I should ask the, the family--your mother's maiden name.
Speaker 2: Henderson.
Speaker 1: Henderson, okay, great, great.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. But Peggy was a Carmichael.  She was the daughter of the second marriage.
Speaker 1: All right.  But Mater Henderson.
Speaker 2: Ma-, correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and let's go with your mother's brothers.
Speaker 2: Okay, the oldest was Jim Henderson, and the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Middle name, Jim's middle name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember--
Speaker 1: Was it Jim or James?
Speaker 2: James, sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: James, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then there was Uncle Mack [Mack Henderson].
Speaker 1: M-A-C-K?
Speaker 2: M-A-C-K, and I'm sure that that was a nickname, but (laughter) all I know is Uncle Mack.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Story_ID: 364792
Speaker 1: All right let's go back now to your mother's [Rhudine Henderson Dash] mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Grandma Henderson.
Speaker 2: Oh we called her Big Sis.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Big Sis, that was Irene Carmichael was Big Sis.  She called her Sis, and we called her Sis also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her, what was her full name though, real name, or record name.
Speaker 2: Irene Carmichael.
Speaker 1: Irene.
Speaker 2: Irene Henderson Carmichael.  Because she was married twice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have any sense of when she was born, her date of birth and where?
Speaker 2: She was born Union, South Carolina also.  Date of birth, I don't know, but she died at age ninety-nine point six.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did she die?
Speaker 2: You're killing me (laughter).  She died about fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we can sort of say 1991?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it would be safe to guess that her date, date of birth was sometime around 18-, 1890?
Speaker 2: It could be because I know my paternal grandmother was born--I know her date of birth.  She was born 1895.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ethel Capers [Ethel Capers Dash], but that--we're getting ahead of ourselves.  I have those dates (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  Okay so somewhere around 1891.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was her date of birth, okay.  All right.  And Big Sis, Irene Henderson Carmichael, was married to the fir-, her first husband.
Speaker 2: Mr. Henderson, yes, who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember Mr. Henderson's--
Speaker 2: No, but he died when--before my mother was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) He--Henderson died before my mother was born, and then she married Mr. Carmichael.  So even my mother didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know Mr. Carmichael (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carmi-, no, not at all.  (Laughter) He died, too, they were all passed away long before my mother, you know, moved north, you know, to New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 364793
Speaker 1: Let's now go to the paternal--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your, your gran-, your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Charles Edward Dash.
Speaker 1: All right.  And his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Wow.  He's about 1917, Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Died--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventeen [1917].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1917, died June 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's buried in Charleston [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: June, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: June, 1981.
Speaker 1: June, 1981, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm getting my dates all mixed up.  I think it was '82 [1982], I'm sorry, '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: That's fine.  Now his date of birth, you were saying 1917.
Speaker 2: Yes, September--
Speaker 1: The month or date--
Speaker 2: September 27th.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was a Libra just like me.
Speaker 1: All right, good people, all right.  Now Charles Edward Dash, his family, mother, father.
Speaker 2: Okay, his mother, Miss Ethel Capers, Ethel Lee Long Capers [Ethel Capers Dash].
Speaker 1: Ethel--
Speaker 2: Lee Long, L-E-E, L-O-N-G, Capers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Born 1895, Charleston, South Carolina.  She lived to be 103.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's--in Charleston.
Speaker 2: Yes, died Charleston, South Carolina, 103.
Speaker 1: Long history there in Charleston.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay, my father's father was Charles St. Julian Dash.
Speaker 1: Charles--
Speaker 2: St. Julian Dash.
Speaker 1: S-T period?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Charles St. Julian Dash was--date of birth--have any idea?
Speaker 2: It's so funny, it's li- (laughter).  I didn't know him, he died in 1952.  But that's why I don't have, you know, it's not burned in my memory.  But he's just a few years older than Mommy Dash, which we call her Mommy, Ethel (unclear), Ethel Lee Long was Mommy Dash.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so if she was born 1895, he was just--he's born early--1890s.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Charles St. Julian Dash was born in Charleston?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And fondly known as Papa Dash.  So there's Mommy Dash and Papa Dash (laughter).  So it's kind of hard when it's like who's Charles St. Julian again?  Oh yeah, Papa Dash.
Speaker 1: Papa Dash, okay.
Speaker 2: Wait 'til we get to the Ernest, there's Ernest, Ernest, Ernest, and Big Ernest, Little Ernest, Little (unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, well now this is your paternal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --mother--grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364794
Speaker 1: Can you go back any further on your father's [Charles Edward Dash] side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Cha- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Great-grandmother, great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Samuel Dash, (unclear) Samuel Dash was Papa Dash's [Charles St. Julian Dash] father.  Samuel Dash's mother, her name was Rosie [Rosa Brown], that's all we--just Rosie, and she was born a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your great-grandmother [sic.].
Speaker 2: See we didn't call 'em that, we just call 'em by (unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right, I'm just trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm just like--and plus they were--they had already passed long before I was born, so they'd just say you know, Rosie used to say this, and who's Rosie?  Oh, yeah, Rosie.  So--
Speaker 1: And, and I'm gonna put those names, names in, in there.  The great-grandmother--
Speaker 2: In fact, she never took the name Dash.  She always called herself Rosa Brown.  They were very--she was very proud of being Rosa Brown, and that was it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Brown without the E?
Speaker 2: Who knows (laughter)?  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: All right.  And date of birth of Samuel Dash if you have any idea.
Speaker 2: All I can think, I'm trying to backtrack.  If, if Rosie Brown was a free--was freed when she was thirteen years old, freedom came in 1865.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So that's kind of like benchmark, you move forward and backward then, that way.
Speaker 1: So that, that would mean '50--1852 she was born, approximately.
Speaker 2: But they had children earlier then, too.  I've been trying to gauge that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's right, she was, but she was thirteen.  We're assuming that she was thirteen in 18-?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1865].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1865].  That would give her a date of birth of 1852, approximately.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But you're saying--and we're just trying to look at the date of birth, place of birth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have it written down somewhere, so I guess I could email it to you.  The--
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: The finer points of it.  Because now I'm starting to think well how did--where did Emma [Emma Atkins Dash] come from if--well Emma was married to--
Speaker 1: Now Emma was, was who?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause right now we're at your great-grandmother--
Speaker 2: And it, and it goes back even further.  There's also on the, on the--where am I?  I'm lost now.  I'm on the Dash side or the Capers side.  On the Dash side it goes back to--there's a Edward Edwardo--no I'm on the Capers side.  There's an Edward Edwardo Capers, and there's an Edward Capers [ph.] who was married to Amy Johnson Capers [ph.].  And I have the, I have the wedding certificates and everything scanned.  That's what I was doing in South Carolina recently.  So I could give you the whole line, and I have photographs too.
Speaker 1: Oh, wonderful.
Speaker 2: Unbelievable, like glass plate daguerreotype, just like whoa--
Speaker 1: That would be wonderful.  We would like--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we would like that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because Ethel Lee--
Speaker 2: Ethel Lee Long Capers [Ethel Capers Dash]--
Speaker 1: Long Capers.
Speaker 2: --was my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Was, was--
Speaker 2: And we called her Sarah (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --which was not her name at all.
Speaker 1: Grandmother.
Speaker 2: But everyone called her Sarah.
Speaker 1: Gee, (unclear).  Okay.  And we'll find a way to work in that Capers branch.
Speaker 2: Okay, the Capers are the grandmother of--paternal grandmother, and the Dashes are--
Speaker 1: The paternal grandfather--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --right, right.  Okay.  But on the Dashes' side, we have Samuel Dash, your great-grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great-grandfather, right.
Speaker 1: --marrying your great-grandmother, Rosa Brown.
Speaker 2: No, I think Rosa was Samuel's mama.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry--Sam--
Speaker 2: Rosie was Samuel's mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so that's great-great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Maybe Samuel was married to Emma, that's, yeah Emma Atkins.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we don't have a wife for Samuel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: By the way, and you have no sense of when Samuel was born or place of birth.
Speaker 2: Oh, all Charleston, South Carolina. Straight, straight down.
Speaker 1: All Charleston, they were--they were loyal to Charleston.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a long history of Dashes in South Carolina.  We trace 'em all back.  And then it all goes back to the legendary seven brothers coming over from Barbados.  They were slaves and then moving out over country and we're all kind of related.  All the Dashes that you know, you know hear about.
Speaker 1: Right, Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he's--Leon is a cousin and Sarah Dash, the singer with LaBelle [Patti LaBelle]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Stacey Dash and all the other Dashes.
Story_ID: 364795
Speaker 1: Like I said, yeah, I have it, I have it, you know, on the [paternal] family tree that they gave me.  All the--broken down--all the way down or up or the whole pedigree thing and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it's very clear (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the reason why we sort of wanna lay it out like this just in case there's any anecdotes or stories that may have been passed down about what it was like for them while they were in slavery, just coming out of slavery and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm sure--because you seem to have been doing a lot of research on this.  And I'm sure you might have some additional--
Speaker 1: Well yeah, yeah, funny saying--some things I can't say on camera that they don't say I mean (laughter).  You know, my family, they're funny, they're hilarious.  They have such a wry sense of humor, so.
Speaker 2: Great.  That means they're very secure in themselves.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Any, anything that you might think of, just a hint of it and then--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, they say Emma [Emma Atkins Dash] used to always say, "If it's not one damn thing, it's another," (laughter) (unclear).  But, but when you see these pictures of these beautiful, staid looking older black women (laughter), you wouldn't--you know with the high collar, you wouldn't think that they would say that, but they said yeah, Emma always said, "If it's not one damn thing, it's another."
Speaker 2: We're going to love that.  I'm, I'm looking through my notes, though, to find--
Speaker 1: Emma.
Speaker 2: --Emma.
Speaker 1: And we think Emma, we think Emma was married to Samuel.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Samuel Dash.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.  And Emma's maiden name, do you remember?
Speaker 1: Emma, yes, Emma Atkins Hoats, H-O-A-T-S, Hoats.  She was adopted.  Her mother died when she was a child (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I heard you say H in there.  Is it H?
Speaker 1: Yeah the H, yeah.  That's how the Hoats is spelled, H-O-A-T-S, Hoats.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So we believe her, her mother was a slave and had several children by the slave owner.  And she was very young.  And then she, and then they traveled to Charleston [South Carolina].  They lived outside of Charleston on a, a plantation, which I do have the name of written down somewhere.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can you get us all of, all of that--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then we'll just try to piece it together--
Speaker 1: And Emma's mother died very young and she was adopted by, you know, someone who lived in the community called Atkins, and that's how she got the last name Atkins.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But her real maiden name was Hoats.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And all the children kind of spread out.
Speaker 2: All right.  And then going back to the [paternal] great-great-grandmother, Rosa Brown.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And she married a Dash?
Speaker 1: Rosa was--we don't know (laughter).  All we know she insisted on being called just Rosa Brown.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she must have been a Dash for her child to be Samuel Dash, or maybe she didn't--maybe she never married.  Who knows, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I have a wonderful picture of her.
Story_ID: 364796
Speaker 1: Let's go back and, and visit with your grandmother and your grandfather.  Big Sis [Irene Carmichael] and Charles Edward Dash.  How much do you know directly about them, or how much do you know that your mother [Rhudine Henderson Dash] may have told you about them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay well you know, Big Sis was not married to Charles Edward Dash.  Big Sis was married to Carmichael, Mr. Carmichael, who I never met.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But Charles Ed-, Charles St. Julian [Charles St. Julian Dash] was married to Ethel Lee Long [Ethel Capers Dash].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Who--fondly known as Mommy Dash.  And better known as Sarah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Better known as Sarah?
Speaker 2: Sarah, yeah, Bully Sarah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They used to call her Bully Sarah when she was little.  Some play came through town of Charleston [South Carolina] with a character the name of Bully Sarah when she was about sixteen years old.  And since she used to be big and tall, we're all tall women, big.  She used to bully people, bully her brothers and sisters, so they called her Bully Sarah.
Speaker 1: And this was Ethel Lee Long?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Capers, okay.
Speaker 2: And by the time she was a married woman with her own seven boys, everyone kept calling her Sarah.  And she was still Sarah.  So she was always Sarah, but officially Ethel Lee Long.
Speaker 1: Okay, and no one knew what--well she picked it up from--
Speaker 2: Bully Sarah.
Speaker 1: Bully Sarah, all right, all right.  How much can you remember about Bully Sarah?
Speaker 2: I remember everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember everything from the very--my first memories 'til the very end.
Speaker 1: All right, what are your oldest memories?
Speaker 2: Oldest memories of--well I remember what everybody used to, used to laugh about and tell me that--I guess I was four years old and she was over at our house, staying over for the weekend or something when she would come up from Charleston and, and she picked up one of my dolls, like a little Barbie doll.  And as soon as she picked it up, the little head fell off (laughter).  And they all said I didn't cry or anything.  I just looked at her and said, "How would you like me to come over to your house and do the same thing to your dolls?"  (Laughter) And they told that story o-, she would tell that story over and over.  "Julie [HistoryMaker Julie Dash], Julie will tell you right off," (laughter) "Julie said, 'How would you like me to tear up your toys?'" You know, and so--
Speaker 1: How old were you then, approximately?
Speaker 2: I guess I was four, three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was not in school [P.S. 111, Jacob Blackwell School, Long Island City, New York] yet, so not in kindergarten, so--I remember the day because everyone made--whooped and hollered and laughed about it so much, but I don't remember saying it.
Speaker 1: (TAPE DISTURBANCE)
Speaker 2: But I do remember when she was visiting and--
Speaker 1: The--that--at the time she made that visit and you were about three or four years old, had you made any trips down to Charleston at that time, or--
Speaker 2: Not yet.  But it would come soon.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first trip would come soon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364797
Speaker 1: Let's hear about your first trip--
Speaker 2: (TAPE DISTURBANCE)
Speaker 1: --down to Charleston [South Carolina] and seeing Bully Sarah [Dash's paternal grandmother, Ethel Capers Dash] down on her own ground.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  I remember we got in a car and by the time we hit the Jersey Turnpike [New Jersey Turnpike], I was asleep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember waking up (laughter), it was hot, hot, hot.  And we were in South Carolina.  We were in Charleston and you know how they would pack a lot of food, you know, so it was--had no need to stop, ever.
Speaker 1: Don't wanna stop, it was dangerous (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't wanna, it was dangerous to stop.  I believe we stopped maybe along the turnpikes or something, they had some--it was all like a blur, like a wonderful dream.
Speaker 1: About how old were you then?  You said soon after.
Speaker 2: I, I think it was four or five.  I was not in school [P.S. 111, Jacob Blackwell School, Long Island City, New York] yet.  But I--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was months later maybe.
Speaker 2: Months later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do remember the first place we stopped before we got to Bogard Street, the big white house on Bogard Street, we stopped to clean the graveyard.  And my sister [Charlene Dash] will die when I say the graveyard, 'cause I always remember it as that's what they said.  We have to clean off the graveyard.  There's a cemetery where Rosa's [Rosa Brown] buried, Papa Dash [Charles St. Julian Dash], everyone, even my father [Charles Edward Dash] is buried there now.
Speaker 1: This is a family cemetery.
Speaker 2: Family ceme-, it's Humane and Friendly Cemetery [Humane and Friendly Society Cemetery] in Charleston, South Carolina.  And, and the Dash family has a large plot there.  And we--it is a Dash ritual to clean and groom the, the plot, you know to pull weeds.  To keep it fresh and to rake and keep it looking nice.  Which, you know, right down to my last visit three weeks ago, my uncles were cleaning the cemetery plot.  But I always remembered it as the graveyard (laughter).  And then of course my father used to have, you know, the corniest jokes about yeah, we always stay in the graveyard, everybody loves the graveyard.  People just dying to come in, you know.  And we'd look at--we didn't get the corny jokes when we were little, but whenever we went there, my father would say the same joke about people are just dying to get in (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now where is the family graveyard located exactly in Charleston?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's, it's on the Charleston peninsula downtown, and it's called the Humane and Friendly Cemetery.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right next to Fielding's [Fielding Home for Funerals, Charleston, South Carolina] cemetery.  There's a whole bunch of cemeteries down there.  Cemeteries in the South, they're different, you know, people keep 'em up.
Speaker 1: Right, true (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they have ceremonies there and you know, so my first--
Speaker 1: Is anyone else buried there besides your [paternal] family?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  They say there's Mr. Brown, there's Ms. So-and-So.  Just like, you know just all the neighbors.  Everyone's there we grew up--that's Lee [ph.], remember.  And they even call people who are like ninety or sixty years old, that girl.  They say, "Oh that girl, we grew up with that girl."  And so how old was she?  She just died last week.  And it's like well she must have been seventy.  They was like yeah, that girl.
Speaker 1: It would take a, it would take a writer to, to notice those things.
Speaker 2: Oh really?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The--so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The other thing about the, the grave, it's a very, very old cemetery.  And some of the 54th cavalry [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment], something, are buried there, 54th Regiment, you know like from the film 'Glory.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They're buried there, too.  And so I remember my father always telling us, "Careful how you walk on those old graves, you could sink right in."  And it's the truth--it's mushy, the ground is mush over the old, old graves 'cause you can (making sounds) (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I've never seen it, but I sort of get the picture of like the graveyard in the--what was the name of the picture that--I can't think of it now, but I sort of see an image there (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it's kept, it's kept up well, but it's very--it's ancient, very old.  And that's my first memory I have of Charleston, of being in the cemetery.  And it's so different from you know growing up in New York [New York].  People don't even wanna drive past or walk past a cemetery.  They go (making sounds), and the first stop that we made in Charleston was to the cemetery to pull weeds.  It's like why are you pulling weeds?  Who cares if the weeds grow in the cemetery?  It's like, that's Rosie.  You don't want weeds all over Rosie.
Speaker 1: That's your way of honoring them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what they contribute, had contributed to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --later.
Story_ID: 364798
Speaker 1: On this trip, here you are three or four years old, we're talking about 1954 or '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Things were still dangerous to drive down to South Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I didn't know, but that's true, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And when you--what else do you remember besides visiting the family?
Speaker 2: I remember the beds were very high.  They had the--like old plantation, rice planter's bed.  They were very, very high.  And I remember the, the candle flies that would come at night, moths.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We'd be running from the moths.  And they would say, "These New York [New York] girls, they ain't never seen no candle flies."  Candle flies--big suckers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now how many of you made the trip to--
Speaker 2: Wow, we were in my Uncle Julian's [St. Julian Bennett Dash]--back of my Uncle Julian's big Cadillac.  You could put a whole bunch of kids back there.  I think my mother [Rhudine Henderson Dash], father and sister [Charlene Dash] and (laughter) couple of aunts and uncles.  There was just a lot of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--so, so this was your [paternal] grandfather's [Charles St. Julian Dash] Cadillac that you went down there.
Speaker 2: No, no, Uncle Julian.
Speaker 1: Okay, uncle.
Speaker 2: Uncle Julian's.  We never mentioned Uncle--it's my father's--one--my father had six other brothers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's right we didn't--okay, let's get into that while we have a chance.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The first brother--
Speaker 1: Father's--did your father have any sisters also?
Speaker 2: No, only boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First brother was St. Julian Bennett Dash.  He was a tenor saxophone player, and he co-wrote 'Tuxedo Junction' among--he played with Erskine Hawkins' band [Erskine Hawkins and His Orchestra] in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], and--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he's known for that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was your father's oldest brother.
Speaker 2: Older brother.  And then my father was number two--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and his name was Charles Edward Dash.  Then after that it came Herbert Wilmot [Herbert Wilmot Dash].
Speaker 1: W-I-L--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --M-O-N--
Speaker 2: Yes.  M-O-N-T [sic.].
Speaker 1: --T?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Herbert Wilmot Dash.
Speaker 2: Hope I'm getting 'em right.  Herbert Wilmot and then we have another Samuel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Samuel Atkins Dash.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's four.
Speaker 2: Then we have Roger Dash [Roger Evans Dash].
Speaker 1: R-O-G--
Speaker 2: R-O-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: --E-R-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Roger's middle name?
Speaker 2: Evans.
Speaker 1: Very good.  All right.
Speaker 2: Then we have John Thompson Dash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Ernest Alonzo Dash.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: Whew.
Speaker 1: You certainly get an A for, for that.  So these were all of the--your father--the seven children--
Speaker 2: Of, of Ethel Lee Long [Ethel Capers Dash]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --known as Sarah, Bully Sarah.
Speaker 1: Bully Sarah.
Speaker 2: And, and, and Charles St. Julian [Charles St. Julian Dash].
Speaker 1: Charles St. Julian, better known as Papa Dash.
Speaker 2: Papa Dash, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's just like, phew (laughter).
Story_ID: 364799
Speaker 1: And I just want to keep all of these straight because your mother's [Rhudine Henderson Dash] sisters [Mater Henderson and Ola Carmichael]--there were two, two young ladies and two brothers [James Henderson and Mack Henderson].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's, that's a big family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we were much closer with my father's [Charles Edward Dash] side.  We saw them, you know, every week we'd be up, you know, 157th Street and Broadway, up at St. Julian [St. Julian Bennett Dash]--in his house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was 157th and Broadway, over there on the West Side [New York, New York].  And you lived in Queens [New York].
Speaker 2: Lived in Queens, in Queensbridge projects [Queensbridge Houses, Queens, New York], right under the 59th Street Bridge [Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge, New York, New York].  It wasn't too far out, just you know, where the river park is, bridge, go down.  And they used to have a trolley or something or elevator that went up and you could go right over the 59th Street Bridge and be in Manhattan [New York], so it was very close to Manhattan (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  Any of the other relatives live in, in New York City [New York, New York] besides your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were--
Speaker 1: And [paternal] grandfather.
Speaker 2: Grandfather, no, I don't believe Papa Dash [Charles St. Julian Dash] lived in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, I've got St. Julian.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, there's St. Julian and there's Sam [Samuel Atkins Dash] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's oldest brother lived in New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all--eventually everyone but Ernest Alonzo [Ernest Alonzo Dash] lived in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, he came up--
Speaker 2: He went to Wisconsin (laughter).
Story_ID: 364800
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest memories now of your mother [Rhudine Henderson Dash] and father [Charles Edward Dash]?  Let's, let's get into--do you know how, how they met, or when they met?
Speaker 2: They met--(laughter) well I said they met before I was born.  They met sometime in 1940s.  And my mother used to always say that she married him because she felt sorry for him (laughter).  She never said she loved him.  She said she married him because she felt sorry for him because he was so skinny.  And then her sister said yeah, when she met him, that, that he didn't need a wife, he needed a nurse (laughter).
Speaker 1: How, how did they meet?  Did you ever get a hint of where it was?
Speaker 2: No, probably at some social event or something like that and with, you know, dancing and everything because he considered himself a, you know, a great dancer.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And he traveled around with his brother in the band, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Oh he did?
Speaker 2: Well yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he play an instrument also?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.  He was a dancer (laughter), just like they're about dancers now.  He was the younger brother of Julian Dash [St. Julian Bennett Dash] and--with the long eyelashes and he was a great--he was very thin and a great dancer, very handsome.
Speaker 1: Well then he would have been going to places like the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, New York, New York], and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this was during, during the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364801
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little ways then in your mother's [Rhudine Henderson Dash] life.  She was born in Charleston [South Carolina].
Speaker 2: In Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, in Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did she happen to come, come to New York [New York]?  Do you have any--?
Speaker 2: I think it was during the war, and everyone was coming to New York looking for work, looking for--you know, a better life, a better way of, you know--
Speaker 1: So she may have come up during the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And let's go back a little bit further in Union, South Carolina.  Do you know how far did she go in--
Speaker 2: Education?
Speaker 1: --education-wise.
Speaker 2: Oh, she graduated, she'd tell you in a minute.  She, she graduated summa cum laude (laughter) from Sims High School [Union, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sims High School--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --S-I-M-M, or S-I-M, one M?
Speaker 2: I think it's one M.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had one faded (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Union?
Speaker 2: Union, South Carolina.  She had one faded photograph, but no real pictures of her childhood.  They were very, very poor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  When you say they were very, very poor, what did, what did her father do?  What was the occupation?
Speaker 2: I think both fathers passed away.  Her, her natural father passed away before she was born.  And then there was Mr. Carmichael, and he passed away early on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Reverend Carmichael I think they used to call him.  And so it was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he a minister, do you know?
Speaker 2: He was a minister, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Minister.  So there was just the older boys went to WPA [Works Progress Administration] work camp or something.  So that means that was the '30s [1930s], right?  They worked at WPA something.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And Mack [Mack Henderson] was a soldier.  And during World War II [WWII] they sent him to the South Pacific somewhere.  Even though you know, that's when it was very segregated, the [U.S.] Army.  I think he was in Burma [Myanmar], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because he had wonderful stories about sitting around eating monkey hips and rice.  But we know, he was, you know, he was making those stories up, but he'd tell us about it (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna--those stories are not necessarily true, right?
Story_ID: 364802
Speaker 1: How about some of your mother's [Rhudine Henderson Dash] memories that she may have related to you when she came to New York [New York] during the early '40s [1940s]?  Where, where did she live when she came to New York?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, she was a live-in maid.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Out in Long Island [New York].
Speaker 1: All right.  And the--your, your father [Charles Edward Dash] was in New York.
Speaker 2: He was in New York.
Speaker 1: At that time 'cause he was still--he was traveling with your brother--
Speaker 2: With his brother [St. Julian Bennett Dash].
Speaker 1: But he played with Erskine Hawkins.  Of course Erskine spent a lot of time traveling around the country.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: So did your father leave New York and travel during that period?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he--I have all the--a lot of photographs of them, you know, flying, you know, going here and there.  I don't know if my father traveled--was, went on the road with him.  Maybe just hung out with the band [Erskine Hawkins and His Orchestra] when they were in New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When they were in New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and at recording sessions and things like that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I can remember Erskine Hawkins would hang out around 140th [Street] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard], place called Brentwoods [ph.], there.  The, the--
Speaker 2: The Small's Paradise [New York, New York] (unclear).
Speaker 1: Small's Paradise over on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that are-, period and that area was very well known because people were sort of bunched all up together.
Speaker 2: Right, and one of my uncles was [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt's chauffeur, Samuel [Samuel Atkins Dash]--
Speaker 1: Okay, Samuel?
Speaker 2: Sammy Dash, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they were all, it was in entertainment kind of business, artistic thing.
Speaker 1: The--now what was your father doing?  What, what was his line of work?
Speaker 2: He was a shipping clerk--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  And then he later became--was a Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] worker.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  By Port Authority, Port Authority where the bus station is and--
Speaker 2: No, out at--before it was Kennedy Airport [Idlewild Airport; John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], the JFK Airport.
Speaker 1: At JFK, okay.  Okay.  All right, but we don't have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But for many years he was a shipping clerk on 7th Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when he was younger.
Speaker 1: When he--right.
Story_ID: 364803
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up there in New York [New York] with--and I think I got your siblings down here.  And maybe I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one older sister Charlene Dash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: C-H-A-R-L-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: And Charlene's middle name?
Speaker 2: Edwina [ph.].
Speaker 1: Edwina.
Speaker 2: She's gonna kill me (laughter).  My sister was the first African American on the cover of Look magazine.  She was a model during the late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh okay.
Speaker 2: If you look at the 1968 Look magazine cover, she's on the cover as a silhouette.  She's on the cover.
Speaker 1: Okay, as a silhouette.
Speaker 2: Silhouette.  There was a silhouette of (unclear), you know, she's the first African American on the cover.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did a lot of work around the time of Naomi Sims.  She was the Charlene Dash (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was it like--it was just you and your sister, and what was it like growing up there in the household?  What are some of the--your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of, I think I was kind of like the clown of the family (laughter).  You know, everyone thinks I'm so serious now.  But I was cut up and the clown, yeah.
Speaker 1: Edwina's older than you, or, or the--
Speaker 2: She's older than--I'm the baby.
Speaker 1: You're the baby--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 364804
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My earliest memories are, oh, there would always be people over and cooking and laughing and rice cooking (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Family members and friends?
Speaker 1: Family members and friends because we were--I mean we weren't without friends.  It was the Queensbridge projects [Queensbridge Houses, Queens, New York].  It was wonderful.  There was all kinds of people and, and the weekends were always filled with just cooking, laughing, eating, telling wild stories.  My father [Charles Edward Dash] used to bring crabs in.  He'd go fishing and he'd bring croker sacks filled with crabs.  Bring 'em in, let 'em loose and he'd teach us about, you know about crabs.  You know he used to say you never wanna eat a dead crab. 'Cause, you know, they're extremely poisonous.  So we didn't know it at the time that it was poisonous.  All we knew is he'd let 'em, you know, loose in the living room.  And we'd go, oh, gross! And he said, "Don't eat that one, you can eat that one.  Don't eat that one," (laughter) you know.  And he taught us how to eat crabs, how to pick 'em, choose 'em, season 'em and throw 'em in the pot.
Story_ID: 364805
Speaker 1: What was your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to P.S. 111 [P.S. 111, Jacob Blackwell School, Long Island City, New York].
Speaker 1: P.S. 111, okay, in Queens [New York].
Speaker 2: In Queens, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then your ju- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The middle school--
Speaker 1: Middle school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we call, still called junior high school then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was Junior High School 204 [I.S. 204, Oliver W. Holmes School, Long Island City, New York], it was right up the street from 111.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your high school.
Speaker 2: Jamaica High School [Queens, New York].  It was far away, but I was part of College Discovery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A program called College Discovery where they, you know, kind of take 'em and pump 'em up.  Give 'em tutors, take 'em around.
Speaker 1: Right.  A lot of those people got scholarships to some very good colleges.  Were you one of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had, I had--it was basically a scholarship to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They used to give us cash money every week to come to school, and it worked.  And they gave us tutors and they took us--it was a whole affirmative action thing and it worked.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They took us to Washington, D.C., they took us to plays, they took us to operas, they took us to dances, performances.  They took us to light shows.  It was--they were in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They just--it was a wonderful opportunity and it worked, you know.
Speaker 1: How were your grades there in high school, good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very good.  We had tutors, you know, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so they couldn't help but be very good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very--pretty good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did this encourage you to go on to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.  I had no, I had no thoughts of going to college prior to this whole College Discovery program.  It was just like sure, I'll go, you know, sure.  They're gonna give us five dollars a week, sure (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 364806
Speaker 1: Now when you decided to go to, to college, I know the things that you studied, but what were your ideas of what you were interested in pursuing as a career and while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a gym teacher (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because it is easy, I love gym class.  You go in it, you play some volleyball and go on out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when you graduated from high school, was that your first thought to--that you wanted to go on to be a teacher, or gym teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was thinking about it at the time.  I can't really remember, but I think I changed my mind.  By the time I was--I graduated from high school, I no longer wanted to be a gym teacher.  It was just during the high school years.  It was like what's your favorite class?  Gym (laughter).
Speaker 1: Gym.
Speaker 2: Basketball, you know.
Speaker 1: The--so as, as--once you graduated, you began to see other things you would like to pursue.
Speaker 2: By that time I was interested in, in film.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because--yeah, we started going to the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] to filmmaker's workshop there.  It was about the end of high school, last year of high school in, into the summer.  And by that time, it was film.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was called the cinematography workshop at the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cinematography.  And people say, well, what the hell is that?  It was like I don't know exactly, but I love it (laughter) you know.  We went--I was going there with my girlfriend.  We were both taking, you know, classes in cinematography.  We were there for two weeks and we thought it was still photography.  And then we found out it was motion pictures.  It was like, ah, well, anyway, still cool (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was like nice place, you know, it was all fixed up, had lots of equipment.  So I mean like motion pictures?  Okay.  And they, you know, show us films, you know, Russian films and I'm like I like this, you know.  A little writing on the bottom.
Speaker 1: So you were, you were getting your incentive because of the things you were learning there--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at this, okay.
Story_ID: 364807
Speaker 1: You're at the studio, you've graduated from high school [Jamaica High School, Queens, New York].  You're at the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is around, what, 1967, '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], '69 [1969], yeah around there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  And you are beginning to learn a little about and take an interest in--
Speaker 2: Yes, films.
Speaker 1: Film.  All right.
Speaker 2: More importantly, foreign films.
Speaker 1: Oh, foreign films, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Russian films, the films of Satyajit Ray, the films of New Wave French [French New Wave] cinema, you know, 'Jules and Jim,' you know, menage a trois stuff. Man and a woman, you know, those kinds of films, and Truffaut [Francois Truffaut], and this was a whole, another world, another world.  At first you look at it, you know, we were teenagers and we were like what is this?  You know there's a little writing on the bottom of the screen.  Why do we have to read it?  You know, why don't they just dub it?  (Laughter) You know and we had that little attitude.  But then we started, you know, watching 'Potemkin' ['Battleship Potemkin'], Eisenstein's [Sergei Eisenstein] 'Potemkin,' it was like, this is really different, it's intriguing, I like this.  I have to struggle with it, it's not easy.  But I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You hadn't, you didn't, didn't have any thoughts at that time of this might be the way I can tell the story of my [paternal] family in Charleston [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it was just--it was--
Speaker 1: Foreign films.
Speaker 2: Foreign films, but it was something that you know we, we didn't have access to on television back then, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was no cable.  And we--rarely did we see, you know, African Americans on television, you know, there was that one TV program, 'Julia,' and then 'The Cosby Show.'  And, and that's why I decided to change my name to Julie because the kids at school were teasing me because of the TV show 'Julia.'  "You just wanna be like that nurse Julia."  I was like, no.  I mean, I'm more hardcore (laughter).  So I became Julie [HistoryMaker Julie Dash].
Story_ID: 364808
Speaker 1: And your friend, she be-, she had the same interest as you?  I mean you two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's the one that actually drug me down there to the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], M'Yumbi.  Like I said, we both thought it was about still photography because that was cool.
Speaker 1: Okay. Being a photo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well what was her name, by the way?
Speaker 1: M'Yumbi Bynum [ph.].
Speaker 2: Bynum, okay.
Speaker 1: M'Yumbi (laughter).
Speaker 2: W-I-M--
Speaker 1: No, M, like, apostrophe, Y-U-M-B-I, M'Yumbi.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Bynum.  We grew up together in, in Queensbrige [Queensbridge Houses, Queens, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her name was Claudette at the time, Claudette Bynum [ph.].
Speaker 2: About this time you moved to Harlem [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Up to--we moved up to Harlem, 138th Street and 5th Avenue, Riverbend Apartments [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, and the old Riverbend Apartments.  And--but your friends continued to come in from Queens [New York], is that it?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: As you began to go to these classes and watch these films that were being furnished by the--
Speaker 1: Studio Museum of Harlem.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Studio Museum.
Speaker 1: Randy Abbott was our teacher.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's interesting now, his son Malik Abdul Abbott [Abdul Malik Abbott] is now a filmmaker also.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: But Randy Abbott and [HistoryMaker] Ed Spriggs was the, the director of the Studio Museum of Harlem at the time and he later went down to Atlanta [Georgia] and became the director of the Hammonds House [Hammonds House Museum, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I used to tease Ed Spriggs all the time, many, many years later in, in Atlanta.  I tease him because when he would see us coming into the Studio Museum of Harlem, he's a very quiet man and we'd be you know, very loud and popping on gum and you know, overalls and we're, you know, Timberland boots were in back then too.  Wearing Tims and our heads are wrapped up in geles and he'd look at us and just go like (gesture) (laughter) he had no words (laughter).
Story_ID: 364809
Speaker 1: During that period, you were moving toward becoming a very serious filmmaker.  And what were some of the things that were motivating you?
Speaker 2: It was a very hyper-political time.  I was more interested in documentary film at the time, doing newsreels about the community, about and for the community.  I wasn't really focusing on dramatic narratives back then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And of course it was a very political time.  We're talking about the Vietnam War going on.
Speaker 2: Yes, and you had the Black Panther Party office right up on--was it St. Nicholas Avenue, or there was one on Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] too, yeah--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --opened, and right next door to the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer's National Black Theatre [New York, New York].  Frank Silvera's Writers' Workshop.  It was a very, a powerful, political, artistic time during--the Black Arts Movement was actually, you know --
Speaker 1: It was coming, coming to life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear), yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --at, at that time.  Also of course people like [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward and so forth were talking--
Speaker 2: Oh, downtown, right, Negro Ensemble Company down--
Speaker 1: Negro Ensemble theater.
Speaker 2: --downtown, yeah.
Speaker 1: And all of these things were influencing you.  Would you say that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And that sort of moved you to where you wanted to do documentaries, or would this come later?
Speaker 2: I think what moved me to do documentaries was it gave me voice, the power to, to tell a story and get, and, and to tell it your way.  Also mastering the equipment.  I, I was always fascinated by equipment ever since, you know, my Uncle Julian [St. Julian Bennett Dash] used to let us play with his recording machine, you know recording machine his Wollensak reel-to-reel tape recorder.  At the Studio Museum of Harlem we were able to load the Bolex cameras, we were able to string up the old upright Moviola editing machines, which is, you know, a complicated feat.  It wasn't digital video back then.  And the video that was in existence was reel-to-reel heli-scan [helical scan] and there were no cassettes back then.  So you had to string it yourself.  And, and the Portapaks weighed a ton.  So it was, it was, it was fascinating for me to be able to have such hands-on experiences with this--with the equipment and then make something from it and then edit it into something.  Gil Noble used to come up to the class.  He had a television program 'Like It Is,' and he would come up to the Studio Museum and talk to us.  Madeline Anderson, the editor would come up and speak to us.  It was a, it was a fascinating, vibrant time, very rich, fertile time.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And there was a hope among a lot of folks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, in New York [New York], you know, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 364810
Speaker 1: And so at that time, what were you hoping to do?  What was the messages or themes that you wanted to get out?  Or had you formed those?
Speaker 2: I think I--it was--I was just still forming them 'cause I never really thought that I had to work (laughter).  You know I was, it was--I was kind of like living the life of, you know, in between college and high school and you know, just do what you like and money will humble itself to you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Do I really have to get up at five o'clock every morning and, and go to work?  No, that, that wasn't a reality.  It was just you know, the work, the art, the, the experience, the being in the moment.  The Young Lords, I remember took over a church [First Spanish United Methodist Church] on the East Side in East Harlem [New York, New York].  And we rushed out there with our cameras, you know, to film that and we, we would take our cameras down on 125th Street on Saturday mornings and there would always be someone speaking in a megaphone, you know.  Kenyatta, Charles Kenyatta would be speaking.  I mean we used to just--we used, we used to film everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We used to film everything.  So the problem was we were filming everything, we weren't completing anything.  We weren't working.  We didn't have a mission, or one documentary that we were working on.  We were just filming stuff and then coming back and projecting it.  It was like ooh, look what you could do.  We could tell a story, we can, we can.  I didn't really hone in on all of that until you know, I went to CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and started making films there.
Story_ID: 364811
Speaker 1: I was trying to get to that transition there.  Here you are, learning your craft.  At least learning how to do many of--much of the technical work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and starting to understand the power of film, the politics of film, the, the meaning of film, the reality of--within the frame and the reality outside of the frame, and what you could do with it.  What Stalin [Joseph Stalin] had said about film, you know, film was the most powerful medium in the 20th century, you know.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: It's like, it's like that's deep, you know.
Speaker 1: And, and I notice you haven't mentioned people like King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [Malcolm X] and so forth during that period.  Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].
Speaker 2: I think we--
Speaker 1: Impressions they were making on you.
Speaker 2: I think I was more impressed by the immediate--people in my immediate area, you know, they were more television personalities.  I--Malcolm X was assassinated.  I remember the day he was assassinated.  We were, we were uptown at an event, at a church event or something like that, and everyone had to go home because Malcolm X had been shot at the Audubon [Audubon Ballroom, New York, New York].  So I remember that clearly.  And I remember we were in school when Martin Luther King was--was still in high school [Jamaica High School, Queens, New York]--was assassinated.  So you know, everybody had to go home, you know.  And same thing with the, JFK's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], it's like get your books together, go home.  Why?  And they wouldn't even explain, just go home.  So, so I can't really say in all honesty that I was focused on, upon them, and that I was at the time and that I was influenced by them.  I was more influenced by the people within the, the National Black Theatre [New York, New York] next door [to the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer's company, the Writers' Workshop.  The, the Negro Ensemble Company, Joe Papp's [Joseph Papp] theater [The Public Theater, New York, New York] downtown, the Electric Circus [New York, New York] downtown.  All of those kinds of things, you know, created this (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were beginning to make an impression on you then.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364812
Speaker 1: Was the impression they were making upon you what led you to CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: CCNY had a program (laughter) called the Leonard Davis Center for the Performing Arts, and I wanted to be chosen to be in that.  It was a pilot program that they were starting.  And I figured since I already had been studying film that I was a perfect candidate for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I interviewed for it and, and, and got in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you got in, how did you feel?  I mean that day when you found out you had been accepted?
Speaker 2: Well, it was wonderful.  It was a dream come true.  It was just like this is, you know, I love film and they're gonna have a pilot film program and what--life couldn't be better?  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was life like when you now beginning this--studies there at CCNY?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in my junior year and I was--we were living in an apartment on St. Nicholas Avenue, which is now--it's now--Powell, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. [sic.]
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we had gone through the rent strikes and all of that and there were a lot of Black Panthers that used to come through there and, you know because one of my roommates was in the party, Black Panther Party and--so it was a, it was--it--to a lot of people it was just like being in a film workshop and also, you know, majoring in film.  It was something very frivolous because it's like the question always was how's that gonna free the people?  (Laughter) Are you gonna make, you know, this documentary film that exposes this, exposes, that shows, that shows that.  It was like, you know, who knows?  All I know is I'm enjoying learning this and seeing all these new films that are, that are available, that I, I never knew existed.  And so I was fascinated by that.
Speaker 1: And you still wanted to see more of the foreign films than you did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --than you did any of the serious documentaries and maybe the--
Speaker 2: Well I, I watched documentaries, also I always loved documentary, documentary format too.  And I'm really happy now that, you know it's been, you know, resurrected and it's back strong and people are, you know, they're being funded and all that.  But I, I started moving from documentary film to narrative filmmaking when I saw that a lot of people like in the community, like my own mother [Rhudine Henderson Dash], preferred to see a story about the same subject than a documentary.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So I said okay.
Speaker 1: So you, as you were attending CCNY, that realization began to come out that, that was the route that you wanted to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I, you know, I used to wake 'em up, wake 'em up at and hold my light for me, wake 'em up and hold my reflector, you know, get out of bed.  And then after I had made the film, I'd say come on downtown and see my film and one time my mother was--she had come home from work.  She used to work in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  And I said, "Are you gonna come down and see my film tonight?"  She said, "Is it a documentary?"  (Laughter) I said, "Yes."  She said, "I'll see it later."  Now this was before they had VHS cassettes (laughter) or anything like that, so she meant, you know it's like--she was tired and you know she--you know she loved me, she loved my film work, but she wanted to see a story.
Speaker 1: Now these were all things that you were doing while you were at CCNY?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Am I correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364813
Speaker 1: Following CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York], as you're about to come out, how do--how do you think CCNY may have shaped you and prepared you more for what you were about to do?
Speaker 2: Well since we, we all had to work on each other's films, we saw a lot of people drop by the wayside.  And it was--we learned there that, you know, film work is like doing construction work, it's grueling.  We'd have lighting sessions where we'd have to sort it out, work it out, make it work, that sometimes went on for twenty hours.  You know, lighting just wasn't working or some--and then you'd have the, the, the director or the filmmaker, the person who started, whose project it was just decide right then and there that they didn't wanna be a filmmaker anymore.  This was not unusual.
Speaker 1: How many people started off in that program that you were describing?
Speaker 2: About eighteen.
Speaker 1: And how many finished?
Speaker 2: Not many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not many, you know.  And I, and I always find that to be the case, you know, it's something that's consistent.  You have a lot of people who are interested in doing this, now everything is, you know, faster, lighter weight and all of this.  But people who just jump into it, they often don't stay around very long because they just think it's very glamorous, but it's not.  It's like putting on a hard hat and doing construction and hours are long and yeah, you have to, you know, you know, carry your own equipment and you know, it's, it's--sometimes it's grimy, dangerous, dirty work in order to get your shot, to get your picture, to tell your story.  And it's, it's not a whole lot of fun.  It's fun afterwards, it's fun in the editing room.  But into, into building your story, it's, it's a lot of work.
Story_ID: 364814
Speaker 1: Would you say that during your years at CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] you became more convinced that you were in the medium that you wanted to work in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Or less?
Speaker 2: More convinced.
Speaker 1: More convinced.
Speaker 2: More convinced.
Speaker 1: And you started working harder.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I knew I had a lot to learn.  I needed--I didn't know how to write narrative fiction.  I needed to find a place to write it and I needed to find a place where I could work without censorship.  Because although it was a wonderful time, you know, in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] in New York [New York], and very inspiring for me, it was also a time of (laughter) intense censorship where, for instance, at the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], if you present a project that you wanted to do, then the whole group, you know, it was very much the group thing to pass, you know.  The group, group has to vote on whether or not you'll be allowed to do that project, or waste the people's money (laughter).  It's like--it's like--so it's like well maybe I just wanna experiment, you know.  Well the people don't need experiments, the people need--it's like lord, you know.
Speaker 1: So they--you were prepared to build a lot of camels [ph.] there because it was--it had to be approved by the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Wasn't that frustrating for you?
Speaker 2: It was very frustrating because you, you think with blinders on all the time.  So once I got out to Los Angeles [California], I was able to experiment and do the horrible C word type of film, conceptual, you know, like.  It was like--and you know, you have to experiment to learn.
Story_ID: 364815
Speaker 1: When you left CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I graduated (unclear).
Speaker 1: When you graduated from, from CCNY and now you felt you were ready to come out to Hollywood because you felt you would have more intellectual freedom--
Speaker 2: Well, I was--
Speaker 1: --artistic freedom?
Speaker 2: --I was--I wanted to go to UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] film school, the M.F.A. program there.  So I read about Larry Clark, Haile Gerima and Charles Burnett doing films at UCLA, narrative films.  It was like whew, amazing.
Speaker 1: So that--said, I've got to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: So I applied to UCLA and I didn't get in at the time.  I didn't (laughter), I didn't have all my paperwork wasn't all sorted out and I didn't get in.  So I went to American Film Institute [Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone; American Film Institute Conservatory, Los Angeles, California] instead.  And people said, "Well, wow, that's better."  But see, at the time, film still wasn't hip and cool.  So going to the American Film Institute, which was a c-, two-year conservatory prior to UCLA, was, it was something different.  It was, it was intense study of narrative film and writing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You feel that helped you?
Speaker 2: In many ways, yes it did, and many ways there were no illusions about black films there.  I mean it was just like--it was, you know, very highbrow place.  They thought they were very highbrow (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Now you went to the one in, in New York [New York], or--
Speaker 2: No, I went to the one here.  It was in the Doheny Mansion [Greystone Mansion, Los Angeles, California] at the time.  Now it's at--they have it at Ma-, at what was once Marymount College [Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, California].  But it was a private, very private, exclusive conservatory within the Doheny Mansion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Beverly Hills [California].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay.  So you came out here anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And went there, yes.
Speaker 1: And went there.  And what were some of the most rewarding things coming out of AFI?
Speaker 2: Actually meeting with foreign filmmakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, being able to speak with someone from Turkey, you know.  Looking at his or her film.  And I actually met, you know, some New York filmmakers that, that I didn't know in New York, like Amy Heckerling was there and Mimi Leder was there.  Marshall Herskovitz and Ed Zwick [Edward Zwick], they were there at the time too.  Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: And so after two years there at AFI, you were ready for what?
Speaker 2: I went to UCLA.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I applied to UCLA and went there for four years.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--
Speaker 2: And by that time, you know, the--my fam-, the joke within my family was I was a perpetual student (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well you had the money to, to go.  Did you ever struggle with--
Speaker 2: Oh well, yeah, I struggled.  I, I mean I was a telephone operator, I was--did all kind of odd jobs because you know in order to, to make these films, you have to pay for 'em.  And so all of my, you know, grant money or, or money for tuition, you know, I'd pay tuition and then have to pay for the project too.  And then UCLA there was project one, two, three and four.
Speaker 1: So with all of these struggles that you were going through, including, you know, having to work to pay for a lot of the ideas and finally getting into UCLA, that was--or do you feel that was preparing you for your film ['Daughters of the Dust'] that you're best known for?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I don't wanna get ahead of us, that's why I did not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, it was all preparation for that.
Story_ID: 364816
Speaker 1: When you came out of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you felt you were ready for what?
Speaker 2: Well I came out of UCLA having begun to travel the world.  These would be the various film festivals.  So I had already been on the circuit.  I, I had several films in distribution and, and, and, and I knew by the time I graduated, I had already been to Cannes [Cannes Film Festival, Cannes, France].  I had already been to, you know, some of the other major festivals around the world.  I knew film journalists, international film journalists, international film commissions and et cetera.  So by the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would it be fair to say that you were well known within that freelance film circle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, long before 'Daughters of the Dust.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Long before, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it like trying to finance going to all of these film festivals?
Speaker 2: I didn't have to finance it at all because they would send for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had--'Four Women' was completed, it was short, 'Diary of an African Nun' ['The Diary of an African Nun'] which was an adaptation of an Alice Walker short story ['The Diary of an African Nun'].  And I had 'Illusions,' another short film.  And those took me pretty much around the world.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so yeah so--
Speaker 1: Some reason I was thinking 'Illusions' came after 'Daughters of the Dust.'  It came before.  Okay, all right.  And your mom [Rhudine Henderson Dash] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  'Illusions' was my thesis film at UCLA.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay.  And there was somebody I was reading was in there that I was very impressed.
Speaker 2: Lonette McKee was the star of 'Illusions' too.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She did a wonderful job (laughter).
Story_ID: 364817
Speaker 1: I'm trying to get to that, that point where you felt confident enough to begin 'Daughters of the Dust.'  Was there any one thing--you had done these things now prior.  So you, you, you were well-known--
Speaker 2: In the international market, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the, in the international market.  And that was still your interest, the international market as opposed to--?
Speaker 2: Well there--it was kind of like that, that--a circuit of independent, independent film, the real independent film world.  Now when they say independent, it's something very different, it's the Hollywood independence.  Now in the independent film world, my films were in distribution.  In colleges, museums, private screenings, film festivals, art centers, et cetera, and we were touring with those films.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, in Amiens [France], in Northern France, in Nantes [France] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what year are we talking about now?  UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] would have been seventy--what, '3 [1973], '4 [1974]?
Speaker 2: No later.  The '73 [1973], '4 [1974] was American Film Institute [Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone; American Film Institute Conservatory, Los Angeles, California], so it was late, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I first went to Cannes [Cannes Film Festival, Cannes, France] in '79 [1979], and, and by '81 [1981] we were back with a suitcase full of films that we showed in the Marche [Marche du Cinema] of the black American films, independent films.  And then a few months later they had another retrospective in Nantes in France and I mean from then on, and then the Germans want us to--wanted us to come over to show and then the Netherlands and it was, you know, it was really an exciting time.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, meeting all these different filmmakers and arguing about films and discussing films and--very interesting, and--
Speaker 1: And, and your mother [Rhudine Henderson Dash]--what was her reaction?  She was making time to see your films?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, 'cause she, she loved them--well they were shorts and I--after I left New York [New York], they, they were more experimental.  'Four Women' was a dance film and 'Diary of an African Nun' ['The Diary of an African Nun'] of course was a--was my first dramatic narrative, you know, attempt at it.  And 'Illusions' of course was a dramatic narrative too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 364818
Speaker 1: You've made quite an impression around the world with your filmmaking.
Speaker 2: In the independent section--
Speaker 1: In the independent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) independent sector--
Speaker 1: --sector, right.
Speaker 2: --of films.
Speaker 1: And, and yet we have not come to where you're beginning to get that inspiration.  We're getting close to the period.  But that inspiration for 'Daughters of the Dust.'
Speaker 2: I actually started writing 'Daughters of the Dust' when I was at the American Film Institute [Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone; American Film Institute Conservatory, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that would have been around '74 [1974] or '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was writing it as a silent film.  I was very impressed by the, you know--I wanted it to be a really authentic film, you know, even with the little placards and all of that.  I thought that would be very interesting.  But at the American Film Institute, they had a tendency to tr-, to second guess me and not really understand what I was trying to do.  And so they immediately told me well that film's been done.  We have 'Sounder,' we have 'Miss Jane Pittman' ['The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman'].  They started naming everything that what I was thinking of was not.  I said, no, I'm thinking more on the line of a foreign film.  I don't think I've seen this one yet.  Something very different.  And they said, oh no, there's no audience for that anymore.  Those, those films are out.  It was like okay, well okay.  Let's move on and I'll try something else, you know.  And you know I even came up with the--started writing the, the theme of 'Illusions' while I was at the American Film Institute and they said, well my writing instructors there said, well, there's kind of a ridiculous concept (laughter) and, and so, so I learned to let all that information kind of just roll off my back, you know, like a duck.  Just--
Speaker 1: And that's what you should do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because if they thought it was a great idea, they would have done it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't think--well they saw, they saw, they saw me in--or they saw I think the whole culture, African Americans and they had a preconceived notion of who we ought to be and how we act.  Once I, you know, we used to have to write these little scenes, you know, they give you a subject matter.  You go, go off for an hour and write a scene and come back and read it to the class.  And I remember when my writing teacher's, you know, like admonishing me for not--he said the way my--I had the characters of my mother and father speak were not accurate because they didn't have a southern dialect.  And I said well they don't, they're from South Carolina, from Charleston [South Carolina].  It's more of Geechee dialect and I--and they, they were just like, yeah, right, whatever, you know.  Black people, southern accent whether they lived in New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], whatever.  It's--it was--there were rough times there.
Story_ID: 364819
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go back a little ways because I'm interested in how a person who wanted to be a gym teacher ends up with all of these very fine talents of innovative filmmaking, writing skills and so forth.  I mean those are things usually you either have or don't have, and they're not usually found in--well I guess maybe sometimes they are found in gym teachers.
Speaker 2: Well I think my choice, my early choice for being a gym teacher was an easy choice.  Everyone could jump double-dutch, everyone could play volleyball, everyone could play basketball well, especially coming out of Queensbridge projects [Queensbridge Houses, Queens, New York].  Anyone could play handball.  You know, we were all tomboys or a boy (laughter), you know.  So I think it was a easy choice.  And I think that once I started going to Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] and seeing foreign films and I was seduced by this medium.  This medium of film, television and, and that coupled with the ethos, or the spirit of the times, of you know, having, hearing the voices from the National Black Theatre [New York, New York], you know, coming through the walls of the Studio Museum of Harlem, 'cause that's where it was located at the time.  And all the ra-, political rallies on the streets, the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], the Young Lords, the this or the that.  The Asian group called (unclear), you know, leaflet and protesting.  There's so much happening that I think I started growing up.  And so threw the basketball away and said, hey, there's something else that I might be interested in doing here.  And like I said, with my--I was always fascinated by equipment, mechanical equipment, electrical equipment.  And perhaps it's because my Uncle Julian [St. Julian Bennett Dash] allowed me to, you know, use his, you know, recording machine and this and that and the other.  And so the Studio Museum of Harlem was a place where they didn't say, don't touch it, you're gonna break it.  Get back, don't touch.  They'd say, "Yeah, string it up and see, let's see if you can do it, let's see if you can do it again.  Let's--now let's see if you can test the levels as you're recording."  We were working with--I started off working with a Nagra.  First time I touched a machine, I started off working with a Bolex, spring-driven Bolex.  And like I said, the upright Moviolas and the editing bench.  And it was all very tactile and today it's very digital.  You know it's all you know, computer driven.  But we were able to touch it, string the film around our, our necks, hang it to the wall, splice and cut and hot splice and re- we had the cuts right here from the (unclear) splices, we were all cut up.  We could taste the film, there's a taste (laughter), you know.  It was, it was, it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 364820
Speaker 1: So you got that complete education and that love--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then from there--
Speaker 2: Yeah I think that's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it just grew and added more things.
Speaker 2: And yes, and we found out there's so much more to it, you know.  There's more than just dailies and, and newsreel films and documentary films and there's also experimental films where you can make something where you don't even know what's going to happen.  I had a wonderful teacher at CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] who, who's from Boston [Massachusetts].  I think his name was Ted Spanier [ph.].  And he used to talk about films, you know, there was a film called 'Blink' [ph.].  Nothing was on it (laughter).  Just was the blinking of the projector.  And then there--he had us all take a hundred feet of clear leader and draw on each and every frame.  I can do this, it's no problem.  We were up there all weekend drawing, drawing, drawing.  And we drew, drew the films onto the frame.  Then he would give us these tests where he would pick a word out of, you know, you know, he'd write a bunch of different words on a piece of paper, fold 'em over and put 'em in a dish and you'd reach in and pick it out.  And whatever you pull out you have to make a film on it.  And I remember getting, picking, pulling out a paper that said scale.  So I said, "What do you mean, scale?  Like fish scales?  Like a scale, a balancing scale?"  And he just said, "You sort it out, figure it out.  Just make a film on scale, whatever it is."  One-minute film.  They gave us shopping bags full of Super 8 film, a Nizo camera and just like, bye-bye.  Go make the films and bring it back.  You fail if you don't bring it in.  And that's the first--we began at CCNY I learned to begin finishing films, whereas at the Studio Museum of Harlem, we shot, we loved it, we pat each other on the back.  We didn't do a lot of finishing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At CCNY I learned to finish and by the time UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], it was drop-dead finish.  If you didn't--whatever on--come screening date, if you didn't project your film, you failed, done.  Doesn't matter if it was wonderful.  If you shot 'Exodus,' whatever.  You're not finished, done.  So we started sleeping at UCLA in sleeping bags, you know (laughter), to finish our films.  You finished on time, you finished.  And that's one great thing, one of the great things about UCLA that, that's real.  That helps you in the real world because I've also met a lot of filmmakers who, independent filmmakers who cannot finish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there's always a point--it's like with all, painting, photography, you reach a wall.  You're exhausted.  You don't know--you've got all this coming at you from different directions, you don't know how to finish.  The weakness is you start--you either take someone else's idea, you listen to someone else, but you don't use your own voice.  I learned over the years how to do, how to finish and how to function at three [o'clock] in the morning when you're exhausted.  I, I--we had a wonderful teacher at UCLA, Shirley--I forget her last name.  Shirley Knight, no, Shirley--she was an independent filmmaker.  It'll come to me.  But she once taught a class called The Creativity of Exhaustion, and it's a very important class.  You have to be able to function when you're exhausted.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And you could.  You learned that.
Speaker 2: We learned it.  Learned how through exhaustion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it always comes up on whatever project I'm working on, it always comes up.  And we have a joke about you learn who people are at three A.M.  Twenty-four hours into the shoot, you learn who people really are because some people say, "I'm just tired, I can't go on," blah, blah, blah.  "I'm going to my trailer," whatever.  They fra- flake out or whatever.  But someone has to reel it in, someone has to finish, you have to function, you have to stay focused.
Story_ID: 364821
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little ways.  What was your first film where you received nationwide or worldwide acclaim or notice?  I'll substitute notice for acclaim.
Speaker 2: 'Diary of an African' ['The Diary of an African Nun']--oh, no, no, I'm sorry, 'Four Women,' a short dance film won first place, best--first place award at the Florida International Film Festival [sic. Miami International Film Festival, Miami, Florida].  I don't even think that film festival exists anymore (laughter).  I got a nice, big placard and a gold medal.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Florida International Film Festival.  And then after that, 'Dairy of an African Nun' won a DGA Award for best student film, which is Directors Guild Award [Directors Guild of America Award].
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the dance film and what were you trying to show or what were you looking at in that?
Speaker 2: I had a wonderful teacher when I was at AFI [Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone; American Film Institute Conservatory, Los Angeles, California], Slavko Vorkapich.  He used to come in and lecture to us.  He was in his nineties and used to wear a lavalier mic [microphone].  And he was a Russian montagist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he showed, would show us all these different films and experimental films, independent films, segments of films that he composed for Hollywood, Hollywood--he--they would hire him to do montage sequences in the films made in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s].  And, and that's when I got the idea of doing 'Four Women' about--basically an adaptation of Nina Simone's song ['Four Women'] by the same name.  I wanted to do a choreopoem.  This is more--this was before music videos.  'Four Women,' I think we did this around '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '72 [1972], yeah.  And so it's, you know, Aunt Sarah, Peaches--(laughter) just dancing montage and all of that.  And got to play with a lot of different ideas and it was also the first time I got to use film other than Kodak.  We shot on Fuji film, Fuji negative at the time.  They don't make that anymore.  And--not that kind, and, and I loved it.  I loved you know, the colors and the, and the cutting of it and--
Speaker 1: Did anyone try to discourage you saying, this idea won't work or it doesn't make sense?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was actually a film that I, I first thought about (laughter) doing at the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York].  And they kind of pooh-poohed it.  It was just like, what is it about? you know.  And I always wanted to do it and I did it.  Eventually I did it when I was--it was before UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], it was before UCLA.  I think I was--AFI (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you finished it at AFI?
Speaker 2: It wasn't an AFI film, I did it on my own.
Speaker 1: Oh you did it on your own.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I--at AFI, I would--I never got permission to do a film, no.  I did all the writing work, all the whatever, but no.  They would only allow certain people to do films.  They said I was not a director.  Tony Villani said I wasn't--I didn't have the director thing (laughter) going on.
Speaker 1: But you were at AFI when you did it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You just did it on your own.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 364822
Speaker 1: What I'm trying to look, look at I think is that your greatest success has come when you've followed your own voice as opposed to what others felt that, that you should be doing.  And I guess that's the great--would you agree that's the great lesson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, scary when you say that because it happened each and every time, yeah.  But 'Illusions,' and with 'Daughters of the Dust.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because after 'Illusions,' I started--all of the studios were courting me, coming--I was taking meetings at Universal [Universal Studios Inc.], Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.], all these different places.  And they all said, oh, we're just interested to know how you can make films for low budget, you know.  And this was late '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s] and then, and then there was Spike [Spike Lee] and everything changed, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But not--I didn't get financing for any of those projects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No one that I pitched to could understand 'em and it's still pretty much the same situation going on.
Speaker 1: And are they still being successful, successful in the acclaim they receive as oppose to whether they get independent financing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the films that I have made through Hollywood, like 'The Rosa Parks Story,' 'A Love Song' [sic. 'Love Song'] or 'Funny Valentines' or 'Subway Stories' ['Subway Stories: Tales from the Underground'].  Those are not really my films.  I'm like a director for hire.  I come in, I do some rewriting maybe, but and I, you know, design the mise en scene.  But those are not my original projects; I did not set them up at the network or studios.
Speaker 1: As--would I be correct in saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've never really gotten a studio deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And maybe you should be thankful for that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Would I be correct in saying, though, where they've given you a project, let's say 'The Rosa Parks Story,' you as a director, you have put your print on, on that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, I know so.
Speaker 1: Right.  And that's whether people like it or not, that's what you hire a director to do, you expect them to, to do that.  And it's been very, very successful.  I'm talking about 'The Rosa Parks Story' now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the 'Subway Stories' of course which was HBO?
Speaker 2: Yeah, HBO with Taral Hicks the singer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 364823
Speaker 1: Let's go on because we're moving now toward--you're being very, very successful.  Maybe not internationally or nationally acclaimed in the African American community because I think, would it be fair to say that most of the people in, in the African American community, [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash just came out of nowhere with 'Daughters of the Dust.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're moving toward that.  And all these things are shaping you.  Following 'Illusions,' which was--you did that while you were at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just sort of bringing the audience up, up to date on, on this.  Did 'Illusions' help you or give you the confidence to do 'Daughters of the Dust'?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And how, how did you start to prepare, or when did you know that you wanted to move toward doing 'Daughters of the Dust,' and how did you approach it?
Speaker 2: I wanted to (laughter) move forward for that and went through several different lifetimes and I think I mentioned earlier that at one point I wanted to do it as a silent film.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then it was like--no, maybe we ought to have some sound on it.  I didn't have full financing for it the first time we went down to the Sea Islands to shoot.  So we shot in '88 [1988], I believe it was, a ten-minute trailer.  Came back, edited that, screened it at an event in Sundance [Sundance Film Festival] for minority women independent filmmakers.  And Lynn Holst was there from American Playhouse.  And American Playhouse had just begun American Playhouse theatrical ventures [Playhouse Pictures], and they had, recent films were 'Stand and Deliver,' 'As the Band Played On' ['And the Band Played On, Longtime Companion'].  They also did Matty Rich's 'Straight Out of Brooklyn.'  So 'Daughters of the Dust' was part of that whole venture into American Playhouse doing theatrical features.  And Lindsay Law saw the trailer and said, okay, let's take a chance on it.  And then he financed it and we went down there and started shooting.
Story_ID: 364824
Speaker 1: The first time, the first shoot was just a ten-minute trailer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To give people an idea of the look and the feel, the tone, the texture of what I was talking about because no one really understood.  They would say, "Oh, you mean 'Sounder.'"  I heard that a million times.  You mean this, it's like--no this is more, more languid, more, you know, more poetic.  Not just, you know, in the hot sun, in the heat, (laughter) you know, out on the fields, no.
Speaker 1: When you said that your first thought was as a silent film, and then you began to rethink (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause there's a certain beauty that can be had in using that kind of silence and medium.  But that's because I had watched a lot of silence--silent films by, you know, and but I think what many people, many African Americans think of when they think of silent films is they think of 'Birth of a Nation' ['The Birth of a Nation'] because, you know, that's the one you always see clips of.  You know, the horrible shots and the manipulative music and the whole drama about trying to, you know, reconstruct how you know, the, the South and the North, you know, they were just like brothers who, you know, fell apart and it's all because of these slaves.  And so that was not such a good thing.  But then there were also the Oscar Micheaux films that, that I had begun to view at the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were silent, you know, and some with Paul Robeson and, and there's a certain elegant grace and beauty.
Speaker 1: So you saw the silence being a very important part of what that film was giving you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You say later you thought that it should not be perhaps all silent.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you were influenced by what in, in that thinking?
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess trying to not only please myself, but please the audience as well, you know, make it more commercial (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: If you could call 'Daughters of the Dust' commercial (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: So then you felt the film really should be silent, but you were sort of giving in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Hollywood or so to speak (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  To my audience, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Because in silence there's this--it's almost like a meditation.  But I think, I think it still is that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, you know.  You work with the visuals and the music and the sound effects and the memory and the tableau style of the compositions of the story.  And another, another drama begins to play inside your head and that's the wonderful thing where film can take you.
Story_ID: 364825
Speaker 1: Were there any more evolving thoughts before you went down to South Carolina to do that trailer about 'Daughters of the Dust'?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, things--well the birth of my daughter [Nzinga Jafa] was--and then I wrote her in as the unborn child (laughter).  She wasn't originally in there.  And it was like, hm, children, they know a lot of things, you know.  It was evolving all the time.  And then the Trula [Trula Hoosier] character, who's the light skinned woman who travels with Yellow Mary, she was written in after the screenplay had, you know, I'd gone through several drafts of it.
Speaker 1: How many drafts did you go through altogether?
Speaker 2: Many, many, many.
Speaker 1: I have a hunch that you did.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I always do, I always do.
Speaker 1: A number?
Speaker 2: Seven or eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But even with, even with the television movies when I worked with--I mean the rewriting is--the rewriting never ends, you know.  Because you always learn more.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You always have to condense and collapse situations and you know, try to make, try to recapture dialogue that's lost because you lose a scene and you don't have any more days and so then you rewrite it and work it, and massage it and just--it starts taking on a life of its own.
Speaker 1: Would you characterize 'Daughters of the Dust' as your most important work?  I don't mean commercially successful.  Most important work or piece of work that you're most proud, proud of?  Or would it be something else?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  That's interesting because I don't really feel ownership of, of the work after it's done.  I just feel like I've learned something from the doing of it, but I don't really feel a lot ownership of it in terms of it--I don't know.  It's almost like part of my personal journal, my, my learning experience.  I don't know how to gauge that.  I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If it's important or--I know a lot of people have said, and written and this.  But then you know there are an equal amount of people who email me and say, "Why didn't you put subtitles on that movie?"  "Why do you try to be so cerebral?"  "Why do you--who do you think you are?"  So, you know.
Speaker 1: Well is it--what I found interesting is that you don't have any ownership.  You don't see that as a part of you.
Speaker 2: Like an old friend.  You say, hey, you know, old friend that you used to hang out with.  Because it's so intense, the filmmaking experience, so many years are put into it.  But then it's done, you know and you--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know it's like a class you've taken and you move on.
Speaker 1: And I'm sure you're still receiving comments on it even today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  That's why I say, you know, I get email all the time, you know, both good and bad, you know.
Speaker 1: And the bad doesn't bother you at all.
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  When it comes out of left field, it's like, whew, didn't know they were so angry.  I mean 'Daughters of Dust,' people either hate it or love it.  I mean they really are very offended by it, you know, some people.
Story_ID: 364826
Speaker 1: Following 'Daughters of the Dust,' did--what kind of approaches were made by studios and individual producers to you?  Or do you think most of them really understood it as you meant for them to understand it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think Hollywood really was interested because I think that they were quite shocked that it, you know, played for four weeks straight at the Film Forum [New York, New York] and it sold out the New York [New York] Village East theater [Village East Cinema] for weeks.  I, I think they were just stunned and immediately went about trying to create their own type of situation like that.
Speaker 1: Which they always do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And once they find out they can't do that, they come back to the original artist.  They have not come back to you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your response to that is that you continue to go ahead and do your own thing.
Speaker 2: Right.  I was advised by a lot of people that well you have to show, you have to show them that you can do something that's completely different from 'Daughters of the Dust.'  That that was just, you know, we won't even do--one producer said to me, "Saw 'Daughters of the Dust,' we won't even discuss it.  We wanna do this, that and the other."  They don't wanna discuss it.  So I mean it's--you know, glass is half full, glass is half empty.  But I, I'm a filmmaker and I do all kinds of work.  I love making films.
Story_ID: 364827
Speaker 1: Let's pursue the reaction Hollywood has had to what I consider your success in the independent film field.  What are the first reactions that you get at the studios when you go in and they're interested in your doing some work for them or you go in to pitch a story?
Speaker 2: When I go in to pitch a story at the studios, it usually goes well.  And they usually tell me, "Oh, you're actually pretty nice; you're nothing like I expected."  And we have a good time talking about the project and the possible casting and all of that.  Sometimes we have lunch.  But so far nothing has come of it.  Now when I go in because I've been recommended by either you know, like the star executive producer, like when Angela Bassett did 'The Rosa Parks Story' or when Alfre Woodard was doing 'Funny Valentines' and she wanted me to come on.  Or with Jonathan Demme, he wanted me to do a segment of 'Subway Stories' ['Subway Stories: Tales from the Underground'].  First they had to check.  "Are you really from New York [New York]? 'Cause we're only hiring New Yorkers."  And Rosie Perez called and left a long message on my answering machine.  It was like, "We want you to do--," and she really talks like that.  I thought, I thought it was a friend who was playing with me.  It was like no, it was Rosie Perez.  And once I confirmed yes I was really from New York, born and raised in New York, then I was eligible and they sent me a whole stack of possible scripts that, you know, that they had for you know, a story.  And they thought I was gonna pick the one--there was one that's really mysterious with like a ghost child in the subway tunnels and everything.  And I'm flipping through and I'm interested in doing something totally different because I wanted to do a more healing thing for New York, rather than just do, you know, I'm just not always interested in the spirits in, of the world.  That was, you know, you get, you know locked into--people think that you know, like I'm the earth mother type and all that after 'Daughters of the Dust.'  But no, I wanted to do something with the rabbi, the musician and, and I actually created the character who sings to her mother on the telephone.  I just came up with that.  It was about these three rough street girls, a rabbi and a saxophonist, and I just did my little rewriting.
Speaker 1: Great, great.  The, the--and so when you said more healing to make people understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that it's--New York's a great place and there are, you know, everyone knows the melting pot, but yeah there--you know there are tense moments, but at times there are incredible moments.  So when I read that story, a letter that was written by I think it was probably a Jewish woman who was at first accosted, you know, and kind of threatened by these girls in the subway.  And then she came out of the ladies room and it was a saxophone player playing music and then a rabbi joined in.  I just really connected with that particular story, having taken the, the subway so much in my childhood to go to school, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: But of course, you know all that part was cut out.  They made it--and it was really softened up and you never saw the older woman who was kind of accosted.  The girls weren't quite as rough and everything was kind of toned down to lessen the racial tension.  But I think it still worked out anyway, and it was very successful.
Story_ID: 364828
Speaker 1: But you know I'm fascinated, and that's why I guess I keep coming back to it.  How out of tune Hollywood is with you.  I could have said it the other way around, but I meant just that.  That they see films or a film going one way and you may see it going in an entirely different direction.  What do you think is the principle reason for that?  Are they so caught up in just doing the minutia that they just end out out here?
Speaker 2: Well I, I think that there are multiple levels of things happening.  First of all, there's, there's a cultural divide is, is wide, and not just the culture meaning you know, racial.  It's--the Hollywood as I call 'em the cognoscenti (laughter).  They live in this little territory called Hollywood and they rarely venture out--they don't know what's really going on.  All they know is what they read or what someone tells them at a cocktail party and that's the experience.  And they are just locked in on that and that's all they know.  And then there are racial things and then there are other cultures too.  There's culture of women as opposed to a culture of men.  There's the--there's the culture of people who read and experience things as opposed (laughter) to the culture of the people just sit behind desks, and they're very nervous, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about, you know, scared money, you know, goes nowhere.  And they're not gonna, you know, risk their position (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Being out of sync with the--
Speaker 2: Yes, and so they're very out of sync.  So that's one thing and multiple levels of, of things going on.  And once there's a succe-, everyone knows once Hollywood sees a successful film, they immediately wanna clone it and create more just like it.  Or they'll watch a film about a certain culture and they immediately say, "Oh, that's the story."  And then they wanna do other films just like it when they say no, everyone's, you know, we're not a monolith, everyone's not a 'New Jack City'-ite, you know, out of Harlem [New York, New York].  You know, everyone is not, you know--every story does not have to be about an urban--a group of urban youth, you know.  And as far as African American movies go, it's either--once it was, you know, picking cotton, you know very rural, agrarian type of stories.  And then on the other side of that is the urban testosterone films.  Like what's in between.  When do we ever get to see ourselves as African Americans in Middle Earth?  Can you imagine that, in Middle Earth like 'Lord of the Rings' ['The Lord of the Rings'].  You know, now we get to go to space a little bit, and be it in the future.  We get to be a little bit in the past, but it's usually we're locked into those positions, into being, you know, within the agrarian world, laborers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or urban testosterone threats.
Story_ID: 364829
Speaker 1: Do you ever think that someone will come along and recognize the things that you see and say, here's the financing to do what you see?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  Yes I do.  I think it's--I think all things change and all things go in cycles, and all things--the same people that, that were out here that I pitched to twenty years ago, most of them are no longer sitting behind those desks.  I've outlived them.  I've outlasted them, not outlived them.  I mean they're just gone.  They go into other professions or what have you; things change.
Speaker 1: But are more sensitive for people who understand what you're trying to do sitting in those desks, at those desks now?
Speaker 2: It's interesting 'cause speaking of w-, speaking of cultures because now there are more African Americans or people of color behind those desks.  But they've hired the same kind of people.  They're the same cognoscenti, who, who don't read, who don't experience life, who don't travel, who don't know anyone outside of their own little group.  And they're just trying to clone films that are, that are already being successful.  So you have the same--you have black faces behind those desks making those same decisions that, you know, twenty, twenty-five years ago their white predecessors made.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And they only--and they'll tell you you can't do a film for this; there's no audience for that.  Or the, the, the famous myth of we won't be able to sell it internationally.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We, we won't be able to get foreign distribution.  Now I've heard that for so many years, yet every time that I'm sitting in Italy in a hotel room with Germany or in, in Hong Kong, and I turn on the TV, what do I see?  Films from Africa, fil-, African American films.  But they constantly say they can't sell 'em there.
Story_ID: 364830
Speaker 1: If you had independent financing, you're making all the decisions, what kind of films do you think you would be making, or would you like to make?
Speaker 2: If I had independent financing, I would not seek to direct all of the films I want to make.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would--there are quite a few that I would make, but I would seek out some emerging filmmakers.  Some, some young guns, some kids with a lot of energy and a lot of great ideas and who are thinking things that I wouldn't even begin to think.  Find the best of the best (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thinking beyond where you've gone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bring out the best of the best and kind of shepherd them through this minefield that I've gone through.
Story_ID: 364831
Speaker 1: Is there anything that I did not cover that you would like to address?
Speaker 2: Not that I think of.  I think that's about it with--
Speaker 1: Okay.  How would you like to be remembered in this field?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a fighter.  That I--
Speaker 1: Anyone watching this will know that.
Speaker 2: --that I made my presence known and I tried to do well, do good things and be well (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: And--but you're still going to be out there trying to get your works made (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Great, great.
Story_ID: 364832
Speaker 1: Is there anything else I've left out or should include in there?  A period of your life that we need to cover more?
Speaker 2: Can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: You, you mentioned a little while ago some of the independent young filmmakers have great ideas.  Would you care to name them at this point?
Speaker 2: Not at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I think they're still in the making and in the doing and that kind of puts pressure on--yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have my eyes open and--yep.  I mean it's like, it's like the whole art form, it's a spirit that just cannot be crushed.  And that--this independent filmmaking has been taken over, co-opted by Hollywood and now they're saying this is mine, this is an independent film, this is--and now they're still studio driven films, you know, financed by the studio with the studio producers in place.
Speaker 1: And you think that curtails their creativity and their vision (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they're independent films after all.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know when you have a team of--when a committee is making a film, sure making a film is a collaboration, it always has been, always will be; you can't do it alone.  But when you have a team of people sitting around a table, you know, casting, complete committee and--when the, when a director does not have choices; when they are not making his or her own choices, then there's a problem.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 2: Because it's all about choices, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, if--when you can't--when, when a film does not have resonance, you know, when you can't f-, when you're watching it, but you don't feel anything, you know.  There's a problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you don't really have a film.  Okay.  I think that covers--thank you very, very much--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --for this.  And I hope I've covered everything.
Speaker 2: I think you have.  I hope so too.
