Story_ID: 17441
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer and Scott Stearns is the observer.  And if you could, please, for the record, please tell me your name, your full name, spell it and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am Ruth Amy Davis, R-U-T-H, A-M-Y, D-A-V-I-S, and I was born May 28, 1943.
Speaker 1: And the location?
Speaker 2: I was born in Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's (laughter) date is March 2, 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this interview is taking place at 4108 Seventeenth Street, NW, Washington, D.C.  And if you will, Ambassador Davis, would you please state your occupation?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am a United States diplomat.  I am presently on detail to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and my title at Howard University is Distinguished Advisor for International Affairs.  And I'm in the Ralph Bunche Center.
Story_ID: 17442
Speaker 1: Please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What is my favorite food?  Let's see.  Aye, ye, ye, ye.  I like, I, I like food in general.  I like Italian food.  I like American food.  I like Chinese food.  I like a variety of food, and I like to cook.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is probably spring because everything seems to come to life in the springtime.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is a little bit drab.  It's, it's beige (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'd have to say that my favorite vacation destination is in Europe, Spain.
Story_ID: 17443
Speaker 1: Now, tell me a little bit about your mother.  What was her name?  Where was she born, and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Edith Vertele Mallett Davis, and she was born in Manning, South Carolina, and she grew up in Manning, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background and how she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother grew up in a large family.  She had a number of brothers and sisters.  And she grew up in a very close family.  It was a farming family.  And it was a family that enjoyed a great deal of respect in the community.  My mother talks very frequently about her family, and I enjoy very much hearing about them.  For instance, I always remember that my grandfather [Eugene Mallett] was one of the first people in that community to own a car, an automobile.  And obviously, it was a Ford, remember those days when you could get a Ford in any color as long as it was black.  (Laughter) Well, my grandfather had a number, at--one at each time, but a number of Ford automobiles.  And they were very well respected in the community.  As I said, it was farming community.  They put a lot of emphasis on education for the boys and the girls.  All of the girls--interesting, all of the girls went to college.  And they were teachers.  The boys didn't go to college.  The parents focused on making sure that their girls were educated so that the girls would be able to take care of themselves.  The boys ended up, one was a farmer and one was a minister who migrated up to the North.  But it was a very close family.  My grandmother was, I remember--my grandfather died when I was very young.  But, and so, I don't, I don't really remember my grandfather.  But I remember my grandmother.  I remember her as an extraordinarily industrious woman.  Her name was Dalia Mallett.  And when I say she was industrious, she did things like she knew how to sew.  So she took in sewing in addition to being a farmer.  She loved flowers.  So she had the most beautiful flowers planted around her home.  And she was the real, sort of focal point of the family.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?  Did she share any stories with you of her growing up, and if so, would you share them us?
Speaker 2: Well, I've described, I describe my mother as a very loving woman who brooked absolutely no nonsense, and I--she talked about growing up.  She talked about experiences with her, her siblings and experiences with her--she had some aunts and uncles who were about the same age that she was.  And one story that she tells amuses me very much because my mother was very smart.  She worked very hard.  She studied very hard, and she had these, the aunts who were around the same grade.  One of them didn't do very well in school.  And when it was time for her to go to college, there was a switching of the grades so that she would get into college.  My mother was mortified.  And I think that that was one of the basis of my mother's great, sort of ethical view on life.  You've got to do things right because if you don't do things right, just and honestly, you might hurt somebody.  So, but she had lot, lots of stories about growing, about, about the, the difficulties of, of growing up in a farm family where they were poor, but they didn't particularly know that they were poor because of the love and because of the unity of the family.  I remember also one story that my mother tells.  It's a bit later in her life when she married, my father [Anderson Davis] was in the military.  And, as I said, her family--they were poor, but they did well, and they were well respected in the family.  My father was in the military, and she came back to Manning [South Carolina] to teach.  And obviously, as I said, the family was doing very well, and I remember--these are some of the indignities of being black in the South.  One of the bankers in the city, in the, in the little town came to my grandfather, and he said, Gene--his name was Eugene Mallett, "Gene, do you owe Mr. Snyder money?"  And my grandfather said, "No, I don't owe Snyder money.  Why did you ask me?"  He said, "Because Snyder came to the bank asked how much your daughter deposited in the bank because he had heard that she gets her husband's military check."  What was my mother's reaction to that?  Obviously, they were very shocked.  But my grandfather said, "Edith, don't deposit another check in that bank.  You save it, and you take them to Atlanta [Georgia] when you go to Atlanta."  And that's what she did.  That's the kind of thing that obviously is extraordinarily unpleasant.  And you can certainly say that it was one of the indigo--I meant indignity that she had to suffer because she was African American.  I, I think my grandfather was right to say, "Don't deposit your checks there," 'cause who knows, if he found that she, she had more money than, than he thought she should have, he might have invented some reason that my grandfather owed him money or whatever.
Story_ID: 17444
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk a little bit about your father.  What was his name, where was he born, and where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: My father, his name was Anderson Davis.  He was born in Shady Dale, Georgia, and he grew up in Atlanta, Georgia.  And he grew up among, a-again, a very large family, and my father (laughter), I hate to keep using the word, strict, but my father was a, was, was, was very strict.  He always, he was very religious, and he--I, I, I can't imagine him doing the kind of pranks that he must have done as a child (laughter).
Speaker 1: What kinds of stories did he share with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father talked about his relations with his cousins and sort of growing in, in Atlanta, growing up.  He, he felt constrained because he watched his mother [Amy Jackson], who was a domestic, work very, very, very hard and very, very long hours.  And that always worried him, and he felt very compelled to be somebody so that he would be able to help his mother and be able to ease her economic situation.  And, and he worked very hard, and he--in later years, really gave a lot to his, his family.
Story_ID: 17445
Speaker 1: What do you know about your ancestors?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can't trace my ancestors very far.  But what I can tell you is that it was really amazing when I went to Benin as, as ambassador in West Africa.  I very frequently saw people who looked just like my family members.  I couldn't believe it.  I remember when I arrived in Benin, I'd been there very shortly.  And I was invited to the home of one of the former presidents of Benin, President [Hubert] Maga.  And when I arrived, the woman who opened the door, just almost floored me.  She looked just like my grandmother, just like my grandmother.  And I said, this--I, I could hardly refrain from touching her.  And I thought, this clearly, it is true, I know, that a million and a half slaves were shipped out of Benin, and I said, my goodness, I would not be at all surprised if some of my very ancestors did not come from this place.
Speaker 1: Did that kind of, were--do you think that you may trace back your ancestry because of that and see if it is actually the case?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really have not--I'm always caught up right now in the, the moment.  And I've been so very, very busy I really have not spent very much time thinking.  But it is something that, that I really would like to do.  I actually have to say that I regret, and I had this conversation with my sister [Eugenia Davis Clements], I regret that we did not sit down with some of the older members of the family to record some of the history of the family.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your grandparents, starting with your mother's side?
Speaker 2: With my mother's side, my grandfather was Eugene Mallett and my grandmother was Dalia Mallett.  They were farmers, and they worked very hard, as I said.  They were very well respected in the community.  I, I said the name Mallett, that's the family name.  E--now in the little town of Manning, South Carolina, there is a Mallett Road named in honor of one of the members of my family, not my grandfather, but the--it, it just goes to show you how very well respected they were in the community.  And I know that my grandparents put a lot of emphasis on education, especially for the girls.
Speaker 1: You had mentioned before that the family was very poor but yet and still your grandfather was able to own an automobile.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they worked very hard, and they saved.  When I say poor, I don't mean really, really poor.  I guess I meant without a lot of extra resources.  They--that, that, that's very interesting, now that you mention it.  Let me think about it, probably, probably what happened was that as with many of us happens, in the later years and in the later years people are, do a bit better, and they're able to marshal their resources.  My mother [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] says they were poor, but, in fact, they did own an automobile.  And I think that it is because of this sort of really putting things together to save things and being very directed, so that your resources go a bit further than they would have gone had they not been so directed.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me a little bit about your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, I did not know my grandfather, but I knew my grandmother [Amy Jackson].  And my grandmother was a, a typical Southern woman who was born in a rural town, I mean a very small town.  She, too, was born in Shady Dale [Georgia], but she migrated to Atlanta [Georgia], or moved to Atlanta, and she did, as, as her other sisters did, domestic work.  And it is very interesting because you know the salary of a domestic worker is very, very limited, but the family worked together, lived together, and there again, believed in education.  And they worked hard, she worked very hard, and she sent my father [Anderson Davis] to college.  He went to Allen University, in [Columbia] South Carolina where he met my mother.  So I would say, my grandmother--what I remember about my grandmother--in fact, it's interesting.  I remember that my grandmother was very devoted to her work.  She worked very, very hard.  And I think that--and I think it with a little bit of resentment to tell you the truth, that my grandmother gave more of her time to raising the children of the white family that she worked for than she gave raising my father, although she loved him very, very much.  And her ideas about working were to work to have enough to take care of him, but what she really gave was to that family.  I can remember my grandmother on her salary, which was very, very minimal, who had to make a cake once for the Christmas or Thanksgiving, for the family that she worked for.  And they didn't have all of the ingredients at, at the home where she worked.  And I remember, she--my grandmother spending the money out of her own salary to buy those ingredients.  That was her dedication, but at the same time, it was a drain on her resources in terms of her own family.  I suspect that perhaps I shouldn't resent that as much as I do because one of the things that I learned from my grandparents and from my father was to be very, very serious about my work.  But I think you can see that I have a little resentment there.
Speaker 1: How do you think your father feels?
Speaker 2: My father, I, I can't answer that.  My father knew that his mother wanted the best for him, that she worked as hard as she could to make sure that he got a college education.  But to be perfectly honest, yes, I think my father felt a little slighted.  And he felt that he should have been--although he was the focus of all of her resources, and although he knew that she loved him, he felt just a, a bit that too much of her attention was devoted to the family that she helped to raise.
Speaker 1: And why didn't you know your grandfather?  Had he passed on?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had.
Story_ID: 17446
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) When you said that earlier, I started to, I started to think.  Well, I think my earliest memory was when my mother [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] took me to school.  I went to a small, private school at first.  It was a little kind--kindergarten.  And my mother took me to school.  The people who managed the school--it was right down the street from where we lived--were Mrs. Scott and her daughter, Ms. Knox.  And when I got in that school, I was determined not to stay.  I wasn't gonna let my mother leave me, and she started out of the door, and I went tearing after her, running around that room.  And they (laughter), they had to, they had to catch me and subdue me (laughter), and my poor mother left with tears in her eyes.  And so that was one of the, that was one of my earliest memories.  I started out confronting this world fighting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you share some other memories with us and describe what your family life was like growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, other memories that I had, I remember that we lived, when I was--when my father [Anderson Davis] came out of the military, we lived with my aunt in Atlanta [Georgia].  She had a very big house, and we lived there because my father was working.  And my mother was working as a teacher, and they were working to save enough money to buy a house.  And we didn't have a car.  We had to, to walk everywhere we went.  We went to church rather near.  We would--I lived, we lived on Ashby Street [Atlanta, Georgia].  We went to the Simpson Street Church of Christ.  I remember walking to church.  I remember church being a very, very big part of our lives.  Then, my parents actually saved up enough money to buy a house.  And they said to us, "We're going to buy this house first, and then later, when we're able to, we're going to buy a car."  So we bought the house, and we moved into the house, and we still went to the Simpson Street Church of Christ, but we had to walk.  So we had--I remember very well walking to church every Sunday.  And I think it was about forty, about a forty-minute walk.  But we did it every Sunday, and, of course, we walked to--we walked to school.  We walked everywhere, and finally, when I was thirteen years old, my parents got a car.  It was a nineteen--I guess I was thirteen, it was 1957 [Pontiac] Bonneville.  And my father who had just gotten his driver's license said, "We are going to take a trip to California, and we're gonna spend a month driving from Atlanta to California so that you can get some knowledge about this country."  And that was the trip that opened my eyes to a different kind of world, different people, different languages, and it was, it was fabulous.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about that trip.
Speaker 2: The, the thing that was so great about it was, I remember driving across country--a couple of things I remembered, very--you know, I, I, I am formed in many ways by the South and by the experiences that I had.  I remember my father being so proud that he was able to take us traveling.  But on the other hand, I remember the pain in my father's eyes when we weren't able to use the bathroom facilities at filling stations or when we weren't able to find motel accommodations and were told that we had to drive thirty or forty miles to find somewhere to stay.  And I remember as a child saying, "This is very courageous of my father to do this for us," and it's very painful because he can't do very much about this situation, except once.  There is a story that I'll tell you.  But I said, "Someday I am going to repay my father for all of the trouble that he's gone to, through, and for what he's tried to do for us."  And I'll just skip ahead a little bit and tell you that when I was sworn in as ambassador, I said I hope that this is some of the repayment that I wanted to make to my parents for what they did for us.  But back to the trip across country--we stopped once in a, I think this was in Mississippi, in a filling station.  And my father asked the guy to fill the tank up with gas, and as he was filling it up, my father said, "Where is the restroom?"  And he said, "There's no restroom for, for colored people."  And my father said, "Well, take your gas out of my tank.  I'm not buying it."  And, of course, the man reneged and sort of said, "Hurry up, and go around the corner."  That was, that, that was one experience, but that was sort of, you know, the indignities of racism.  But what was fascinating about that trip was, as we drove across country, we met people who spoke Spanish.  I didn't know people who spoke Spanish.  We even met people out in California who spoke Chinese, and I found that really fascinating.  And I thought, "Gee, these people are really very interesting, and I would like to know more people and know more about different cultures."  And I actually think that that was really the basis for my finally wanting to become a Foreign Services officer.
Story_ID: 17447
Speaker 1: So, Ambassador, tell me a little bit about your sister [Eugenia Davis Clements].  When was she born and what life was like with you two growing up?
Speaker 2: My sister was born January 8, 1949.  And I remember very well when she came into my life.  My parents [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis and Anderson Davis] had tried to prepare me for her.  And they always made, tried to make me very responsible.  So they said, "Now, the baby's coming home, and the--your mother's gonna come in an ambulance with the baby.  And you are to pay the ambulance man, the driver."  So I said, "Oh, okay".  I was very proud of that.  Here, they arrived, and there my mother was with this baby, and I thought, "Who is that?  And why is she bringing this baby here?  Maybe if I don't pay the ambulance driver, they'll take her away." (Laughter) But they didn't.  That was the first sighting of my sister.  But my parents, because I was six years older than my sister, my parents taught me to be responsible.  I was almost like a second parent for my sister.  And it's very interesting, in later years, my mother has been envious, she will tell you, of the relationship that my sister and I have.  We've, we've been very, very close because I always felt that I was responsible, I was responsible--and I told you we walked a lot.  When my mother started to do substitute teaching, we lived, there again, about, almost thirty-five, forty minutes away from my aunt, who babysat my sister.  So I would have to walk my sister to my aunt's to leave her, and then, I guess and then I'd go to school.  And after school, I'd walk and get my sister, and we would walk back home.  And we were, we were very, very close.  I remember when I got a [Charles] Merrill scholarship at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I was to go overseas for fifteen months.  And I remember how wrenching it was for the two of us to know that we'd be separated.  And I remember my sister saying--I said, "Oh, you know, don't worry.  I'll be home in fifteen months, and it'll be just like it was before."  And she said, "No, it will never be the same."  And in a way, it never was the same because I left home again after another year.  But we have always been very, very close.  My sister is a physician now.  She, she decided that she'd want to go to medical school (laughter).  I remember once, and I teased my parents about this.  I've teased all their lives.  My sister, when she was little, she drew some pictures.  She drew pictures of, of men and a man and a woman.  And she labeled all of the parts of the human body cause she has a biological mind.  She's interested in biology 'cause in the future, she's gonna be a doctor.  And my parents found the pictures, and they said, "You're drawing dirty pictures. (laughter) Don't ever do that again."  And she sent me a note, and she said, "There are four evil eyes here watching me" (laughter).  But I always knew she was interested in the human body.  And then my parents realized that, and I remember that they purchased for her for Christmas one year, one of these sort of human bodies that you could take apart the various organs and what not.  So they came around, and they (laughter)--that when she drew pictures of the human body, they weren't dirty pictures, they were biological pictures.
Speaker 1: What's your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Eugenia.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: Yes, E-U-G-E-N-I-A.  It's the feminine of my grandfather's name, Eugene.  And so, anyway, so she, she went to medical school at, at Los Angeles, UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles].  And she, of course, many interesting stories to tell.  One of the stories that she told me was that even in California, there, as an African American student, she wasn't always very well received.  And once when she was on duty, one of the white students was supposed to give her the key to the room that the ones on duty could sleep in.  And she found out when it was time to go to sleep, that he had given her the key to the broom closet.  So she had to sit up all night, and she was obviously very disgusted and annoyed about that.
Story_ID: 17448
Speaker 1: One thing you didn't talk about was how you got from Phoenix, Arizona to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, okay.  The reason that I was born in Phoenix, Arizona [May 28, 1943], and that's a very special thing for me.  I'll have to tell you.  The reason that I was born in Phoenix, Arizona was that my father [Anderson Davis] was in the military.  And so my mother [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] went out with him.  And then when he got shipped out to the Aleutian Islands [Alaska], my mother went back to South Carolina where she taught.  And when my father got out of the military, they decided that they would move to Atlanta.  But what I wanted to tell you was that this is one of my markers because I was born in Phoenix, Arizona.  And then I went to Atlanta, and I grew up in Atlanta.  Atlanta, has, as one of its symbols, the phoenix because, as you know, [General William Tecumseh] Sherman burned Atlanta to the ground.  But Atlanta rose from the flames like the legend of the phoenix to become one of the pearls of the South.  So I was born in Phoenix, and I grew up under the sign of the phoenix, and I have always believed that from destruction, you can bring peace, tranquility, development and make a thing of beauty.  So that has been, I think, the thing that has compelled me and impelled me towards a diplomatic career because, as you know, in this world, there is a lot of confusion.  And I think that if you work hard enough and long enough, you'll be able to bring some peace, tranquility and perhaps a thing of beauty.
Story_ID: 17449
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your elementary school years.  Do you remember the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I first went to [Rev.] E. R. Carter [Elementary School, later KIPP West Atlanta Young Scholars (WAYS) Academy, Atlanta Georgia].
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: E, period, R period, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R.  And it's on, it was on Ashby Street [Atlanta, Georgia].  I had, I didn't have a very good experience at E. R. Carter, I'll tell you, to be perfectly honest because, I told you, my mother [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis]--well, at the time, my mother was, she taught, but she did supply work.  She didn't have a permanent teaching position.  My father [Anderson Davis] was a mail carrier.  We had in my class the daughters and the sons of a few doctors and a few lawyers.  And frankly speaking, I didn't count because I wasn't somebody.  And I resented that because I have always really felt that I really am somebody.  And that doesn't exclude other people from being somebody as well.  But, so I was not very happy at E. R. Carter.  But then we moved, when we moved from my aunt's house to our own home, and I went to [Emma] E. C. Clements [sic, Emma C. Clement Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  That's, E period, C period, Clements, C-L-E-M-E-N-T-S.  And that was a whole, completely different atmosphere.  Nobody cared who your mother or who your father was or what they did.  And I actually, as a student, excelled in that, I excelled in that environment.  I was a safety patrol officer.  I became captain of the patrols, and I rode the school bus, and I put everybody in their place if they weren't behaving.  And I remember going to Washington [D.C.] to visit the Capitol, and it was the first time that I had, had been here.  And that was a, that was a great experience.  I thought this is a city that I could live in.  But that elementary school experience was, was very, very, very, very positive.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers who had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember very well, Ms. Taylor, and I remember the, the principal, who shall remain nameless for a reason (laughter).  I, this is another little story.  We, my father read to us a lot.  He read poetry.  He ordered books, and he--what was the name of that set of books, the 'Child World Encyclopedia' [sic, 'Child's World Encyclopedia'] or something.  Anyway, he'd read to us.  We went to a ceremony, and the principal made a wonderful speech.  It was just a great speech.  She did it with such poise, and it was so eloquent.  And we went home, and in a couple of weeks--my father taped it.  My father said, "You want to listen to this speech again."  We listened to it, and then he got the '[Child's] World Encyclopedia' out, and he read the speech.  She had pilfered the speech completely from the encyclopedia or the booklet.  And it was then that I thought--I, I really lost a bit of respect for the principal, but it really opened my eyes to the fact that, "Boy, you better be careful 'cause you're not the only person who is knowledgeable and who reads."  So if you want to do speeches, they'd better be your own or you'd bett--I learned this in elementary school, they'd be your own or you'd better give the author credit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations back then?
Speaker 2: You know, (chuckle), to be perfectly honest, I have to tell you, two things I knew.  I can remember being at home and listening to the rain outside, saying, "Oh, this is very pleasant, I'm very secure.  But how is it that people live their lives in the same house, in the same city.  I got to get out, and I've got to see the world."  That was one thing that I knew.  The second thing that I knew was that all of the professional women in my family were teachers.  And I didn't know what I wanted to do, but I knew that I did not want to be a teacher.  I knew that I wanted to be different.  I obviously had a great deal of respect for them and for what they did and for all of my teachers.  That's one of the very special things, I think, about growing up in the South because your teachers were very, very important to you.  And your teachers really were helpful, and they were important.  And so I respect them, but I just did not want to be a teacher.  And I certainly didn't have my sights on being a diplomat because I didn't know any diplomats.
Speaker 1: What about junior high school?  Where did you attend junior high school?
Speaker 2: Okay, in the South, we attend just high school, five years of high school, not junior high as you do here, I think.
Speaker 1: So, well, those later years in elementary school, who were some of your friends, and who or what was influencing you at that particular time?
Speaker 2: Oh, in elementary school?
Speaker 1: The later years in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I remember, in the seventh grade, I remember, I remember Sarah Hicks.  Sarah Hicks was really, really smart.  I remember once we had a, an essay, and our teacher said, "Read this essay and give me a précis of the essay."  It was about a farmer who was going through a period of going from utilizing old farm equipment to, to new type agricultural implements, tractors and what not.  And I will never forget as long as I lived, the teacher said, you know,"Write a summary, a précis of it."  And I wrote mine with sort of the very words and slimming it down.  Sarah Hicks actually did a summary.  She said that this, a précis, she explained what it was all about, that it was talking about the transition from older types of farming to a more modern.  And I thought, "How in the world did she figure out how to do that, and I didn't?"  And I will never forget that cause I was bested, and I didn't like to be bested (laughter).  So, Sarah was a great influence on my learning how to think about things in a, in a different way.
Story_ID: 17450
Speaker 1: Let's move on to high school.  Now, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Okay, I attended Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], which was about a--(laughter), I always think about walking (laughter), which was about a twenty-minute walk from my house.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your experiences in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, my experience, I, I, I'm thinking about being in high school and, and walking to school and thinking about the library.  The library was always very important to me because I liked to read.  My parents [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis and Anderson Davis], as I said, were very strict.  So we wouldn't go out and spend a lot of time running around with friends in the neighborhood.  My idea of a high old time was to go to the library and check out books.  I remember Mrs. McFeeders (ph.), the librarian, and I'm digressing from your question, but I'll get back to it.  I remember one day when I was still small, young, and she said to me, "Ruth, you've been reading all of these books in the children's section.  It's now time for you to go over to the adult section.  Give me your hand," and she walked me over to the adult section, and she showed me an array of books.  She said, "Now, here's Carl T. Rowan, who's written a wonderful book about 'Go South to Sorrow,' and here are other authors.  Here's Frank Yerby, you might want to read him.  It's time for you to change.  It's time for you to grow up."  So Mrs. McFeeders was a very, a real part of my life as an elementary school kid and as a high school kid.  Now,--.
Speaker 1: How old were you when she told you that?
Speaker 2: When Mrs., when Mrs. McFeeders took me (laughter) through my change of life, I guess I must have been, I'd say around thirteen.  So, so, okay, you asked me about Booker T. Washington High School.  I had a very positive experience at Booker T. Washington.  I was very active.  I was the reporter for the newspaper.  I ran for, I ran for an office to--to be reporter, I had to run for an office.  And that office, and it was really a lot of pleasure cause I, I did a little campaign, and it was, it, it was neat.  And (laughter) I remember, I was putting, I was writing one of the campaign placards, and I had put something about an officer, and I'm a notoriously bad speller.  And I'd spelled, I think I had too many i's or not enough i's in "officer," and they said, "Ruth, if you're gonna be the reporter (laughter), you got to do better than that." (laughter)
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in high school and how did they influence you?
Speaker 2: I remember, right off hand, Dr. Tate.  Dr. Tate taught French, and he loved the French language.  And he was an influence in terms of saying, you know, "You really have got to be serious about studying languages because they open a whole new world to you."  Mr. Martin, who taught, oh, he--mathematics.  I remember my mathematics teachers, Mr. Rice, Mr. Martin, and I remember them, and Mrs. Johnson, I, I, I detest mathematics (laughter).  It's, it's amazing that I ever got through, through mathematics.  But they were all very patient.  I remember Mrs. Howell (ph.), who, when I was in the eleventh grade, tried to convince me that it would be a good idea to be one of the people who helped to integrate the schools and to transfer from Washington High School.  I never did that.  I did not, I did not want to do it.  So, but, but it--we entertained the idea.  Mr. Puckett (ph.) who taught science.  Dr. George who taught physical education, who followed me very closely.  Unfortunately, he died recently, but before he died, we were able to do a homage to him, and that was, that was very special.  But my--what, that I think was special about my high school years was that the teachers were very supportive.  They all said to me, "Now, Ruth you'll have to--you're gonna do well, and you're gonna go to college.  We will write for you your letters of recommendation."  It was a given that I'd go to college, that they were supportive of me to make sure that I went to college.  I think that that's one of the values in the segregated system that we had.  We had the support that we needed to survive the system, and to develop ourselves.
Speaker 1: Now, interestingly enough, you were trailblazing in so many other areas.  Why didn't you want to be part of this first group of students who would help integrate the schools?
Speaker 2: That's very interesting.  I, I felt very comfortable and very happy at--I felt very comfortable and very happy at Booker T. Washington High School, and I just did not want to, I, I didn't want to leave.  And I was very, oh, I, I was very hesitant to integrate a, to work on integrating a school because I knew that I wasn't welcomed.  And I didn't want to be somewhere where I wasn't welcome.  I have to tell you a story about why I, I thought very strongly that I wouldn't be welcomed.  When I was in high school, the eleventh grade and so, in the summers, what I did was, to make some money--we didn't have sort of affirmative action or jobs or internships, that African Americans could do, and I worked in the--I did domestic work in the summer.  And I remember, and this is, I think, a very defining moment of my life, the lady of the house had gone to the Caribbean.  And she came back and she told me, she said, "Ruth, I went to the Caribbean.  I had a wonderful time."  She said, "It's beautiful down there."  And she described the beauty of it, and, you know, conjured up how lovely the islands were.  And she said, and, you know, "People work, they go to work, say at about 8:00 o'clock [A.M.], and then they're finished at 2:00 o'clock in the afternoon." And I said, "Oh, that's great."  I said, "I'd love to do that."  And without missing a beat and without one bit of malice towards me, she looked at me, and she said, "But Ruth, that's not for people like you.  That's for people like my friends."  And I thought, "What is this woman talking about?  Doesn't she know that this is America, that people can succeed, and that people can do well, and that all people have the same kind of opportunities?"  And I think it was at that moment that I decided that I am really going to be somebody.  But I also decided that I didn't want to be around a whole lot of people who were negative, and who told me things like that.  So that's why I elected to stay in the safe cocoon of the black community.
Story_ID: 17451
Speaker 1: So had your teachers not said, "Ruth, you know, you're gonna go to college; we're gonna write these letters of recommendation for you," do you think you would have made the choice to go to college, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, probably, yes, because of my parents [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis and Anderson Davis], because my parents put a premium, I mean a real premium on education.  And they were very serious about our education.  I missed two days of school in my whole high school years [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  And that was because I was, had the Asian flu.  I never will forget that, but, you know, my mother said, "You go to school, and death is no excuse.  You still go to school."  And so my parents were very, very focused, and we were very focused.  But it certainly made it easy, and it made it seem the very right thing to do when all of your teachers were very, so supportive.  And I imagine that there were other students whose parents were not so focused and directed, and that was very helpful for them.
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, what were you thinking you wanted to do with your life?  What were you thinking you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know, I, I--and I kept thinking, "Now, you got to think about this.  You got to be somebody, you got to do something."  So I thought, well, maybe, since I don't want to be a teacher, maybe I'll be a social worker.  I thought that sounded, that sounded pretty good (laughter), so that's what I said when I finished high school, "Yes, I'm, I'm gonna, and I, I'll be a social worker."
Speaker 1: What were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was almost never any question, although I thought there might have been a question.  I applied for a number of schools.  I applied for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I applied for--I wanted to go to Canada.  I applied for some school in Canada, and I applied for Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I actually was accepted first at Spelman, and my mother said, you know, "I think that Spelman is really where you want to go to school."  And that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Did you--as someone who was eager to see the world, and, were you a little hesitant about still continuing to stay in Atlanta to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, not, not at all.  I, I wanted to see the world, but that wasn't at that time, it wasn't that pressing.
Story_ID: 17452
Speaker 1: Ambassador Davis, for someone who was really eager and anxious to see the world and do a lot of exploring of the world, why did you decide to stay in Atlanta [Georgia] to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, yes, it's true that I wanted to see the world, but I knew that I would have time to do that later.  And Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], obviously, had a wonderful reputation.  And I wasn't ready to cut the ties from my family.  And so Spelman was right there, and we all thought that it was the best thing for me.  And it proved to be, without a doubt.
Story_ID: 17453
Speaker 1: Before we talk some about your experiences at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], let's go back a little bit.  Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, so many things.  And they're all sort of things that bring back very good memory.  For sights, any time, any time, I see anybody taking a photograph, I think about my father [Anderson Davis] because my father always had a camera attached to his hand.  I'm not sure I'd know what he looked like without a camera.  And he was always taking photographs, and his favorite place to take photographs was when we were sitting around the dinner table, at various celebrations.  So anybody, any time I see a camera or someone taking a picture, I think about my father.  And I miss my father taking these photographs because he really made the family's history in, in, in photographs.  Let's see, that's a sight.  A sound, I am a great fan of opera.  And frequently, when I hear opera, I think about my mother [Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] who knew nothing about opera, but who, I remember once saying--we could check albums, LPs [long playing records] out of the library, and I remember once saying, "What, what LP should I get, mama?  I, I don't know."  And she said, "Well, there's this opera singer called Mario"--I don't even know if she said he was an opera singer.  She said, "There's this singer called Mario Lanza.  Why don't you check out one of his records?"  And I remember listening to Mario Lanza with my mother.  That was the only time that we ever listened to any opera together when I was growing, just that one record.  But I remembered it, and I remembered that I liked the sound.  And, of course, I became really a lover of opera when I was in Italy.  But I always think that was the first time that I heard opera, and it was with my mother.  So that's a sound.  The smells, fried chicken (laughter), fried chicken always makes me think--you know, we, down South call chicken "the gospel bird" because you always ate chicken on Sunday.  And more often than not, it was fried chicken, and that makes me think of growing up in the South.
Story_ID: 17454
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about some of your experiences at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  What was it like for you at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved being at Spelman.  Spelman opened my eyes even more to the world.  Once, when I was at Spelman, we had mandatory chapel, and so I think we went, and as I recall now, we went every, you know, third--three days a week.  And we had speakers, all kinds of speakers, speakers who talked about art, speakers who talked politics, who talked about--everything.  And that was a very, very good thing, I think.  It also, I just had excellent teachers.  One of the teachers--there're two teachers who I recall with great, great fondness.  One was Millicent Dobbs Jordan.  You might recognize the Dobbs name.  That is the family from which Maynard Jackson [former mayor of Atlanta, Georgia] hails.  And I remember the--I, I thought I was pretty smart, you know.  I graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] at the top of my class, and every other time they called an award, I got it.  So I thought I was really hot stuff.  I remember writing my first essay for Mrs. Jordan, and I think I got a C minus, and I couldn't believe it.  And I went to see her, and I said, "I wrote this like"--just because she said, "Don't waste my time telling me why you did something wrong.  Let's spend my time for me telling you how to do it right."  That was also one of those defining moments of my life because as a supervisor, as an administrator and as a manager, my thought process has always been, "Let's not play the blame game; let's figure out how to do it better the next time."  And I attribute that to Millicent Dobbs Jordan who was just a wonderful, just, just a really wonderful professor.  Another one is, was Dr. Lois Moreland, who, after I left, instituted the Trailblazers, and those are for all of the Spelman girls who are interested in international affairs.  And Lois Moreland was very, very instrumental in helping me--I was a Merrill scholar at Spelman.  Now, that, talk about defining, was a defining experience.  As a Merrill scholar, I was awarded $3,000 and back then $3,000 was a lot of money.  And I could study anywhere in the world that I wanted to study.  And I elected to study in France.  What was interesting about that?  This was the '60s [1960s], and in the '60s [1960s] African countries were becoming independent.  So I met all of these African students who--now, remember in the '60s [1960s], in the United States, we were talking about the Civil Rights Movement rectifying the problems created by racism, but these students were talking about their countries becoming independent, and they were going to go home and take over the building of their countries.  And I thought, "This is incredible.  These students are talking about going back and doing nation building, and I would really, really like to see that in process."  And that was when I decided definitely that I was going to go overseas, and I really wanted to go to Africa cause I wanted to see this whole process of nation building.  And so I went back to Spelman, and I finished my last year--oh, also, also, when I was a Merrill scholar, I traveled around in Egypt.  And I just thought Egyptian, Egyptian culture, anthropology, the Pyramids, the whole sort of the pharaohs, I just thought it was just the cat's pajamas.  It was so wonderful.  I got ex--really excited.  And I thought, "I think I want to study Egyptology."  So I went back, and I saw one of my professors.  We called him 'Pop' Shivers.  I said, "Pops, I want to study Egyptology," and he leaned across the desk, and he said, "You want to study Egyptology?  And what will you do with Egyptology?"  Well, that was a profound question (laughter), and, and it brought me back to, to my senses.  But remember, I told you that I wanted to go to--I was, I was gonna be a social worker.  But I got a chance to go to Washington [D.C.], all of these things through Spelman.  I got a chance to be--on a Ford Foundation grant that gave me a, that gave me a internship in Washington, and then a scholarship to go to grad school so that I'd go to work--ultimately, I'd go to work for the State Department.  But I decided, now, this is when the Billingsleys came into my life.  [Andrew] Andy Billingsley was teaching at, at UC [University of California at] Berkeley [California].  And he came, and he was recruiting students for the School of Social Welfare.  So I decided I wanted to go to the School of Social Welfare cause I'm gonna be a social worker.  But I took this scholarship, the international affairs scholarship.  And I met Amy [Billingsley] in, in California.  (Chuckle) And I finished my two years, and I remember, just before I graduated, I got this call from the State Department, and they said, "Well, you've finished your two years, are you ready to come into the State Department?"  (Laughter) And I said, "The State Department?  Oh, yes," and this is what I need to do to see the world.  I said, "Yes, I'm ready to come."  So, what I did, was I was out there in Berkeley, picketing for a Black Studies program.  And I put my picket sign down and went to Washington to join the Foreign Service.  And I remember raising my right hand saying, "I will not strike against the federal government," and I said, "Oh, my God, I've been co-opted" (laughter).  Anyway, the point that I'm trying to make is that Spelman College was really a defining period in my life in that it gave me the Merrill scholarship experience where I went overseas, got to know, got to know African students, and got to think that I really wanted to live in Africa and get to know it, and then inevitably, that's what I did.
Story_ID: 17455
Speaker 1: Ambassador, let's go back a little bit to your experiences in Europe during the '60s [1960s].  What was that like for you as an African American woman being in Europe--?
Speaker 2: Well, I--.
Speaker 1: During that time period?
Speaker 2: During, during that time period, it was very interesting because it's the '60s [1960s], okay, and we, as I said, in the U.S. are, there was a lot of turmoil in terms of the Civil Rights Movement.  And, what inevitably people asked me about was, "Why is it that you're proud to be an American and America isn't proud of you?  You are discriminated against in that country, and why is that--why, why did, first of all, why do you accept it?  And second of all, why do you say you're proud to be an American?"  It was very clear to me that people, first all, didn't understand America.  I think [Rev.] Jesse Jackson put it very well when he said that, "The issue is that in America, you have the right to fight.  You have the right to struggle to change things."  And that is exactly what we were doing in America, and that is exactly what I wanted to convey to people.  And I said, "You know, I really do want to be a diplomat because I would love to be"--well, I didn't say I wanted to be a diplomat.  I said, "I would love to be able to change people's perception of what America is all about."  And, and I have to say, apropos to my feelings, the Civil Rights Movement in this country, I believe, was one of the most important things that happened in this country because changing the laws, the gains of the Civil Rights Movement made it plausible and possible for America to talk about human rights overseas.  You could not do that.  And no American diplomat could talk about human rights if we hadn't had the Civil Rights Movement, and if things hadn't changed in America.
Story_ID: 17456
Speaker 1: So let's go back to 1969 when you first went to the [U.S.] State Department.  What, what was your first job there?
Speaker 2: As, as with all junior officers, you get started with, you get started by going to what we call the A-100 course.  And we, I went to the A-100 course, and in my A-100 course, was another Georgian.  His name was Edward Ganeim, and 'Skip' was--this is very interesting, and I'm telling you this because it will show you my point of departure.  Skip [Edward Ganeim] and I would drive down to Georgia in, on long weekends 'cause he had a car, and he wanted to have a rider.  And I would ride down with him.  Skip said, from the moment that he was in the Foreign Service that he was gonna be an ambassador.  He said, "I am going to be an ambassador."  And when, I remember a speaker came and said, "There will only be from this class a maximum, of you, of forty people, there will only be two or three ambassadors."  And everybody, all of the men looked around at the other men to see who they'd have to beat out to be ambassador.  And I have to admit that, that I looked around myself to see which one of these men would be ambassador. (laughter) But anyway, Skip and I have remained very, very good friends through the years.  We--and, and Skip was Director General when I was a Director of the Foreign Service Institute [Washington, D.C.], and we frequently told people about our sit-in, when we drove down from, from Washington [D.C.].  We went to a restaurant, and they refused to serve us in North Carolina.  And I said to Skip, "Let's get out of here," and he said, "We're gonna stay until they serve us."  And they did.  They, they finally decided that it was the best--it was late at night and the best thing to do would be to just get rid of us, which they did.
Story_ID: 17457
Speaker 1: I want to ask you a question.  When you all were there at your, the initial, the initiation class, and, you know, your friend [Edward 'Skip' Ganeim] said, "I'm gonna be an ambassador," were you thinking at that time that you'd be an ambassador too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't thinking that I would be an ambassador.  I was thinking that this will be a wonderful experience, and I'm gonna work really hard, and I hope, with all of this competition--the majority of the class, you know, they were white males.  And I said, "With all of this competition, boy, I hope I can stay in this play, (laughter), let alone be an ambassador."  I just wanted to be able to succeed.  But I, I--what, as Skip talked to me about the fact that he was going to be an ambassador, I'm thinking, "I am going to work as hard as I can and be as successful as I can," but it never occurred to me that--it never occurred to me that I would be the ambassador, nor did it ever occur to me that I would become a career ambassador.  Now, that is a title that only forty people in the history of the Foreign Service of the United States have had the title of Career Ambassador.
Speaker 1: And what does that mean?
Speaker 2: It simply means that I am one--presently, I am the highest ranked Foreign Service officer at the [U.S.] State Department.  We will have a--there're never more than four or five career ambassadors at the same time, that title, who have that title.  We will have a board soon, and I will sit on a board to help select others.  I'm not sure how many the [U.S.] Secretary [of State] will decide that he wants to appoint, but in, in the history of the Foreign Service, there've only been forty.  I am the third African American to have that title, the two before me were Ambassador Terrence Todman who's one of our most distinguished ambassadors, and Ambassador George [Edward] Moose as well.  And I am the third woman to have that title.
Speaker 1: And the first African American woman?
Speaker 2: And the first African American woman.  My mentor, Mary [A.] Ryan, was one also, and she has helped me much, much through my career, but I am the first African American woman to have that title.
Story_ID: 17458
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the early '70s [1970s].  You were in Zaire [now the Democratic Republic of the Congo], and then from there, you went into Kenya--.
Speaker 2: Kenya.
Speaker 1: --and Tokyo [Japan].  Can we talk about that time period?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--being in Zaire [1969-1971] was, it was very interesting because Zaire, you know, it was a huge country with a tremendous amount of wealth.  It was, at one point, the playground of King Leopold [II of Belgium].  It was his personal possession.  But what was unique about Zaire was that when the Belgians decided to prepare Zaire for independence, they put it on a fifty-year plan and Zaire became independent within two years of that plan.  And they only had about eight college graduates.  So you can imagine that working in an atmosphere like that was extremely interesting and extremely challenging.  From Zaire, I went to Kenya [1971-1973], which was also interesting because it, too, was going through the first stages of being independent.  And it was, it was a fascinating experience.  First of all, Kenya is a beautiful country.  It is--I, I think about Kenya, and I think about vanishing Africa because it has all of these wonderful herds of animals that roam through the, that roam through the plains, just absolutely fantastic.  And that was also my first Foreign Service post that my parents [Anderson and Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] came to visit.  We had marvelous times.  I could tell you stories about being caught in the herd--in a herd of buffalo, and how my, my mother could really tell you that one, how, how frightening it was.  But also, just the real beauty of, of Kenya, and the beauty of the animals roaming wild.  That was a--it, it was a very good experience.  I worked very hard.  I was counselor officer, and I was in charge of issuing visas and assisting American citizens.  But I had had two posts in Africa, and I said to myself, "You need to find out if you're a good Foreign Service officer in Africa only or if you're a good Foreign Service officer worldwide."  And it was then that I asked to go to another part of the world and went to Japan.
Speaker 1: And what was your experience like in Japan?
Speaker 2: It was, it was incredibly interesting.  The Jap--the Japanese are industrious.  They are, have a real strong sense of history.  And I enjoyed very, very much being in Japan.
Speaker 1: So you were in Japan from 1973 to '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And after 1976, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Naples [Italy].
Speaker 1: And how long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was in Naples for four glorious years [1976-1980].  And I enjoyed my work--I used to wake up in the morning, and I'd look out of the window and over to my right was Capri, and out of my window there was the, the Bay [sic, Gulf] of Naples, and to my left, there was [Mount] Vesuvius.  And I'd laugh, and I'd say, "They pay me for this.  I can't believe it" (laughter).  It was, it, it was a marvelous experience living in Italy.  My parents came to visit twice.  We visited southern Italy and Sicily once, and then the next time we went up through northern Italy.  And I was able to really share my Italian experience with them.  And I was very, very grateful for that.
Speaker 1: How were you coping as someone who's very close to her family, going to--living all your life in Atlanta [Georgia], going to college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] there, and then all of a sudden, you were just all over the world.  How were you coping emotionally?
Speaker 2: Well, it, there was--it was so exciting.  Being in the Foreign Service, we always say when we recruit, that it's the most interesting work in the world.  And, indeed, it is the most interesting work in the world.  It was so exciting.  I was never, ever bored.  And I was--it was so exciting that I was always caught up in the moment.  So I really--while I missed my family, I wrote to them frequently, and, and as I said, my parents came to visit.  They came to Kenya.  They came to, they came to Nairobi [Kenya] once.  And they--in later years, they came to Italy twice and Spain, they came every year.  But I--being able to share my experience was extraordinarily important to me.  I, it, it's true.  There are a lot of things that I missed about America, but the experiences that I had on the other hand were so marvelous that I did not mind being separated from my country and my family.
Story_ID: 17459
Speaker 1: So, after you returned from Italy in 1980, what did you do?
Speaker 2: When I came back from Italy, I felt that what I really needed to do was to get some anchors in the United States.  I'd spent most of my adult life overseas.  And I decided I wanted to buy a house.  I bought a house in Washington [D.C.].  That was an experience as a single woman, and an African American, I'd been saving up my little money.  And I remember, I had $30,000 on a down payment for a house.  And although I had--that was an appreciable amount of money, I had some real difficulties in buying my house because I was a single woman.  I had to get my parents [Anderson and Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] to cosign, the whole business--anyway, I did it.  And I also, putting down those roots, decided that I really wanted to learn something about the city that I'd like to live in finally.  And I worked as the Special Advisor to the Mayor of Washington, D.C. [Marion Barry], in which I was the, in charge of the sister city relationship between Washington and Dakar [Senegal].  And I worked to make it a more international city.  I tried to help integrate the diplomatic core into Washington, into the life of Washington, and was relatively successful at that.  Then I went back to the State Department where I, I, having served overseas for so long, I figured I needed to be somewhere that I would really get some knowledge about the State Department.  And I went to serve as the senior watch officer in the Operations Center.  That's the nerve center of the State Department.  And I had fabulous experiences.  I had to manage the State Department's response to, and know what was happening all over the world at all times cause we had to keep the Secretary advised.  I remember one night we had the assassination of our military attaché in Greece, and at the same time, Benigno Aquino in the Philippines was assassinated.  So we had to work on that.  Another time I was on duty, the whole, almost the whole of the North Korea--of the South Korean cabinet was wiped out in Burma [now Myanmar] because there was a, an explosion that wiped out most of the official delegation.  So there I was at the helm, sort of making sure that all of the right people were notified and, and, you know, the response to these incidents were--was carried out properly.  And from the operation center, I went to be in charge of training for our diplomats.
Story_ID: 17460
Speaker 1: After that--and this is where, at a time that I started to understand that I might run the distance, I became Consul General in Barcelona [Spain].  Now, that was a very interesting experience because people ask me very frequently, "In your experience, did you experience racism?  And how you, as a woman, responded to difficulties imposed upon you because you were black and because you were a woman?"  I understand now that when I went [1987-1991], was assigned to Barcelona, some of the people in Barcelona said, "What have we done to annoy the United States?  Why are they sending us this black woman?"  Now, that's a very interesting reaction because we had had a black ambassador.  Terrence Todman had been the ambassador in Madrid [Spain].  So I would not have been the first black diplomat to serve.  But I went to Barcelona, and there's something else about Barcelona that I should say.  Barcelona at that time was very insular, and it was difficult for any foreign to break into the Catalan culture.  But when I got to Barcelona, I said, "I am the U. S. Consul General, and I will be respected, and I will do the job that I'm supp--I was sent here to do."  One of the things that I did was that I went everywhere.  If anything was happening, I was there.  I was interested in the cultural events--and, in fact, people will tell you now, that I spoke fluent Catalan.  That's not true, but when I was with the Catalans, when they laughed, I laughed.  And when they smiled or cried, I cried, so everybody assumed that I (laughter) spoke Catalan.  The long and the short of it was that I started off at a disadvantage because did not--thought that there was--they, they deserved better than a black woman for the Consul General.  When I left Barcelona, the Catalans put on, at the king's palace, which is used rarely, a dinner of four hundred of Barcelona's best, and they brought my parents [Anderson and Edith Vertele Mallett Davis] as a surprise for me.  That has not happened to another Consul General.  But the fact of the matter is that I let them know that I was very, very serious, that I was very interested in their culture, that they could count on me.  I bought, when I was Consul General, one of the best sites in Barcelona for the consulate.  They were very impressed by that.  And I will tell you, the friendships that I made in Catalonia, it was marvelous.  I was very ill about two years ago, and four separate Catalans came to babysit me.  And I think that, I think tell you this because it's very significant because I think that you can, in many instances, overcome racism if you put your heart and your soul in it.
Story_ID: 17461
Speaker 1: And finally, in nineteen--the early '90s [1990s], you got your ambassadorship?
Speaker 2: I got my ambassadorship.  I got my ambassadorship, I think, because I was extremely successful in Catalonia [Spain].  Not only did I buy that perfect, perfect consulate, I also worked as the liaison for the consular corps to the Barcelona [Spain] Olympics.  And because of that I was able to assist the Atlanta [Georgia] Olympic Committee in getting to know all of the right people and helping them to win the Olympics.  In fact, Billy Payne, who was the head of the ACOG [Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games], invited me to go to Tokyo [Japan] for the final bid process where Atlanta was announced.  And I was really proud of that because I think mostly, many of the things that I have done as a Foreign Service officer, other people could have done them and done them as well.  But the fact that I could work to help to get my own city of Atlanta to get the Olympics was very special.  And, you know, it made me think back when that plane touched down after we were victorious in winning the Olympics, I thought of that woman who said that, certain things weren't for people like me.  And I thought, "Yes, these things are for people like me.  And it's people like me who can work to help to put city on the map of the world."  So, so I, from, from Barcelona, my success in Barcelona really paved the way for my ambassadorship to Benin, via the senior seminar and which, which is the highest level of training for the U.S. government.  And we traveled throughout the United States to get--for people like me who spent most of their adult life overseas, it was a wonderful opportunity.  We did everything from visit farm families, we did military maneuvers.  I jumped off of a forty-foot tower, and drove military tanks.  And I really felt, "Hey, I'm really ready.  I could be an ambassador in terms of substantive issues as well as if I have to lead my people out in an evacuation, I can do that as well."  So I went to Benin, as Ambassador.  And I have to tell you that, that was a singular experience.  I've told you that I saw people in Benin who looked like my family.  The president of Benin, President Nicéphore [Dieudonné] Soglo was extraordinarily interested in the linkages between African Americans and Africans.  I was able to, as Ambassador, make some decisions about how we would utilize our foreign aid.  I decided that, along with my aid director, that we would utilize it for restoring the educational structure, infrastructure.  And having made that decision, I was also able to say, listen, if we are gonna help restore your educational infrastructure, the cost is going to be that you've got to encourage and let little girls go to school.  So I feel pretty proud that this Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] girl has made a difference in the lives of many young girls in Benin.  Because I passed as Ambassador, young girls were educated, and who knows, perhaps one day, one of those little Beninese girls will be the ambassador to the United States.  The other thing that was so compelling for me in Benin, I remember when I was presenting my credentials to be Ambassador, and I stood, and I heard the Beninese anthem, and I heard the American national anthem, and I thought about the trip that I had made to Benin in the business class of a jet, and I thought about my ancestors who must have left West Africa, bound and shackled in slave ships.  And I'm gonna tell you, being United States Ambassador Extraordinary & Pleni-potentiary in that moment, it was a very redemptive experience.  The other thing that I remember so vividly was going to Ouidah where the Portuguese had forts and where the slaves were kept before they were shipped.  They would be kept seven days, and without food and water, and then they'd be marched down to the sea and the men would have to walk around what they called the Tree of Forgetfulness nine times.  And the women would have to walk around it seven times.  And the purpose of that was to whip out all memories of their families and of their friends and their lives in Africa.  And I walked around that Tree of Forgetfulness seven times, but I did it reverse because I don't ever want to forget, and I don't ever want to forget what price my forefathers paid for finally, the privileges that we enjoy in the United States now.  I think I--we owe them a lot.
Story_ID: 17462
Speaker 1: And after you left Benin, you were there for three years, what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: After I left Benin, I came back, and I was [Principal] Deputy Assistant Secretary for Consular Affairs [1995-1997], and that was, that was a wonderful experience because we had worldwide responsibilities in terms of visas, in terms of welfare and protection of American citizens, and I enjoyed that experience very well.  But it was cut short because [U.S. Secretary of State] Madeleine Albright asked me to go over to serve as the Director of the Foreign Service Institute [Washington, D.C.].  And at the Foreign Service Institute, I made, with the help of one of my Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] sisters, Aurelia [E.] Brazeal, I think I made one of the most important decision for a long time for the service, in that I instituted the new school of Leadership and Management [sic, The Leadership and Management School].  People had been saying all through my career, "Oh, Foreign Service officers can't manage."  And I thought, "Okay, they say we can't manage.  We're good at policy, but we can't manage.  Let's do something about it."  And I have instituted--I instituted the School of Leadership and Management, and it a singular move.  Now we have all of our Foreign Service officers taking courses in leadership and management, and certainly becoming better managers.
Story_ID: 17463
Speaker 1: Is the Foreign Service today where you'd, where you'd like for it to be in terms of diversity?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  No.  The answer is no, but the answer is that we are becoming.  [U.S.] Secretary of State Colin Powell has been extraordinarily important in this effort.  He asked me to be Director General of the Foreign Service because he said he was interested in a number of issues, but diversity was one of the main issues.  And he wanted me to work on changing the face of the Foreign Service.  And I have, I took that at heart.  When I arrived in the Foreign Service, it was, 12.5 percent of the people were minorities.  When I left, 18.5 were minorities.  So, you see, we're in the right direction.  And how did we do that?  We did it because Colin Powell made sure that we got the resources that we needed to do some very aggressive recruitment and very aggressive advertising among minorities publications.  And, as I said, it's going in the right direction, and I think that as the Director General, one of my major accomplishments was, first of all, I managed one of the largest hiring blitzes in the Foreign Service in the last--in memory, and along with hiring all of these people, came the hiring of more minorities.
Speaker 1: And you're also beginning to attract minorities on the college level.
Speaker 2: Yes, what we are doing, when I was Director General, one of the first things that I did was to double the [Thomas R.] Pickering [Foreign Affairs] Fellowship, which is a fellowship now, it's forty per year.  And the majority of the Pickering Fellows are minorities.  And that is linked with employment.  Now, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I'm working with the [Charles B.] Rangel [International Affairs] Fellowship, and that's a fellowship for graduate students, ten graduate students, and that is linked also with employment to the Foreign Service.  So that will help to augment the numbers of minorities in the service.
Speaker 1: Why do you think the numbers are so low?  Why do you think there are a lack of minorities in the Foreign Service?
Speaker 2: Oh, [U.S.] Congressman Rangel always says, and he's very, been very interested and, and has worked very hard in this area.  He always says that the Foreign Service is the best kept secret in Washington [D.C.].  Now, unfortunately, it's not a great secret for non-minorities cause last year, we had 20,000 people taking the exam, and we only have, less than 500 jobs.  So somebody knows about it.  But for minorities, it, it has not been on their radar screens.  First of all, there haven't been large numbers of minorities who have been in the Foreign Service, who have been successful in the Foreign Service.  But now you've got Colin Powell as Secretary of State.  You had Ruth [A.] Davis as the Director General, and who, Ruth Davis, who is the highest ranking Foreign Service officer.  So people see this, and they say, "Oh, this is, indeed a career, at which I can succeed."  And so they become more and more interested.  Success breeds success.  So I think that Powell's high visibility, the aggressive recruitment, all of those things did not exist before.  So African Americans and other minorities just weren't interested.  But the Foreign Service Act of 1980 says that the Foreign Service should be reflective of the American population.  And that's why I have said, as Powell, we have really got to utilize--look, September 11th [2001 terrorist attacks].  September 11th taught us that there are people out there who hate us enough to kill us, to kill themselves in trying to do damage to us.  That means that America has got to, has got some problems.  And they need to--we need to utilize all of our resources, all of the population.  We've got people from all over the world here, got African Americans, we've got Chinese Americans, Arab Americans.  We need to utilize those things to help to make America better understood in the world.  And this is the time.  And I think that we are starting to do that much more in the Foreign Service, and I pat myself on the back for taking a lot of credit for it.  And it's important because I have always said, and anybody who knows me, knows that I have said, "That short of being a multi-millionaire, there's nothing that I would have rather have done with my career, than to be a Foreign Service officer of the United States because it is a fascinating, fascinating career that gives you the opportunity to serve your country and to have a magnificent time in the serving."
Story_ID: 17464
Speaker 1: What do you want to do that you haven't already done yet?
Speaker 2: What I want to do is to continue to work on making the Foreign Service more diverse.  I want to interest young minorities or older minorities or minorities in general, in international affairs, and perhaps, I'd like to write a little about women in the Foreign Service and perhaps to write a little about my life.
Speaker 1: And what do you hope your legacy will be?  How do you want people to remember you?
Speaker 2: I would like people to remember me as someone who cared about others in terms of helping to give young people an opportunity and also helping to support young people as a mentor, to bring them along and help them to be successful in their careers.
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for young people or people, minorities who are interested in the Foreign Service?
Speaker 2: Well, for minorities who are interested in the Foreign Service, my advice, and especially to students, my advice is to get the absolute best education that you possibly can, but not just to stick with the books, to read the newspaper, to read periodicals, to know what is happening in the world, and to make the world a real part of their whole existence.
Speaker 1: And are you happy with the way that you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: I would not have it any other way.  If I could shed a few years, if I could shed a few pounds, if I could go back and start all over again, I would be born in the same family.  I would go to the same schools.  I would be a Foreign Service officer, and I'd do it all over again.
Story_ID: 17465
Speaker 1: Okay, Ambassador, can you describe this for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is during the summer of 1994, and I was being crowned as the princess of, a princess of Ketou in Benin.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Ketou?
Speaker 2: K-E-T-O-U.
Speaker 1: [Ambassador Ruth Davis is crowned Princess of Ketou, Benin, 1994.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17466
Speaker 1: This is 1991 when I was a, participating in the senior seminar, which is the highest level of training for U.S. government employees, and we were learning how to be intrepid, I suppose.  I was jumping out of a forty-foot tower.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis trains for the Foreign Service, 1991.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17467
Speaker 1: This was in the spring of 2001 when Secretary of State Colin Powell visited the Foreign Service Institute [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis with Colin Powell at the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C., 2001.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17468
Speaker 1: This was in 1993 in Cotonou, Benin where I was visiting a school, with Beninese children and parents.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis with Beninese children and parents, Cotonou, Benin, 1993.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17469
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Mrs. Edith [Vertele Mallett] Davis, with Secretary of State, Colin Powell, and in the rear is Rabbi Arthur Schneier.  This is at my swearing-in as Director General [of the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C.].  The Rabbi Schneier is a great friend and has been a great supporter of mine, and this was one of the happiest moments of my life.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis's mother, Edith Vertele Mallett Davis, greets U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, Washington, D.C., 2001.  Ruth Davis was being sworn in as Director General of the Foreign Service Institute.  Rabbi Arthur Schneier stands to the right.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17470
Speaker 1: This is my swearing-in ceremony as Director General [of the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C.].  And that is Secretary of State Colin Powell, and my minister Andrew J. Hairston who flew up from Atlanta [Georgia] for the occasion, and it is July 13, 2001.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis (left) is sworn in as Director General of the Foreign Service Institute by U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, Washington D.C., July 13, 2001.  Ruth Davis's pastor from Atlanta, Rev. Andrew J. Hairston (center), holds the Bible.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17471
Speaker 1: This is in the summer of 2001 when President [George W.] Bush came to the State Department and attended the swearing-in ceremony of our junior officer class [at the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C.].  The President remarked of me because I was so definitive in my statements that I reminded him of his mother [Barbara Bush].
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis with U.S. President George W. Bush at the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C., 2001.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17472
Speaker 1: This was in 1993 in, I believe it was near Ouidah [Benin], and I am visiting a Beninese family, and we're having a cookout.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis visits a family near Ouidah, Benin, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17473
Speaker 1: This is in Barcelona, Spain in 1990.  I am with the then-Mayor of Barcelona [Spain], Pasqual Maragall, and he is now, still a very good friend of mine, and he is the President of Catalonia [Spain].
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis with Pasqual Maragall, Barcelona, Spain, 1990.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17474
Speaker 1: This is, this is around, this is 1994 when [Benin] President [Nicéphore Dieudonné] Soglo made an official visit to the United States, and that's at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis with Benin President Nicéphore Dieudonné Soglo and U.S. President Bill Clinton, Washington, D.C., 1994.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17475
Speaker 1: And this is Mrs. Soglo, along with Hillary Clinton and myself during that official visit.
Speaker 2: Do you know Mrs. Soglo's first name?
Speaker 1: Rosine.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis with Benin First Lady Rosine Soglo of Benin and U.S. First Lady Hillary Clinton, Washington, D.C., 1994.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17476
Speaker 1: This is Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, when she was visiting me at the Foreign Service Institute [Washington, D.C.] in two--in 1999.  She was extraordinarily supportive of training.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis with Madeleine Albright at the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C., 1999.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17477
Speaker 1: This is Secretary [Colin] Powell, again on one of his visits to the Foreign Service Institute [Washington, D.C.] in 2001.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Davis with Colin Powell at the Foreign Service Institute, Washington, D.C., 2001.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17478
Speaker 1: I believe this was 1991 when Pres--Vice President, Gore, visited Benin.  And in this photograph, you will find Tipper Gore, the Vice President, President and Mrs. Nicéphore [Dieudonné] Soglo, and their son, Leoudi (ph.) Soglo, and myself.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis as liaison to U.S. Vice President Al Gore during his official visit to Benin, 1991; (L. to R.): Mrs. Tipper Gore, U.S. Vice President Al Gore, Ruth Davis, Benin President Nicéphore Soglo, his wife, Rosine Soglo, his son Leoudi Soglo.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17479
Speaker 1: And this when President [Nicéphore Dieudonné] Soglo returned--came to the United States on his official visit, and he is sitting with Ted Turner in Atlanta [Georgia], and behind him is the Ambassador, Lucian Tournaquine (ph.), and Leoudi Soglo (ph.) and the, the Foreign Minister and the Minister of Finance, Paul--.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Paul Dosou.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis as liaison to Benin President Nicéphore Dieudonné Soglo during his visit to Turner Broadcasting System Headquarters, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1994; (Seated, L. to R.): Benin President Nicéphore Dieudonné Soglo and Ted Turner; (Standing, L. to R.) Lucian Tournaquine, Leoudi Soglo, Benin's Foreign Minister, Ruth Davis and Minister of Finance Paul Dosou.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17480
Speaker 1: This when I was being sworn--this is when I was presenting my credentials to President [Nicéphore Dieudonné] Soglo, December 1992.  And Roger Moran was my deputy at the embassy, who is sitting over to, other side.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis (center) presents her credentials to Benin President Nicéphore Dieudonné Soglo (right), Benin, December 1992.  U.S. Embassy Deputy Roger Moran is seated on the left.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17481
Speaker 1: There again in December of 1992, one of the proudest moments of my life when I was reviewing the Beninese troops on my way to present my credentials as Ambassador Extraordinary and Pleni-potentiary to the Republic of Benin.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis reviews Beninese troops, Benin, December 1992.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
Story_ID: 17482
Speaker 1: These are my parents, Mrs. and Mrs. Anderson Davis, Edith [Vertele Mallett] Davis, my mother, and my sister, Dr.  Eugenia Davis Clements and myself at the reception that followed my swearing-in to, as Ambassador to Benin in November of 19--actually October of 1992.
Speaker 2: [Ambassador Ruth Davis's family celebrating her swearing-in as Ambassador to Benin, October, 1992; (L. to R.): Mother, Edith Vertele Mallett Davis, sister, Dr. Eugenia Davis Clements, Ruth Davis, and her father Anderson Davis.  From the collection of Ruth A. Davis.]
