Story_ID: 88829
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Sterns.  Observing is Mrs. [Pamela T.] Duncan.  Sir, would you please state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Charles T. Duncan.  D-U-N-C-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C., October 31, 1924.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now.  But, I am an attorney.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  25th of (laughter), 25th of April, 19--no 2003.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my and my wife's home at Arundel on the Bay, Annapolis, Maryland.
Story_ID: 88830
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, "People Magazine"-ish type questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They just require a brief answer.  The first one is:  Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.  But, probably blue would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't think so.  Well, now wait, once upon a time it used to be winter, when I was a skier.  Then, it used to be summer, when I was into boating.  But, since I no longer do either of those things, it doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  Because that's a kinda hard one because for the past 20 years, I've had either sailboat or powerboat.  So, most of our time has been spent on or around the boat.  Then we lived over in The Hague [Netherlands] for six years starting in 1994.  And, while we were there we visited 10, 11 different countries.  So, I don't know that I have a favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Is this a family type program? (Laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Yeah, for the most part, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't think I have one.
Story_ID: 88831
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Not very.  This was something I wondered about in preparation for this interview.  I am not a genealogist and--so the answer is, I can't go back very far.  I can go back to my maternal, to my maternal grandparents and to my paternal grandparents by name only.  I never--I didn't know them.  And, beyond that, I couldn't, couldn't be of much help.
Speaker 1: So, there are no stories that are passed down from the 19th Century or anything about or stories about your people and what they were doing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where they were from?  Were they always from [Washington] D.C., as far as you know?
Speaker 2: Now, my mother [Nancy Gladys Jackson Duncan] is--was--is from Charlottesville, Virginia.  She was born there.  Her mother [Nannie Cox Jackson] was there.  My father, my natural father [Dr. Charles A. Tignor], was a Washingtonian and his parents, we learned just very recently, came from Martinique, on one of the Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Is there a story around--about that or?
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about him coming from Martinique?
Speaker 2: Well, my father died when I was eight years old.  And, so, I wasn't around him and his family a lot.  So, in fact, we only learned within the year about the Martinique connection.  So, there's not a story connected to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Well, tell us about your father?  Can you--as much as you know, can you give us his full name and--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: His name was Charles Andrew Tignor, T-I-G-N-O-R.  And, he--
Speaker 1: And, when was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born, as closely as I can figure out, and this is amazing, in 17--1876.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A long time ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, he was born in Martinique?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was my grand--my paternal grandparents.  My father was born in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about, you know, where'd he go to school?  Where'd he grow up, you know, what kind of a person was he and what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was, he was a physician.  And, he trained at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He was a general practitioner.  His office used to be located in the home, as was common in those days, and still is to some extent.  So, I basically grew up in a, in a doctor's office.  And, he used to take me on calls that he would make.  Those were in the days when doctors would make house calls, and I would see patients come and go out of the house.  I remember him fondly and with tenderness.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, he died when you were eight?
Speaker 2: He died when I was eight, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her full name and date--
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name is--her maiden name was Nancy Gladys Jackson.  And, of course, her first married name was Tignor, and then she re-married and took the name Duncan from her present husband, Todd Duncan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a school teacher.
Speaker 1: Did she grow up in D.C., or?
Speaker 2: Starting, starting with her college days, she went to Miner Teachers College and she lived with a sister of hers, who was then living in Washington.  And, she was, oh, I guess a teenager or, you know, close to it.  And, she stayed here and has been here every since.  And, is still living.  She's 106 years old.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, since she was a school teacher, she taught in a public school?
Speaker 2: Public schools, yes.
Speaker 1: What grade did she teach?
Speaker 2: Fourth.
Speaker 1: Fourth?  Okay.  Alright?  What kind of person was--is she?
Speaker 2: Is she?  Oh, she's very strong, very strong willed and I wouldn't want to say domineering, but her point of view is always known and not infrequently followed.  There were certain things that she liked, she was very much into her home, homes, and how they were fixed.  This house, this room we're sitting in now, Pam [Pamela T. Duncan] and I could say, "Oh, that's, that's Gladys," which it is as a matter of fact.  Or, that lamp in the corner is Gladys, and we would go through the whole room like that.  She's very gracious, she was social.  She was, what today one would call a civic activist.  She was very active in the Home Rule Movement for a couple of years.  She helped picket the lunch counter down at Peoples Drug Store at 14th and U.  She was quite a lady, and still is.
Story_ID: 88832
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, can you reflect back on your childhood and give us an idea of some of the--describe some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether this is a response to your question.  But, when I grew up, I was born in '24 [1924] and until '34 [1934], that period in there, Washington [D.C.] was racially segregated in terms of residential options, public, most public facilities, restaurants, movie theatres, things like that.  Curiously enough, the streetcars were not of public transportation, was not, but otherwise it was just a good old segregated southern town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you said sights, and smells.  I don't know that I answered that part of your questions.
Speaker 1: Well, can you remember any sights--what did it look like?  What did your neighborhood look like?
Speaker 2: We were--there's a residential area called LeDroit Park, I don't know if you've ever heard of it or not, but it was reputed to have the better, not better, but more educated, more affluent black families live there.  And, it was adjacent really to Howard, is adjacent to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  So, a lot of it was people by folks who worked at, at Howard.  And, I was born on the very fringe of it or one of the fringes, on Florida Avenue.  And, in those days we had streetcars.  And, what I most remember about that, the old homestead, was streetcars going by, coming out near Georgia Avenue and turning.  And, it was a restaurant in our block, Harrison's Restaurant [Harrison's Cafe].  It's just a good old segregated town.  But, curiously enough, if you grow up in that setting, in a way you don't know that that's going on.  As you get older, of course, you do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any sounds or smells that you associated with the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  Well, the streetcars.  The clanging of the streetcars going by, the sound that they would make.  No smells.
Story_ID: 88833
Speaker 1: Okay. What did you like to do when you were a little kid?  Did you--what kind of games did you enjoy or activities?
Speaker 2: Roller skating, bicycle. On those rare occasions when you could go sledding, sledding.  As I recall, I haven't thought about this for a long time.  There used to be building sets, much like Legos now, I guess, but they were called erector sets, and I was big on erector sets.  Building--I'm going beyond a ten-year period, now I didn't do all of this up to 1934, this would go a little beyond it.  Model airplanes, I used to build model airplanes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did you, let's see, were there many children in the neighborhood, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  In fact, 'til this day, I exchange Christmas cards with a girl who lived right down the street from where I lived.  And, it was one or two other families.  I stay in touch with them now.  The neighborhood has gone down, dreadfully.  It's not where you wanna live today.  Talking about the ghetto.  That's sort of--it's like in the ghetto.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Although a block away, it's perfectly lovely.  The Mayor of Washington lives a block away in LeDroit Park and his block is just perfectly lovely.
Story_ID: 88834
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about school.  Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Kindergarten through the fourth grade, I went to Mott, M-O-T-T Elementary School, Lucretia Mott.  And, grades five and six, Morgan [Elementary School], and then seven through nine going to Patterson Junior High School [now Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson], 10th and U, it's still there.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you like school?  Were you, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Nancy Gladys Jackson Duncan] was a school teacher and of course, the schools were strictly segregated, faculty, staff, you know, just totally.  And, the practice in those days was that, kids who showed promise or looked halfway bright, were given special treatment, there's no doubt about that.  And, if you were also the son of a school teacher, then you got double special treatment.  And, you better learn, and you better behave, if you didn't, your mother would know about it before you got home.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm a--no siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, when you were in school, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Probably, English or something around English.  As opposed to history or foreign languages.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--were there any teachers who were like, particularly concerned about your development and growth?
Speaker 2: All of them (laughter).  And, for the reason I just gave you.  I wasn't, I wasn't kidding.
Speaker 1: So they--
Speaker 2: I wasn't kidding.
Speaker 1: They kind of focused in on you 'cause you were (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Not, not just me, but you know, anyone who was--
Speaker 1: Anyone who was the son of a teacher.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, sure.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel about that, did you know that--
Speaker 2: I didn't know it at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you say you didn't feel any pressure or anything, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was pressure to do well, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, did you have any favorite books, coming up, that you read?
Speaker 2: I can tell you, I read a lot.  And, a favorite books going back to that period, I couldn't think--I could make one up, but I couldn't think of--I mean, it wouldn't necessarily be true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, you went to Lucretia Mott first, then you switch to Morgan.
Speaker 2: Morgan.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Morgan.  Now, why did you change schools?  Did you move or something?
Speaker 2: That was a--when--yeah, when my father [Dr. Charles A. Tignor] died; my mother remarried.  She moved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were living in a different neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Morgan different from Lucretia Mott?
Speaker 2: Not really.  As it turned out Morgan was so-called demonstration school.  And, in that's sense it was marginally better than Mott, but just, just a little, little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and then you--from Morgan, you went to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school, yeah.  Rhonda Patterson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88835
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, when did the idea of going to prep school--
Speaker 2: Before you get to that, I wanna make the point that, for sociological reasons, I ought to be honest, we received a superior education.  I took--I started Latin in grade 7B and had two or three years of Latin.  Our teacher was Annette Eaton, I don't know why I remember that, but I do.  In the ninth grade, we read "The Odyssey" and "The Iliad" and I mean, we read them and had to, sorta, you know, understand it as best as you could.  I don't remember too much about math, but I still like to tell a story as I'm doing now.  But, we did foreign languages in junior high school and with real good English stuff.  Now, you know there's a lot of reasons for that.  My mother would not now necessarily be a school teacher, she might, but she would have other options.  Whereas in those days, black females could be nurses or teachers and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so you had a high, you may have had a higher caliber of teachers then, then you do today?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm suggesting that.  But, I also wanna be careful because I know some teachers today, who are just as high caliber as the teachers were in those days.  I think it's more a matter of numbers than anything else.  You have a lot of teachers in the public schools now, who are not as well educated or socially minded, then was the case, when I went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did your teachers drive you, in terms of educational goals and that sort of thing, you know?
Speaker 2: I remember in the fourth grade, Mrs. Cupid (ph.), running a, either it was a yard stick or pointer, down my back when I couldn't come up with the answer, that something in the times table, I remember that.  But, they just--you know, the real answer is the question of expectation.  And, you've heard it say, even as of today, in low achieving kids, one of the reasons for it is that they don't have any expectation held out for them.  The teacher's sorta give them the idea that, you're not going to go very far, but the whole society does that.  But, in those days it was a little different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the expectation level was high?
Speaker 2: Oh, very high, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know that, well you don't, 'cause you're not from here.  But, there's a high school called Dunbar High School, which was the--what was called the Preparatory, the Black Preparatory School of the East where most of the kids went, went on to college.  There were a number of distinguished graduates, Eddie Brooke [HM Edward Brooke], Duke Ellington, I think, if you're from Washington [D.C.] and at all prominent, you went to Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright now, I guess you were on track to go to Dunbar, I guess--
Speaker 2: Oh, I would have gone to Dunbar had I not gone away, yeah.
Story_ID: 88836
Speaker 1: Now, how did you happen that you ended up going away to school?
Speaker 2: My mother [Nancy Gladys Jackson Duncan]'s choice and decision.  I should tell you that, that my father [Dr. Charles A. Tignor] being a physician and my mother being a school teacher, I was, I grew up in a relatively well-to-do home.  I mean, we had a live-in maid.  And, as from--well, at least from my birth and that was not considered unusual.  And, my family and the group of people, I grew up with, the Depression didn't particularly mean anything to us because, neither--you know, both my parents continued to work.  So, I think my point is that, I'm the first to admit that I was a privileged kid growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now this--the school itself, how was it chosen, I mean, they're lots of prep schools, but (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Well, they weren't a lot.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Not a lot (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: There were not a lot.  (Simultaneously)
Speaker 1: I mean, how was it chosen?  Is there a story here?
Speaker 2: There is a little--my mother had a social friend who had sent her son a year or two older than I, to Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] and I think that's how she learned about it.  And, I went there because my mother knew somebody else had went.  Plus, you know, it had a reputation and all that.  As indeed, people today come up and say, I got sent to Mount Hermon because of you Charlie Duncan.  And, I say, "Don't blame me, I didn't do it.  It was John Phillips' mother who started that."  And, I have friends right today, who graduated from the same preparatory school and we have, you know, good memories and laughs about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you feel at the time when she told you, you were going to Mount Hermon Prep School?
Speaker 2: Well, as I told you, my mother was very strict and when she told me I was going to Mount Hermon, I said, "Okay."  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Well I know, I know you're agreed to go, I guess or I suppose you agreed to go, but--
Speaker 2: Well, what choice did I have?
Speaker 1: Did you feel--were you, were you looking forward to it or were you kinda dismayed by it, or what?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't, I didn't--we had been, we had lived for a year in England prior to this.  And, I went to a school in England, in London.  So, the idea of, you know, not just necessarily following the usual footsteps, didn't particular concern me.  So, I got up there and I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: What was it like, was it an integrated school or all black?--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it integrated by me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You were the only black?
Speaker 2: That's probably not fair.  There was another black in my class and, you know, probably one or two.  Maybe, you know, six in the whole school, maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Well, how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked it very much.  It was the first time--I was telling somebody the other day, that the first half of my life I grew up all-black and the second half I grew up all-white.  In terms of the situation I found myself in.  So, it was, to me, I remember being treated as an equal for the first time, you know, and not have to worry too much about the black thing.  Of course, I was naive, and I'm sure a lot went on that I didn't see or didn't understand.  So, my attitude was, you know, that I'm like everybody else there and by and large, I was treated that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What kind of activities did you get involved in there?
Speaker 2: Skiing.  I was introduced to skiing for the first time.  And, also to the outdoors because the school is, is located in a rural setting.  And, I remember going out in the woods, you know, you go out a hundred yards in the woods and learned about salamanders and frogs, for the first time.  You know, I didn't--that's--is not an urban kid's experience.  But, that and skiing were the two big things that I got out of going to Mount Hermon, not to mention a superb education.
Speaker 1: Are there any particular teachers or administrators that stand out?
Speaker 2: From Mount Hermon?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you looked up to or took a particular interest in you?
Speaker 2: No.  Not really.
Story_ID: 88837
Speaker 1: I-- If you had asked that question about Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [Now Shaw Middle School at Garnet-Patterson], I would have named a couple of people.  I named Mrs. Eaton--
Speaker 2: Well, let's backtrack, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Eaton?
Speaker 1: Eaton, yeah.  Annette Eaton, she was a Latin teacher.
Speaker 2: E-A-T-O-N?
Speaker 1: E-A-T-O-N.  Mary Delaney Evans was my English teacher in the ninth grade and she had--if you asked me what one person had the most effect on you, I would probably name her.  And, by way of interest, right down road about a mile from here, her son lives.  He also went to Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Vernon School, Gill, Massachusetts].  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Mary Delaney Evans?
Speaker 1: Evans, yeah.
Speaker 2: Is she related to the famous Delaneys [Sarah Louise and Elizabeth "Bessie" Delaney]?  Or, that you know of.
Speaker 1: Of the--the two ladies, the two sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know, I doubt it.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's interesting I don't have anyone at Mount Hermon.  I mean, I remember a lot of the, the teachers there and there're a lot of folks who were very good to me, very kind to me, and very helpful to me, but nobody stands out quite like Mrs. Evans.
Story_ID: 88838
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you miss Washington [D.C.] while you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, I did not.  As I grew older, I realized that there were a lot people I did not know because I didn't go to Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].  And, that happens--to this very day, I mean, if folks that contemporize will be talking about, I'll say, well, I don't know that person-"'cause you didn't go to Dunbar, Charlie!" So, that would an answer.
Speaker 1: You kind of missed it, not having that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't really say, you missed it, I just didn't have that experience.  I had other experiences, supplanted and filled in. I made friends at Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] that I'm still friendly with to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, when you were in your senior year there, I mean, did you, did you know where you were going to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: What you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Not what I wanted to be.  Well, I was--I went to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  And, the reason I went to Dartmouth was it had a great ski team and offered skiing.  And, I only applied to Dartmouth, no, no, nowhere else.
Story_ID: 88839
Speaker 1: Now, were there any special act--honors or anything for you when you graduated from Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The answer was, I won a lot of prizes and honors and the school's top award.  They loved me there. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you valedictorian or anything?
Speaker 2: Salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Salutatorian.  Okay.  Alright.  So, you graduated in--
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-two [1942] and you're off to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Right, in the next--got in the next month, well, you know the next term.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now how did you like Dartmouth?  I guess you already--
Speaker 2: I liked it very much.  It was quite different from Mount Hermon.  Mount Hermon was, was a strict, religiously-orientated school.  Dartmouth in those days was, was wide open and you didn't have to walk on the sidewalk, you could cut across the grass.  I remember when I was up there just looking around, a beer can came sailing out of the window and that really shocked me because at preparatory school, you couldn't, you know, drink anything.  And, just the idea of drinking deer in your room, really blew my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't want to talk about honors at Mount Hermon's, just suffice to say that I got a lot.  And there is--what's that thing that, that sums all that stuff up?  It's the, it's at Mount Hermon--I think, the, the new head of the school.  What's her name?  The old head, the one that I inducted?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Jackie.
Speaker 2: Jackie, yeah.  There's a magazine with her and me on the cover.  And, I think a lot of this stuff are in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what honors I won and all that.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, at Dartmouth--
Speaker 2: It might be worth pointing out, and I don't normally do this, but you remember how they would have the class prophecy as who was gonna be the most this, and the most that?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: I really cleaned that one up.  I was, what, the most popular, the versatile, the most likely to succeed, the most respected and something else.  So, I had a very, very good academic and social, if you would, but not social in the (unclear) sense at Mount Herman.  Fine experience, fine experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now--
Speaker 2: One of the two institutions I'm remembering in my will.
Story_ID: 88840
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], now so it was more liberal environment at Dartmouth?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of (unclear) rules, yeah.  But, I don't think otherwise.
Speaker 1: Were you tempted to drink a lot of beer or something?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Absolutely, sure.  My first, first time I ever passed out was the first weekend of Dartmouth, where we all went down and bought a big bottle of Valentine's Ale.  You know, I've never drank anything much before so, I drank that and woke up the next morning in my bed saying, "Hey, how did I get here."  They say "Charlie, you passed out."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you, did you find it hard to balance with social with the academic?
Speaker 2: Well, when you--tell me what you mean by social?
Speaker 1: Well, you know drinking, and dating, and partying.
Speaker 2: Well, see dating and partying, you gotta remember now that, first of all Dartmouth is 140 miles up in the woods, past Boston [Massachusetts] and the rules of segregation was still in effect, so I mean I didn't date any of the town girls.  There were a couple of kids at Wellesley [College, Wellesley Massachusetts], [Mount] Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts], from here [Washington, D.C.], African American girls, and I would occasionally, you know, go to visit them, have them up to Dartmouth.  But, social life wasn't big at Dartmouth.  It was a strong fraternity movement, but you ran into the race question again there.
Speaker 1: So, did you join any fraternity?
Speaker 2: No.  I got a bid my last year from "The Jewish" fraternity.  But, for one year, it wasn't worth it, so I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there other black students in Dartmouth?
Speaker 2: Same, same as at Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gills, Massachusetts].  There were, I think, maybe ten to a dozen of us altogether.
Speaker 1: Did you all become very close?
Speaker 2: Not all, no.  Some of us did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you like the course of study at Dartmouth?  What did you major in?
Speaker 2: Basically, political science.  I went to Dartmouth during the war [World War II] and my education was interrupted by military service.  I mean, I left Dartmouth and went into the military service and then came back to Dartmouth and finished up.
Speaker 1: So, you started at '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942], that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, then when were you inducted in the Service?
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944].  End of '44 [1944], early part of '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're about half finished?
Speaker 2: I finished three, three years as a matter of fact, because you accelerated in those days.  You went during the summer.  So, I just, just happened to have finished three years, when I had to enter the military service.
Story_ID: 88841
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what branch did you enter?
Speaker 2: The [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: The Navy.  Alright.  And, I know you obtained the rank of an ensign right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the Navy.  About--what was the Navy like for a young black man out of Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Well, there was good news and bad news.  In those days--I don't wanna start telling sea stories here, but in those days, in the Navy, most blacks were assigned to cooks and bakers school.  It's up here at Perry Point [Maryland].  And, just, it's just by great good fortune that didn't, didn't happen to me and I got sent to Great Lakes.  And, while I was at [Naval Station] Great Lakes--
Speaker 1: That's near Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  While I was there, the opportunity to go to Midshipmen School presented itself.  I applied and was accepted. So, I went from, from boot camp Great Lakes directly to Midshipmen School, which was at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], where my wife attended and my son [Charles Todd Duncan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were married by then?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not married by then.  But, where my present wife attended, yeah.  Many years later, many.  It was just the fact that she went to Cornell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Alright, so, so you're at Cornell at Midshipmen School and well, you know, how, I mean, the military in those days was going through some changes, trying to accommodate black--
Speaker 2: I know that, tell me about it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I mean,--
Speaker 2: I could write a book on that subject.
Speaker 1: What happened?  What happened?
Speaker 2: This was before President [Harry S.] Truman's desegregation order [1948].  Although, it was sorta in the works down the line, and I'm told that--well, I and four other black guys was sent to Midshipmen School and then we were assigned to ships.  Curiously, no, no ships on the line, not cruises, destroyers, but oil tankers, cargo ships, things like that, to see if, if--why enlisted men would, would accept orders from black officers.  The same as Tuskegee [Airmen), can black men fly airplanes, you know, a big, big experiment.  And, the answer to that questions was, yes.  But, the questions should have been, would the, the black steward's mate accept orders from a black officer.  And, the answer there was, yes too.  But, there was a little bit of friction.
Speaker 1: Tell, me about that.  Now, that's unusual.  That's something we haven't hear about before.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: A black steward mates, you said they were, they were a little--it took a little convincing.
Speaker 2: Not convincing, I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, they were a little reluctant.
Speaker 2: A little less receptive to the idea.
Speaker 1: What do you think is the reason for that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's all crabs in the basket, or I mean, you know.  Who's he coming down here giving us orders, you know, and those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they thought, they thought it odd that a black officers should be telling them what to do?
Speaker 2: I don't want to over do the point.  The white kids were--there was never any questions, they saluted the star and bar on your shoulder.  The steward's mates who had every right to be mad given what they were asked to do during the war, which I almost got into.  They were the same level as the white officers, you know, they just say, you know, hell with you and it took a little more persuading.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of--in what--what kind of things were they asked to do that, you know, were they treated unfairly?
Speaker 2: You don't know what a steward's mate is or was.  Steward's mate was a servant to the white officers and, you know, me too.  They acted as waiters in the ward room.  They did some of, some of the cooking.  They shined your shoes, overnight when you put 'em outside your room.  They were, they were servants, period.  I mean, anyone familiar with the area will tell you that.  And, so the steward's mates generally were not happy with their lot.  Never mind, you know, black, white, this or that.  But, that was, that was terrible.
Story_ID: 88842
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, well you know so everything was pretty smooth with the white commander, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and officers that were--
Speaker 2: Well, now that's a different question.  The enlisted men, yes.  With the, the officers I guess also, very nice.  It was with the Captain that I had my problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what kind of problems did he present?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't, first of all, he didn't like non-Annapolis United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] people.  Secondly, he didn't like junior officers, like the lowly ensigns, and thirdly, I have a suspicion that he was not thrilled to have a black officer under his command.  So, on the one hand, there were some minor disciplinary problems that he saw fit to get after me about.  And, but on the other hand, I rendered some valuable service to the ship on one occasion and became a bit of a pet of his.  So, you know, the good news and bad news.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story, what did you do?
Speaker 2: It was a little consternation when I arrived aboard.  All the--everybody knew I was coming; as to what to do with him.  So, they made me assistant navigator.  And, the ship was then in dry dock when I pick it up, when I joined it.  And, Loran School, you know, you've heard of a Loran-C that people use today.  Well, this was Loran-A, this was, this was a predecessor.  It was a big oscilloscope machine the size of, of a television set.  And, so they sent me to Loran School and I became quite adept in operating Loran.  And, nobody else on the ship knew how to do it.  And, it looked very mysterious with all these waves jumping around in the oscilloscope.  And, one night--it was a dark and stormy night.  One night we were coming back from Japan going around the Southern tip of Honshu Island, and Loran worked in all kinds of weather, you know, it didn't need to see the sun or the moon or stars.  And, I was keeping plots of our position and I noticed that although we were headed on a certain course, we were being offset by 15 degrees, because of the currents.  And, we were being set upon a tiny little island, it was just a speck on the chart.  And, I called the Captain's attention to it and he didn't pay much attention to it.  Then a little bit later, he asked me to do another fix and I did.  And, sure enough, it was straight--everyone was just straight line, no questions what was happening.  So, I recommended that we change course.  Well, he didn't like that at all, for the aforementioned reasons.  But, I told him, I don't know where I got the courage, but I said, "Captain, this is a six million dollar ship and there are 115 officers and men onboard and if any harm comes to this ship because of navigation, I'm going to be obliged to tell what happened."  I actually said that, I don't know where I got the nerve, but I did.  And--so, he reluctantly agreed to change course to the one I recommended.  And, the next morning when we were able to establish our position by piloting, we were close enough to land to be able to, you know, do some navigational fixes that way, we were actually where I said we were.  So, from that day to this, from that day until I left the ship, he wouldn't, he wouldn't move unless Ensign Duncan was, was working the Loran.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Anything else from the Navy?
Speaker 2: Aww there are, you know, there are war stories, but that's my favorite one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you weren't involved in any battles or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I--no, no, no.  Let me make it clear, I was in boot camp on the V-E Day and I was in the shipment school on V-J Day so, the shooting war was over.  And, by the time I got to Japan, you know, the war was over.  The shooting war was over.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long did you stay in--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.
Story_ID: 88843
Speaker 1: So, you came out, you went back to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Went back to Dartmouth and finished up, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this took a year to finish up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: As I said, I'd finished three years, so.
Speaker 1: And, you majored in political science?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  And, now did you--when did you decide to become a lawyer?
Speaker 2: About then.  That last year, I was getting toward the end of my college career and I knew even then that a college, you know, just a degree wouldn't get it for what I wanted to do.  So, I said, well, I'll go to law school, I said, a good way to finish off a nice liberal education.  So, I went to law school and it turned out that I liked it very much and became a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I mean, I didn't wanna be a lawyer from, you know, when I was five years old and all of that.  It was strictly a last minute decision with me.
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes who were lawyers?
Speaker 2: No.  Curiously enough, I did not when I made that decision.
Speaker 1: Had you ever thought about become a doctor?
Speaker 2: (laughter) funny.  That's the best question you've asked.  Having growing up in a doctor's office, I had decided early on, that I did not wanna be a doctor.  So, so, that's the reason for, for that, and the only other option you had in those days would be a doctor, lawyer, and minister.  And, ministry didn't appeal so, you know, law was about the only thing left.
Speaker 1: Just on that minister piece--now you didn't say anything about church, was church was a big, large part of your upbringing?
Speaker 2: I would say probably, yes.  My parents were devoted members of Plymouth Congregational Church, which is still around.  And, I use to go to Sunday school every Sunday and have to sit through the main service.  As of--when I got to be a certain age, and I guess at Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] I was into my religious phase.  I was a member of the Deacon Board of the church up there and all that stuff.  So, to answer your questions is, yes.  I had a rather traditional religious upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not to mention that the school itself, was religiously-oriented.  It was non-sectarian, but they offered compulsory courses and bible class, compulsory attendance at chapel, five times a week, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88844
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you go to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  This is a big deal for most people, you know, Harvard Law School is supposed to be the best law school in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, it was not for me.  And, I say that with all humility.  And, I say that because, I'd had this marvelous experience in England for a year.  I had very strong junior high school experience.  I went to Mount Hermon [Preparatory School for Boys, now Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts], a top preparatory school where as I've told you, I did very, very well scholastically and otherwise.  At Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], I was Phi Beta Kappa, and you know, a couple of other little things.  So, by the time I got to law school, I didn't, again I only applied to Harvard, I mean I didn't send out fifteen applications like you have to do today.  And, I was accepted.  It wasn't any big deal.  Only because I've had these wonderful academic experiences coming along.
Speaker 1: Did you know anybody there?  Did you know anybody at Harvard?
Speaker 2: No.  You mean when I went, entered?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, you really didn't know relatives or friends that had gone?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I picked it because it was Harvard.  No other reason.
Speaker 1: Oaky.  Alright.  Well, how did you find Harvard?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I didn't like it, it was, it was, as far as I was concerned, just another school.  And, it had the reputation, you know, even then, but the naive little fellow that I was, I wasn't particularly impressed by it.  It was alright, it was another school, a trade school I like to call it.
Speaker 1: Well, who was some of your professors at Harvard?  I mean, would you know their names?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--lawyers my age would know their names.  But, I guess, to the general public you wouldn't--C.V., Morgan, Freund, Cox, and Labor Law--
Speaker 1: Archibald Cox?
Speaker 2: Archie Cox, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was historic that's why I'm asking 'cause that look at this years from now and trying to learn about what happened at Harvard, and you were there.  So, if you tell us, it helps, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it Warren C.V., he was well known in the agency.  Morgan, I can't think of his first name.  No, Scott, Austin [Wakeman] Scott, he was a big authority on Trusts.  Whitmore had left by that time.  Just, some, you know, professors from the--from that era.  But, I didn't have any particular interplay with any members of the faculty.  In those days, you didn't do that at Harvard Law School.
Story_ID: 88845
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.  That's (unclear), I've heard now you moved on to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to teach later on in life.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, we, you know, we have these vivid stories of people that went to Howard Law School about Charles [Hamilton] Houston, and the atmosphere there being, I guess, not as--it was a warmer atmosphere or more collegial type atmosphere, I guess.
Speaker 2: At?
Speaker 1: At Howard.
Speaker 2: Howard.  Oh, sure.  Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had fifteen hundred students.  Howard had fifty, you know.  It's a big difference, just starting out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was kind of impersonal experience?
Speaker 2: Which?  The law school.
Speaker 1: Howard.
Speaker 2: Harvard.  No not Howard, Harvard.
Speaker 1: Harvard, yeah.
Speaker 2: Harvard, yes, yes.  Impersonal is a good word.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't go to reunions, for example.  I went to one and, so I haven't been back.
Speaker 1: What did, did you, what did you think you learned from Harvard?  I mean, I mean I know you--
Speaker 2: Whatever you learn at law school, you know, (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The stuff in the books.
Speaker 1: Anything that, anything that, that, you know, I don't know, I'm just, I guess I'm trying to fish for something that, something special that may have happened there.  Anything that you can think of?
Speaker 2: I got married in the summer between Harvard-the law-college [at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and law school.  So, having a new wife and shortly thereafter a son [Charles Todd Duncan], put me in a situation that I was not used to, you know, married and a parent and in law school all at the same time.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet you wife at--
Speaker 2: No, no, she was a childhood friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I wasn't, for once, I wasn't academically distinguished.  Albeit, you know, I finished in the top fourth of the class, but that doesn't count.  So, I don't, I don't think of anything.  There were no riots in those days and it was just three more years of school as far as I was concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, as I think I already mentioned, there were only, I and one other black person in my class.  And, this was before the, the school really began to seek black students.
Speaker 1: Now, who's the other black student?
Speaker 2: His name was Clarence Holloway (ph.).  I'll never forget him.  He was blind.  And, I can hear to this day, his click, click, click, click, click, click, doing his braille, taking notes.  And, he ended up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I think he ended up not practicing law and I've not been in touch with him since law school.  But, he and I were it, period.
Speaker 1: Did you study together?
Speaker 2: He and I?
Speaker 1: Hum-hum.
Speaker 2: Oh, heavens no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--were you a part of a study group?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  A group of five and Pam (points to wife) and I still, what was it last summer, visited one of the member so the study group.  They're only two of us still living, out of the original five.  But, oh yeah, I found--I formed lasting friendships at Dartmouth and at the law school.
Story_ID: 88846
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Well, when you finished Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], what did you do?  What were your prospects?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: In 1950, I mean, (unclear) they should've been bright.
Speaker 2: Oh, are you kidding? (unclear) You must be young.
Speaker 1: No, I'm asking (simultaneously) I've gotta--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously).  How old are you?
Speaker 1: I've got to get you to talk (unclear).  We gotta, gotta ask these.
Speaker 2: No.  I was sent, I'm sure they did this intentionally, in those days, you use to interview for, for, you know, the associates position during the Christmas holidays of the year you graduated.  That's the way it was done.  And, they sent me to fifteen firms in New York, the top firms.  And, with one exception, they all said, "Mr. Duncan, we're ready for a Negro associate, but our clients are not.  We can't hire you."  There was one firm that, that did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, see that, that makes that question a little bit more (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, no, the reason--was a perfectly valid question.  The reason I reacted the way that I did was I thought maybe you didn't know that.  (Laughter)  Oh, no it was terrible.
Speaker 1: A lot of people don't know that are gonna be watching this, they don't know, you know.
Speaker 2: In 1950, it was not easy being a black professional, unless you were a doctor and even there, your opportunities for hospital internships, residencies, the-patient-base was all very, very, restricted and limited.  Black folk had a hard time.  There wasn't anybody doing what you're doing now.  Nobody.
Story_ID: 88445
Speaker 1: So, one firm [Rosenman Goldmark Colin & Kaye] agreed to hire you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was, in those days, there were two, two Jewish, "Jewish" law firms.  And, what that meant was that the partners were all Jewish, the associates were all Jewish, and the clients were, by in large Jewish connected.  And, the reason for that was that Jews had as hard time getting in the downtown Wall Street firms as black folk did.  Except, you know, difference in time.  But, so they, they formed their own firms.  But, you go to any of the law firms you read about now and they wouldn't had any Jewish partners in those days.  Those days being the '50s [1950s], the early '50s.
Speaker 1: So, you worked for Rosenman--
Speaker 2: Rosenman--
Speaker 1: Goldmark--
Speaker 2: Goldmark Colin & Kaye.  The Rosenman was Samuel I. Roseman who was in, in President [Franklin D.] Roosevelt's so-called cabinet, inner circle of advisors.  As a matter of fact, he came down here and worked down here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he in the, what they call the "Kitchen Cabinet"?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Okay, so what was it like there for you?  What happened?
Speaker 2: It was, it was overall a pleasant experience.  I mean, certainly, socially and everyone, you know, treated me very, very nicely.  Now, for some reason, I didn't get the word that you're supposed to work 2,000 hours a year, or whatever it was in those days.  And, I probably didn't devote as many hours to the law firm as I could have and perhaps should have.  But, it didn't make any difference because after three years, I got tired of, of what I was doing and wanted to, to move on.  And, I remember all of the, you know, young associates would do would be to get--write memos, look stuff up, that's all you did.  And, they gave me the assignment of, could CBS raise Edward R. Murrow's rate of pay from $50,000 a year, which was a lot in those days, to a higher amount, to a higher amount.  And, they may have said, you know, under his present contract.  And, I said, "What's the problem, they wanna raise his salary, raise it."  And, somebody said, "No you dummy, there's a problem with wasting corporate assets.  He's under an obligation till the end of his contract term to, you know, be paid at the rate of $50,000 a year."  And, to raise his salary would be wasting corporate assets, which was a doctrine I wasn't familiar with.  So, I said, "Oh."  Well, anyway that--I wasn't interested in, in that kind of question.  It didn't present any issues that I was at all interested in.  So, I wondered as I've--am fond of saying I wanted to write wills, and get divorces, and be a lawyer.  So, I left the firm after three years.  It was quite a cordial parting.
Speaker 1: So, that was in New York?
Speaker 2: In New York, yeah, yeah (unclear).
Story_ID: 88446
Speaker 1: You came back to [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Then I came back to D.C., yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you opened up a private practice here?
Speaker 2: I was invited to join a black firm, which I did.  But, found I didn't like it and left very shortly after I got there.  And, opened my own firm [Reeves, Robinson & Duncan] with another fellow who was at that first firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you like that, you liked that a lot better?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I'm gonna, I'm gonna say again that, that black lawyers in the '50s [1950s] had a very, very hard time, economically and there weren't any retainers.  You didn't--the cases you got basically walked in off the street.  And, I'm fond of saying, we practiced poverty law before you got paid for it, and, we did in a way, we really did.  I mean, most of our clients were poor and had economic problems and I'm no--you know, everybody who did it will, you know, tell you basically the same thing.  Economically, it was very hard to be a private practitioner in the District [of Columbia], or anywhere for that matter.
Speaker 1: Was it tough in the courts?  Did the courts respect black lawyers?
Speaker 2: I have got to say, not to the extent that is now the case, or should have occurred.  Some, some, some judges did and some other judges were openly contemptuous, so they seemed (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: You got any stories about any of that?
Speaker 2: There was a judge, a federal judge named Alexander Holtzoff, and I used to hate to appear before him.  And, I remember standing up saying, "Your honor, I move," and he said "Denied" before I could even get whatever it was I was moving for.  I have later learned, I have later learned that if you socialize with judges it somehow creates a different atmosphere when you appear before them as practitioners.  Now I didn't know that, in these years, I didn't know that, but just, just for the record, there are a number of black judges now.  Most of them I knew before they went on the bench.  And, it was some of whom I maintain regular social contact.  And, we don't talk about cases or anything like that.  But, it's--if I were to come in your courtroom having spent this hour together, I would feel very differently than if I've never seen you before, or you've never seen me before.  So, that all country club argument about transacting businesses, there's some merit to it, you know, not necessarily contract business, but you develop a familiarity with the person on the other side of the table, that pays off in other circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now, women in law would argue that in other professions that they--since they don't get a chance to socialize with the men in higher positions, it keeps them down.
Speaker 2: I think my point is, I'm tending to agree with that.  So, that's not entirely without, without meaning.  It is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So black lawyers too have the same problem,--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not being able to really socialize with--
Speaker 2: Now, the whole women thing and the law is very interesting.  When I graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], women were not admitted as students.  They just couldn't go.  Now, women constitute 48, I think, percent of the profession.  So, the numerically at least, woman have done very, very well compared to, you know, black men.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were in private practice for three years, and then what happened?
Speaker 2: I was in private practice for ten [sic, eight] years.
Speaker 1: Ten years, oh okay.
Speaker 2: From '53 [1953] to '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: '61.
Story_ID: 88447
Speaker 1: When [President John F.] Kennedy came into office.  And, two of the three of us in that firm [Reeves, Robinson & Duncan] joined the, the administration in one capacity or another.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, how did you come to the attention of the administration?
Speaker 1: Oh, I had been active politically.  And, I was talking about this the other day and I was asked, "What did you do?"  And, I can't think what I did (laughter).  But, what I (unclear), there was a Democratic Central Committee and we--the Home Rule was the big issue.  And, I was just really active in those circles.  ADA was big, Americans for Democratic Action.  I was active in that and when the administration came in, I got a call from one of the people who was doing placements saying, "Where do you wanna be?  What job do you want?"  And, of course, you know, it had to be within reason.  I couldn't have said Attorney General.  But, I could have said, how about First Assistant U.S. Attorney.  And, they said "Fine.  Done."
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, but, I think we skipped something here and that's the Brown v. the Board of Education.
Speaker 1: Oh, gee.
Speaker 2: You wrote the second brief on that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What that was, was in the '53 [1953], '54 [1954], just six months to a year.  Because, one of my partners at Reeves, Robinson & Duncan; Frank Reeves, and he had a connection with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and he recommended to Thurgood [Marshall] that I might be of help to them.  So, that's how I got involved in that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not realizing at the time, I don't think, what a landmark case it would, it would be.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  'Cause it was this that took--okay.  This is before prior to the decision made on this?
Speaker 1: Well, we were working on the brief for the decision, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, alright.  You're an active in the Democratic Central Committee and then--?
Speaker 1: In those days, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, in '63 [1963] you become a part of the administration--
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sixty-one.  Yeah.  As Principal Assistant United States Attorney--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: For the District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  Well, what was that like, being part of the Kennedy Administration?
Speaker 1: Oh, the best--some of the best years of my life in the political sense.  'Cause he was a sympathetic President, and you know, and he was in favor of a lot of things that I was in favor of.  So, that was like heaven, at first, you know.  When he was elected, I remember sitting down, in the other house, sitting down watching the election returns come in and how when he won, you know, it was like judgment day, just, just wonderful.  So, I enjoyed those years.  I got a lot of experience I wouldn't have got otherwise, particularly felony trial experience, and it was a good part of my professional life.  When I say a good part, I mean it was a happy beneficial part.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, it says here that you served as Chief of the Appellate Division of the United States Attorney's Office.
Speaker 1: That was about my first three months there and then I became Principal Assistant.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 88448
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, when [President John F.] Kennedy died, I mean, when Kennedy was assassinated, what were your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, with everyone else, I was--personal, personal tragedy.  I remember when he lay in state in the Capital, my mother [Nancy Gladys Jackson Duncan], my then wife and I stood in line.  We got in the line at six o'clock in the evening and it was two o'clock in the next morning by the time we had gotten up to just walk by his casket.  And, my mother then was seventy.  And, because I was in the U.S. Attorney's Office, I could've gotten them and me through a VIP entrance to the Capital and avoided all of that.  But, for some reason we all wanted to do it.  That was part of the feasance, if you will.  And, well the whole country was shocked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have much contact with the Attorney General with that?
Speaker 2: No.  Little, little or none.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when President [Lyndon B.] Johnson took over, did things change any for you?
Speaker 2: No.  Not for me.  'Cause he carried on, the first several years very much in the Kennedy tradition.  So, it didn't particularly affect me.  I think it was when [President Richard] Nixon came along is when all of us democrats, you know, had to get the hell outta there to go somewhere else.  And, I remember I think that's what precipitated my leaving the U.S. Attorney's Office.
Speaker 1: That's 1968?
Speaker 2: No.  This was '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: No, Nixon was elected in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm confusing the Corporation Counsel.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Johnson's, Johnson's election, first election was--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  Oh, I know, I know, I know what it was.  I got a call about being General Counsel over at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  And, I thought about it and I said, "Well, I've been in the U.S. Attorney's Office for four years.  So it's, you know, about time to move on."  So, I did.  That's how I happened to leave the U.S. Attorney's Office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88449
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].
Speaker 2: Oh, I was saying that that was a brand new agency.  So, I had the advan--not advantage, but the experience of helping to put together a new federal agency, which believe it or not is more than a notion.  You just don't say, you know, be in existence.  I mean, little things, like who answer who, who is responsible for answering mail.  One of the first things that we were criticized for was that congressmen would write to the EEOC, weeks would go by with no response.  Well, you know, that's part of the whole learning experience.  And, then the subject matter was a great interest to me.  And, we thought in those early times, that we were gonna eliminate discrimination in employment.  We really did, that was our mission and we thought we could do it (unclear) hope, but you know.  So, those--that was an interest--you know, I was just there for a year.  That was an interesting, interesting year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a particular case that pops out in your mind?
Speaker 2: In those days, we didn't go to court.  It was basically a, not arbitration but, just trying to persuade people to get along.  Didn't have any real enforcement powers, that came, that came later.  So, basically, it was an organizing year, to tell you the truth.  We got some good things done.  I remember, oh, one of the first cases we had was the airline stewardesses, as they were then called.  They were complaining about the age restriction, the weight restriction and those qualifications as being discriminatory, which they clearly were.  And, thanks to our effort, and I don't remember the specifics now, but thanks to our efforts that whole industry changed.  And, to this day, I say to Pam [Pamela T. Duncan] when we get on an airplane and there's a rather portly woman, as a cabin attendant and I say now see, we brought that about.  That that wouldn't have happened if--.  I do remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88450
Speaker 1: Alright.  Well, what did you do when you left the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]?
Speaker 2: Went to the Corporation Counsel's Office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that again, I think was part of--
Speaker 1: That's the Washington's D.C. Corporation Counsel's Office?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was part of--that was [President Lyndon B.] Johnson's, part of Johnson's grand design.  Because he, he knew that he wanted to do something about Home Rule in the District [of Columbia].  In those days, the District was governed by a board of commissioners, a three person board of commissioners that exercised both legislative and executive power of functions.  And, I got there oh, about six months before Johnson came out with his organization plan to, to have an appointed city council mayor, which was a step along the way to what we have now.  And, so I was there during the transition from, from the commissioner form of government to the city council mayor form of government.  And, just as a legal matter, that was fascinating, I mean, 'cause you had to separate out the various functions which were legislative, which were executive, and that was just very interesting legally, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was like Walter Washington (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: I was just gonna say, that's when I first met Walter and he was appointed by Johnson.  And, we got along.  We didn't--hadn't known each other particularly before that.  And, we got along very well and became good friends and to this day--I--we called him last night to see how he was 'cause he was due to get home from the hospital.  When the new government came into being and this, I don't know how much time you wanna spend on this, when the new government came into being we hadn't been there, three months, six months, when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated, April five [April 4th, 1968], and the riots and calling out the troops in D.C.  That was fascinating, socially and legally.
Speaker 1: The black population rioted, right during that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, Yeah.
Speaker 1: Assassination of--
Speaker 2: Well, it was one of the, it was one of the many U.S. cities where there were riots.  I mean, you know, in Detroit [Michigan], well everywhere, there were riots everywhere.  And, we were in riot condition for what, three, three days and then things quieted down.  Oh yeah, you can drive, I can take you out right now and show you vacant lots where the building was burned down and never been replaced.
Story_ID: 88451
Speaker 1: Okay. So, we were talking about the riots--
Speaker 2: Oh, the [Washington, D.C.] Corporation Counsel's Office.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)
Speaker 2: And the riots, yeah. Those riots were, were country wide.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, interestingly enough, that came up just recently in connection with the looting in Iraq.  And, both the Secretary of Defense and my good friend and Pulitzer Prize Winner, Colbert [I.] King [HM], both made the point that the--we know about looting, I mean, it's not really such a big deal.  And, I seriously object to equating the riots of, what was it '68 [1968], yeah, with what's going on in Iraq.  Because in our riots, we had a police force, we had court system, we had all the structures of government and in Iraq that was not the case.  And, it was just wrong to say because it looting, all looting is the same.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's no infrastructure in Iraq.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it was a, I guess a tremendous shock to the mayor--Walter Washington Administration.  He just starts and now here comes a riot.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, he's the only one of two black mayors in the United States then, I guess?
Speaker 2: Probably then, the only one.  Maybe Andy Hatcher [sic, Richard Hatcher, HM] in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Naw, I think it was [Carl] Stokes in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Stokes in Cleveland.  Oh yeah, no, that was not a good way for the new city administration to start off having to declare a curfew and then just deal with all the municipal problems that a riot would bring about.
Speaker 1: Now I think about it, I think he was the only one, 'cause Stokes wasn't elected until the fall.
Speaker 2: It was my thought at the time that Walter was the only--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was.
Speaker 2: --the only one, yeah.
Speaker 1: You're right.  So, did the black community blame the administration in any way for any of it?  Or, were they, I mean, did they--
Speaker 2: Blame what administration?
Speaker 1: Well, the new administration, I guess--
Speaker 2: The new D.C. Administration?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We weren't even on the radar screen with--no.  That was a spontaneous thing that happened.  Not, just in [Washington] D.C. but across--I think thirty or forty cities had major riots, if I'm not mistaken.  Was the administration blamed, that is a little funny because all of a sudden, we were expected to deal with the riots and then we got called down on the hill.  Why we didn't shoot looters.  I remember the White House called at the beginning of this and says "What's happening over there in your city."  And, we that that was funny, 'cause all of a sudden, it was our city now.  But, no there was no blame on the new administration.
Story_ID: 88452
Speaker 1: Okay, now the next thing that happened, you had the Poor People's Campaign coming in town--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  That, I had forgotten that, it was some crisis every year, the (unclear).  The Poor People's Campaign, well, it might have been the same year [1968].  Was it not?  Yeah.  And, I do remember one thing about, I remember a lot things about that.  It was announced that [Ralph] Abernathy and the other leaders were gonna have a procession of mules to come as part of the campaign.  And, I remember say, Aww, I know there's a police regulation that prohibits parading mules through the street.  Well, it was a policy regulation dealing with mules.  But, it didn't prohibit mules, it said, "Each mule," no.  "Each four mules had to be attended by one person when passing through the public thoroughfares of the District."  So, it permitted it, but it required a certain number of handlers.  So, I remember how disappointed I was, not only was it not prohibited, but it was expressly allowed.
Speaker 1: Were there legal issues about setting up the Tent City, Resurrection City?
Speaker 2: There were, but they had to get a permit for example.  And, I remember walking down in the West Potomac Park area with Warren Christopher, who was then Deputy Attorney General, looking for a suitable place to permit, give a, you know, legal permit, to the organizers of Resurrection City.  And, we agreed on that spot next to the Tidal Basin and then there were the law and order issues that arose out of Resurrection City.  Pretty soon, it got very dirty and just a little out of hand.
Speaker 1: I think it rained almost every day.
Speaker 2: It rained almost every day.  And, then it just became a mess.  And, finally the chief of police was directed, I'm sure by the White House, to shut it down and sure enough, he did.  And, I as Corporation Counsel was concerned about all the suitcases that were there and people's personal property, I say, "Well, you just can't throw that stuff away.  And, they said, "Well you wanna bet."  (Laughter)  So, then the new administration [of Mayor-Commissioner Walter Washington] got off to a shaky start, through no fault of its own.
Story_ID: 88453
Speaker 1: Now, you were, you were Director of Public Safety in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think this grew out of the riots.  And, [Mayor-Commissioner] Walter Washington felt that he didn't have any control over the police department because in those days, he didn't.  If the police wanted something, they'd go down on the Hill, straighten it out with whichever committee was the appropriate committee.  So, he wanted to try to get a handle on, on the police department.  Plus, the police department in those days, appeared to be a bit of a problem.  In the sense, that there was a lot of shooting and just general dissatisfaction with the relationships between the police department and the citizens of this city [Washington, D.C.].  And, it was for those reasons that he asked me to be Public Safety Director.  I'm trying to figure out, I either preceded or succeeded Pat Murphy [Patrick V. Murphy], who was the [deputy] police chief in New York and came down here and did a similar function.  I think, no, I must, I must have come after Murphy because there were legislation that abolished the position of Acting Director of Public Safety, so I think that must have been after Pat was here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I'm a little, little fuzzy about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I just did that while I was Corporation Counsel.  I spent more time on that than in the office, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Were you able to do anything to ameliorate the relationship?
Speaker 2: Oh, hell yes.  I think, I think if I were asked, if Walter were to ask, what was your greatest accomplishment?  It would have to be that we "turned around the police department and got it headed in the right direction."  And, I don't mean to suggest that I did that, or Walter did that.  But, we did select Jerry Wilson to be the new Chief of Police.  And, I remember talking to Jerry about what we wanted to see accomplished, and did he wanted the job under the circumstances and he said, yes.  And, I think he was the one who really turned the police department, the attitude of the police department around.  He gets a lot of credit for that.  But, we set it up, so we get a little credit too.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 88454
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you left the Corporation Counsel [Washington, D.C. Corporation Counsel's Office] in 1970?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970], or '71 [1971].  I'm vague on it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you joined another law firm?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, I went back into private practice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I was only there [Epstein, Friedman, Duncan & Medalie] for three or four years and then I was asked to be Dean of the Howard Law School in '74 [1974], so I couldn't turn that down.  So, I became Dean at Howard, '74 through '78 [1978] when I was in academia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you like that?  This is the first time you really--this is not the first time you taught--
Speaker 2: No.  I taught on a part-time basis back when I was in private practice the first time with Reeves, Robinson & Duncan.  I--as an adjunct professor taught a course, then another course and another course.  So, I was primarily in private practice, but I did the teaching on the side, which you would do in those days.  Can't do that now, happily.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, I mean, why can't people do it now?
Speaker 2: Well, it--the law professors supposed to be full-time.  And, ought to be full-time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were Dean of the Law School and you taught courses too, right?
Speaker 2: Do be honest, I didn't.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I tried to team teach a course with another faculty member, but the way the university was run in those days, it just didn't make sense.  'Cause all I did was attend meetings and fill out forms and that wasn't a very productive period in my professional life.  It's the only job that I ever had where I didn't learn anything.  And, that's a sad commentary on the position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any particular aspect of the job that was exciting to you?  I mean, were you able to make a difference?
Speaker 2: I thought, I thought I did.  'Cause the faculty was very different after I had, after I had been there for three or four years.  But, for whatever reason I didn't see eye to eye with the president so the relationship between me and him, Dr. Cheek, was tense.  I never, to this day, have understood why.
Speaker 1: It's James [E.] Cheek?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88455
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after Howard [Law School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: After Howard, I went back into private practice where I stayed for the next-'78 [1978], '88 [1988], '94 [1994], that period was again devoted to private practice.  And, I think I was in two different law firms:  Peabody, Lambert & Meyers, and Thelen Reid & Priest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--are there any cases that came up that were memorable?  Or, did you--any stories in that period?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, you know.  I guess Glen Echo was before that.  Yeah, that was before the U.S. Attorney's Office.  I--it was a commercial practice, you know, we represented corporations and businesses and didn't do a lot of civil rights work, during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you--in '94 [1994] you receive an appointment to this international position.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  This is really--
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was very, very, interesting.  I got a call from the Legal Adviser's Office in the State Department, did I want to go in this [Iran-United States Claims ] Tribunal?  And, I'd never heard of it.  And, I said, "I don't have any experience in international arbitration."  They said, "That's alright as long as you can do litigations."  I said, "Yeah, I can do that."  So, I went over and talked to the folks in the State Department, and Pam was in the picture by then, and I really didn't want to do it.  I didn't have any experience.  I had two elderly parents, who I was--helped looked after.  And, I remember talking to my father, asking him whether this is something I outta do and he encouraged me to do it.  Well, as it turns out, it was one of the, the, one of the best professional experiences that I had.
Speaker 1: Now, (Simultaneously), I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I was appointed by the president without senatorial confirmation required to something called the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal.  Which sits in The Hague [Netherlands], and which was brought into existence basically by a treaty between the U.S. and Iran.  It wasn't a treaty.  It was an executive agreement, but that doesn't too much matter.  And, it had to do with the settlement of hundreds of millions of dollars worth of claims growing out of the hostage seizure [Iranian Hostage Crisis] back in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: It was like '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979], yeah, what am I thinking about, sure.  Growing out of that.  So, I looked into it and talked to Pam about it.  The salary was more than I've ever earned in my life.  The workload was represented to be light.  So, I say, yes.  So, we moved over there.  Pam and I.  We got married.  We move over there.  Well, actually I guess we got married a year later.  But, we, we were--went as a couple.  And, had an apartment, a car, diplomatic license plates.  There were a lot of perks, they really were.
Speaker 1: Did you get red lights and all that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Did you get red lights with that or no.
Speaker 2: You could.  But, you try not to do that.  You try to abide by the laws of the host country.  So, the work was fairly interesting.  Was frustrating in a way, but I adjusted to it and if you talk to some of my colleagues, they will tell you that I did alright.  I did a good job.  And, meanwhile, we got to travel to ten or eleven foreign countries in Europe.  And, between the work itself and the opportunity to travel, it was the marvelous six years, just a wonderful six years.
Story_ID: 88456
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us, now even though you explained the name of it and that they did, it seems, it seems like, kind of an obscure sort of a--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  That's the way I used to describe it, as an obscure Tribunal that sits in The Hague [Netherlands].  It's not as obscured as I made it out to be, 'cause every now and then--well number one, its fundamental job was very important.  Like I say, there were hundreds of millions of dollars worth of claims.  And, they had to be settled.  There are not a lot of--when I would say tribunal, people would think of the International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia.  People would think of that.
Speaker 1: So, they're like Nuremberg [trials] or something?
Speaker 2: Well, really not like Nuremberg, more like the World Corps, and more like the Yugoslav Tribunal.  But, this one was just not very well known.  And, so your word obscure is correct.  Except for the people involved didn't think it was obscure.
Speaker 1: Give U.S. an example of a case from that period.
Speaker 2: Oh, there were several different kinds of cases.  One, one group of cases would involve, people who had dual citizenship.  Iran, and the United States, who had lived in Iran or had property interest in Iran, which were confiscated during the [Islamic] Revolution.  And, in accordance with International Law, the people whose property was appropriated were entitled to compensation.  And, much of what I did was, in that area of claims by U.S. citizens against the government of Iran, for property which had been taken.  Related to that would be a business, a U.S. business entity which lost property or other, basically lost property as a result of the Revolution.  And, they were entitled to compensation.  And, it was a third class of cases between the two governments, Iran and the U.S., where we had, the U.S. Government had sold Jetta Aircraft parts to, or Jetta Aircraft in parts to Iran, and had never been paid for.  Now some of those cases are still pending.  All the other cases that I--we used to call private claims, the citizen against Iran, the business against Iran.  They're all settled now.  And, the only thing left are these huge claims between the two countries.  And you know what the state of relations with Iran is now.  And, basically the Tribunal is not doing anything.  There're just sort of sitting there.  Which is wonderful for the people on the Tribunal (laughter).  It was a nine-member Tribunal.  Three Americans, three Iranians, and three so-called neutral members.  Members from other countries.  When I was there it was Italy, Finland and Poland.  They were the countries of origin of the Tribunal members.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  And you did that until 19--, until?
Speaker 2: The year 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].  Alright.
Speaker 2: Then I retired for good.  And that brings us up to date!  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes it does.
Story_ID: 88457
Speaker 1: Tell me, you know, with all your experience, and I know you didn't tell me everything--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.
Speaker 1: It's so much that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh sure.
Speaker 1: And, but, tell me this juncture, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the Black community?  We ask everybody that one.
Speaker 2: Well, in the broadest sense, the bottom line sense, would be economic and social parity with other groups in this country, primarily the white group.  Broken down, you get into healthcare, you get into education, you get into employment, each one of which impinges on the other.  Where you live depends on where you go to school.  Where you go to school depends on--defines the kinds of education you get.  The kind of education you get defines what kind of job you can get.  And this just goes around in a circle.  And, I am certainly distressed that the economic differences between elements of the black community and the rest of the country are getting worse if anything.  And, I say enough already, let's get on with it.  It's been too long.  You know you have, what, couple of hundred years of slavery and then another hundred years of slave-like conditions of legal segregation and it's very disturbing that we're still in a sense back where we were.  Now, if you get on yet another level, is this ever gonna work itself out and then you get in this social sociology and philosophy and I'm not sure that it ever will.  I just think that group antagonism is part of the human makeup.  I still have hopes that in this county, in this county, we can work out some of these economic disparities.  Not under the present administration [of President George W. Bush], I fear, but somewhere, somewhere another [President Lyndon B.] Johnson or another [President John F.] Kennedy will come along, hopefully.
Story_ID: 88458
Speaker 1: At this juncture too, when you look back on all that you've done, what do you consider the--your greatest accomplishments or your legacy?
Speaker 2: I can't answer that without sounding, I don't know what, no conceited, but, without sounding self-important and I don't mean to be and I'm not, I don't think.  Put another way, I think I, and my contemporaries, coming along when we did, sort of paved the way for a lot of people who came later.  And, as I think back, it's interesting, remember the story, no I haven't told you this, or did I, about going in the [U.S.] Navy and they were trying to find out if white, oh yeah, we talked about this, whether white enlisted men would follow orders, it's amazing in my life how many demonstration positions, positions I have been in.  Starting with preparatory school.  And, certainly in college.  You'd be surprise how many people have told me over the year, "Charlie, meeting you has certainly changed my attitude toward Negros."  They say that.  Said, I never knew anyone until I met you and I had the usual prejudices, but having met you I now realize that we're all alike or all the same.  I've gotten a fair amount of that.  It also--when I was appointed to the U.S. Attorney's Office; that was a big deal!  A big deal!  Black--Negro appointed to Principal Assistant U.S. Attorney and there were articles in the paper.  And, every time I would do something, they would talk about, Charles Duncan, first Negro Principal Assistant U.S. Attorney.  Again, it was, people were watching to see how I did.  And we--I did fine and so did, so did my contemporaries.  And, suddenly it wasn't a big deal anymore.  Now, to be sure it was not a black U.S. Attorney between my years and Eric Holder [HM], which was what 20-30 years later.  But, I remember another example.  One of the leading law firms here in the city [Washington, D.C.], that I was very friendly with one of the partners, and I talked to him about joining the law firm when I left Corporation Counsel, aww no, no, no, it couldn't be done, lateral transfers, this, that, and the other.  He said, "You can move next door, you can marry my daughter, but not the law firm."  And, it wasn't too many years after that, that they had finally gotten around to considering their first associate, black, Wesley Williams, very well-known and now a leading partner in that firm.  And, I remember this, this same partner, Covington, he used to call me up regularly wanting to know what I thought of this guy, and would it work out, and what should they do, and blah, blah, blah.  And, I said, "For Christ sakes, hire the guy and if he doesn't work out, fire him.  It's not a lifetime commitment."  They finally did, and he's, he's worked out very, very well.  But, my point being that, I don't have any plaques to prove this, but I know in my own mind, that having set an example sort of eased the way for the people who came after.  And, don't think I'm not aware of it.  I stood on the shoulders of lawyers and others who came before me.  I'm not suggesting that, you know, I and my generation started this out, I mean, it's been--you asked about Charlie Houston.  I mean, a lot of U.S. stood on the shoulders of Charlie Houston.  So, that's perhaps a conceited answer, but it's the way I feel about my career and some of my colleagues who are contemporaries.  But, beyond that, there's a lot of little things you could point to.  The policy department, I'm--I'll always be proud of that.  At one point, I was chairman of the committee that plays a decisive role in selecting judges here in the District [of Columbia].  And, when I look at the court the way it was before we came along, and the way it was four or five years later.  It's just a total reversal, I mean, it's a far, far better court now.  Well, a lot of little things like that I could point to, but, that's about it.
Story_ID: 88459
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have a last question, but before I ask it, I want to ask you about, ask you to tell the story about the Christmas Party on--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that, that story goes along with the Loran story in changing course.  I had been on the ship, it was in dry dock, in San Pedro, California, and I'd been on the ship for maybe a week, and they had assigned me to be the Assistant Navigator.  During that week, there was a change of command and the old captain left and the new captain came on.  And, if I'm not mistaken, he was on board a day or two before I got there and the month was November, December.  And, the executive officer came to me and said, "Charlie, the captain wants you to tell the steward's mates that they can't come to the Christmas party, but that they will be given their share of the--what was spent on the party, in cash."  I should say that the cash came from profits of the ship's store--is where the money for the Christmas party came from.  And, that created somewhat of a dilemma in me.  I said, "This isn't fair.  Why should--why can't the steward's mates go to the party?"  So, I thought about that, and I thought about that, and I said, "Hey, you've been an ensign for two weeks and you've been a Negro all your life, and you're gonna stay a Negro and you might not stay an ensign."  So, I decided to go up and talk to the captain about it, which you had the right to do.  By right, I mean any officer could request a meeting with the-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Could you repeat that sentence for (unclear) pause and let you get a drink.
Speaker 2: I didn't hear-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When you said you had done, you know, you didn't know how long you'd be an ensign--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So, you went--
Speaker 2: So, so, I asked for permission to see the captain, which I was granted, easily.  And, I should point out that at the time, nobody knew much about this captain.  And, he was a captain, he was a four striper.  And, we didn't know anything about his feelings.  So, I went up and I talked with him and I told him what was on my mind and how I didn't think it was fair to exclude the steward's mates.  They were being paid, I mean, you know, they, they--the money for the party came from the ship's store and they were customers there.  So, to make a long story short, the captain chewed me out, oh boy, he said that I was obliged by Congress to give him my undivided loyalty, that I was in no position to, to questions his authority or ask him about any order that he had given.  And, the next time I did such a thing, he would see to it that I had a general court martial.  So, I'm sitting there feeling about this big.  I said, "Jesus Christ.  I've been in here less than a month (laughter) and already I've screwed up."  So, anyway he--to my astonishment, he said that he had not given that order.  That that order was given by the captain that he had just relieved.  And, as far as he was concerned, the steward's mates could come to the ship's party.  So, word of that got around, word of that got around, and I was the hero of the whole ship, including the steward's mates for a little while, for having talked to the captain and having done this.  And, I was pleased with the result.  The steward's mates, bless their heart, said they didn't want to go to the party (laughter) and they'd take their money (laughter).  But, that, that had--now that's, that's when I said--that started my troubles with the captain, it really did, 'cause he be--he watched very closely thereafter to see that I had left no, I's undotted and T's not crossed.  You know, once or twice when I did, he would--he gave me a hard time.  But, that happened.  And, I'm proud of that too by the way.  More proud than the Loran story.
Story_ID: 87916
Speaker 1: Sir, we got one last question, this is different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Never thought about that (laughter).  I would say probably remembered as a good lawyer, a person who cared about the community in the broad sense of government, and all of the social conditions that people are involved in.  As an avid sailor and pilot of small planes.  And, probably I would also hope that people, by and large, thought well of me.  That's, that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  I enjoyed, enjoyed the interview.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 87917
Speaker 1: Okay.  Give us a brief description of this photo.
Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite photos.  It was taken on (unclear) what was [John F.] Kennedy's assassination date?
Speaker 1: November 23rd [sic, 22nd] of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: November?
Speaker 1: Twenty-third, 1963.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is one of my favorite photographs.  It was taken a day before Kennedy left for Love Field in Dallas [Texas].  As a matter of fact, a few moments after this picture was taken, he and Mrs. [Jacqueline] Kennedy left the room to prepare for the trip to Dallas.  Twenty-four hours later, after this picture was taken, he was dead, as you all know.  It a wonderful picture because it shows me next to the President.  You can see my mother [Nancy Gladys Jackson Duncan].  You can see my first wife, Dorothy.  And, in another version, very much like this, you can also see my father [Todd Duncan].  Dr. and Mrs. Charles Wesley are in the middle of the picture and they were good friends of my parents.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Do you remember this is?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Should I just start talking?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  This is a picture of my wife Pam [Pamela T. Duncan] and me.  Taking in The Hague in 1994.  We had not--we were not married when we went over to The Hague [Netherlands].  So, the Dutch have something called a cohabitation agreement, which she signed voluntarily.  And, it confers most of the rights and privileges of actually being married.  A year after this, we were married.  But, this picture was taken in the office of the, the lawyer, I'm trying to think of what he was called.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The notary.
Speaker 1: The notaries, yes.  The notaries who prepared the agreement and as you can see here, he produced some flowers and made it quite a little ceremony.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What year was this? You missed that.
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This was taken within the last year at the, this is the house of, no, this is the Senate, the Senate Chamber of the Maryland General Assembly.  And, the man standing with me was, his name is Senator [John C.] Astle, A-S-T-L-E, and he is our representative living here in Anne Arundel County.  A friend of mine, with the complicity of my wife, arranged to have this done.  What it is, is it's a certificate from the Maryland Senate just in honor of my legal career.  It's something they do I gather.  (unclear) president of the Maryland Senate, [Thomas V.] "Mike" Miller.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: The war hero.  Larry.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: It's?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it's alright, that's the way--
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 2: That's the way we shoot 'em 'cause--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: The (simultaneously)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of me taken in, no doubt, 1945.  On the occasion of my being commissioned in the U.S. Naval Reserve.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Notice that there're no ribbons of any sort on me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken, I think, by the Eastman Kodak Company at the time I went on their Board of Directors.  That would've been 1978, or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: A picture of me at the helm of Deliberate Speed II.  A vessel 31 foot sailboat, and a real, real beauty.  From '79 [1979] until just recently, I was into sail boating and boating generally.  I had two sail boats and one powerboat.  And, the garb that I have on suggests it was very, very cold that day.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Isn't this the same picture that we just did?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No.  This is the (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: May I see the other one?  May, I see--It's the same--
Speaker 2: Go forward.  Alright.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me.  I don't remember when.  I'm curious about the, the sideburns.  I remember I wore them back in the corporation counsel days.  And, the fellow in the middle is J. Clay Smith [Jr.], who succeeded me as Dean at Howard Law School [Washington, D.C.].  Not immediate next, but down the line.  And, I honestly don't know who the other person is.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year or decade would you attribute to this?  Not knowing the exact year, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Well, I wore my hair like that in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good enough.  Next.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The other guys got an afro, so.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was, I don't know, 12, 14 years old.  I got--took violin lessons up at Howard University School of Music [Washington, D.C.] and this is a picture of me with my violin.  I'm sure taken by Scurlock I have no doubt that it was a Scurlock Photograph.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a hearing held before the Iran U.S. Claims Tribunal.  The courtroom is the little courtroom in the Peace Palace.  I remember the Tribunal seated along the bench.  You can see me way over to the right.  Because, you were seated by seniority.  The table at the left is the Iranians.  The table at the right is of the U.S. Delegation in one of our law class.  It's the only such picture I have and it's very interesting.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken at some point, and I couldn't begin to tell you when.  Judging from the way I was parting my hair, my guess, it would be when I was 14, 15 years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: I don't remember where it was taken.
Speaker 2: This is a marvelous picture of my parents:  Gladys and Todd Duncan.  This picture was probably taken in the early '40s [1940s], when dad was in "Porgy and Bess."  My recollection is that the photographer is Canadian.  But, I don't see his name there.
Speaker 1: Your father was in Porgy and Bess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: He was Porgy.  He was the first Porgy.
Speaker 1: (unclear) you didn't say that (laughter).
Speaker 2: You didn't ask me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I had no idea.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Next.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  He was the first Porgy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: In Porgy and Bess.  Get outta here.  So he had a voice?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead please.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Nineties [1990s] picture.
Speaker 1: This, this looks like.  I don't know when that was taken.  I'm sorry.  It--I'm older here than I was in the earlier picture which was like this.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  We'll start with the left hand photo.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Again, my mother on the left and my dad.  Maurice, I think is the Canadian photographer I was talking about.  Although I can't read it from here.  Taken shortly after they were married.  I would say 1938, '39 [1939].
Speaker 2: That's your mother and father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My mother and dad.
Speaker 2: You were born in '24 [1924].
Speaker 1: Twenty-four [1924].
Speaker 2: So, they were married?
Speaker 1: In '34 [1934].
Speaker 2: Thirty-four [1934].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next please.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) now, he was--remember I said my father died--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: When I was eight years--
Speaker 1: My son and his, my son whose name is Charles Todd Duncan, and his wife Jennifer.  This picture was taken, oh I would guess the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] aboard Deliberate Speed II.  And, it was taken on--oh, this was on the New York Harbor trip.  And, it was taken by a college friend of mine, Norman Weissman.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, the swearing in--
Speaker 2: As what?
Speaker 1: The swearing in as the--
Speaker 2: U.S. Attorney?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is a picture of me being sworn in as an Assistant U.S. Attorney.  The year would have been 1961.  And, the judge swearing me in is Judge Andrew Howard of the Superior Court.  It may have been called the Court of General Sessions in those days.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next, please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture on the left is me and my first wife Dorothy in front of our home at 1812 Upshur Street.  Picture taken--let me see the front of that, please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Tom Lodge, D.C.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to find the year.  They don't tell you.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) saying, right here, copyright what?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This picture was, as best I can tell, taken in 1961, again when I was sworn in as Assistant U.S. Attorney.  On the left is Dr. Lewis Terry, who is a good family friend.  Next, my first wife, Dorothy.  Me in the middle, and my son, Todd who is shaking hand with Jim McShane [James McShane], who was in charge of the Marshall's Office.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: And, you may want to finish to shoot this like this.  I can hold it easier like this and I can (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oaky.  Naw, we gotta get in the light.
Speaker 1: This is a very interesting photograph.
Speaker 2: Stop swinging here, wait.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Raise it up higher, angle it toward the light.  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a very interesting photograph.  It was taken in probably 19--
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: Forty-seven, '48, yeah.  I was in my first year at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, I remember this was a trip that was sponsored by "Jet Magazine."  They wanted to do a story on black skiing.  And, I was one of the few people who fit into that category.  So, they contacted me, and this was on the way to, on a train from Boston [Massachusetts] to, to some ski resort, but I don't remember which one.  I'm the one with the "D" on the front and sitting, sitting next to me was my then wife Dorothy.
