Story_ID: 620013
Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Certainly; Amina Jill L. Dickerson [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson], A-M-I-N-A, J-I-L-L middle initial L and last name Dickerson, D-I-C-K-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right now, is there a story behind the name Amina?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I come from a large family and there are--everyone has a J name so my J name is Jill and I started acting at a very young age seven or eight and I always hated the name Jill, I hated it.  I had a neighbor--my next door neighbor was Jack [HistoryMaker Jack White], I was teased mercilessly about it and as a young African American woman you just never encountered any Jills.  And so when I went further into the theater as a teenager it was about the same time that we had family friends visit us from Nigeria, a student Oshe Bhutto [ph.] and she said that my spirit kind of reminded her of an African historic figure, Queen Amina of Zaria [Nigeria].  Well I loved that and I loved the fact that with all my brothers [Jan Dickerson, Jaffe Dickerson, Jason Dickerson and Julian Dickerson] that I would be the queen among them, even though I have a sister [Julee Dickerson Thompson].  So they sort of did a little mock naming ceremony and I took the name of Amina as my stage name and it really suited me.  So from the time I was about fourteen or so I became Amina, and of course my parents [Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson] reacted kind of negatively at first, like, "What's wrong with the name we gave you?" And I said I didn't lose the name you gave me I'm just not using that in this way and by the time I was sixteen, you know, it was fully my persona.  So when I encounter people in Washington, D.C. and they say, "Jill? Oh hi Jill," I know exactly what point of my life they know me from, you know, where I know them because it's that grade school name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 21st, 1954.  I was born at Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital] the historic hospital of Howard University in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is really as a philanthropist and civic activist.  I just retired so right now I'm about to begin a consulting business to continue to do work in philanthropy and also in working with nonprofit organizations.
Speaker 1: All right, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 17th, 2009.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right, in The HistoryMakers' office.
Speaker 2: We're at the, at the national headquarters of The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 620014
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and the first question is--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really. I like all different kinds of foods.  I like to bake, I like sushi, you know, I like world cuisine so there is nothing that I always have to have.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably yellow.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Brazil; Bahia, specifically.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No.
Story_ID: 620015
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Julius Dickerson] side of the family but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ann Lee Stewart [Ann Stewart Dickerson] is her maiden name, A-N-N middle initial L for Lee S-T-E-W-A-R-T.  She was the second of eight girls born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: What, what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 22nd and I can't tell you the year.  I don't think we know the year. She's about eighty-two.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, eighty-two, eighty-three. She's kind of timeless.
Speaker 1: So 1926, 1927?
Speaker 2: I would say 1927; I'll give her the benefit of that year.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side.  Are there any stories or anecdotes about them?
Speaker 2: Well it's interesting 'cause we've been probing that a lot as they get older and my mother has a bit of dementia so her long term memory is a little bit better.  Her mother Bertha was actually born in Virginia near Madison County, Virginia and we don't know a lot about her mother's family.  Her mother was very light skinned and so it seemed that she had some heritage in her family or even her father that was Caucasian but we don't know that for sure.  It seems to be a bit shrouded in mystery.  Apparently she ran away to Washington to marry my mother's father--I mean, yes my mother's father and the two of them--he was a self-made man and candy maker and sort of jack of all trades (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: And her name too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name is Bertha Stewart.
Speaker 1: Bertha Stewart.
Speaker 2: Bertha Stewart.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name--oh my god, I'm blanking right now.
Speaker 1: He was a candy maker.
Speaker 2: He was a candy maker, a candy maker, gardener; I think he was a wild gardener, loved opera.  You know, he was just an odd kind of guy.  They had thirteen kids and my mother was in the oldest sort of quarter of those kids, John [John Stewart (ph.)] and Bertha Stewart.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he was a candy maker. There's got to be some stories associated with that.
Speaker 2: Well again when you have that many children by the time you get to grandchildren and lots of grandchildren and stuff--our exposure as you can see by just how long--my grandmother, by the time it came to grandchildren after thirteen kids, she really was not interested in her grandchildren I have to say.  She saw us, we saw her, she kind of knew us but she I think was really a bit detached.  He and my grandmother had separated by the time they were in their late seventies or so and so you'd see either your grandmother who was by that time living with another one of her daughters or you'd go to grandfather's house.  The house had this amazing kind of stale smell about it and whatever his candy making skills had been as a young man by the time we were kids they seemed to have faded.  We did not like the candy that he made, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind did he make?
Speaker 2: He made hard candies; he made some chewy things that--peanut butter kind of cluster things and the like.  But nothing that particularly in the era that we were growing up we had Tootsie Rolls and all of that, nothing that really captured our imagination and that we really wanted to, you know, go over there to get.  We saw him rarely, we saw him at the holidays especially Christmas and New Year's.  We might see him around Eastertime but he was not in great health at that point and my mother was considered one of the more independent ones.  So they didn't really feel the need to check on her and to support her because she was fairly independent.  They gave a lot more attention to the younger kids who really needed them more.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was your grandfather born and raised in D.C. too?
Speaker 2: No I'm, I'm not sure of his birthplace.  He was born I believe in a nearby county in Virginia but I know that in their young twenties--or, he was probably twenty and she was still a teenager when they went off to Washington, D.C.  That's about, that's where for us the story kind of begins.
Story_ID: 620016
Speaker 1: Your mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] have some stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh she had lots of stories.  We've been hearing these stories; we've been documenting these stories of hers.  They grew up in an area that was very rural in Washington, D.C., the Northwest area near 16th Street. Brightwood [Washington, D.C.] is the neighborhood right--actually on the edge of Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.].  And she tells stories about how when she wanted to get away she would just sort of run out the backyard of the house and then down into Rock Creek Park and how they felt that was their own territory, you know, that the parks sort of belonged to them.  It's a lifelong passion for parks that I think for my mother developed from that time.  She talks a lot about the fact that there was only one school--you know, the Negro school and how kids as far away as what was then Silver Spring [Maryland] had to be bussed into that school.  She has wonderful memories of, of the kind of attention that teachers gave to her and in fact they went back fairly recently--part of the family in Washington to identify where the house was, it's no longer there and where the school was.  So she tells wonderful stories about that.  She tells stories of course with many sisters most of them younger about just the challenges that she faced with them always wanting to wear her clothes and in her closet and I think that's what led to a lifelong sort of fascination and addiction to clothes you know having her own clothes and her own clothes closet.  She talks about some of the trouble that they used to get into, you know, picking berries from somebody's backyard or stealing apples from somebody's else's backyard.  But mostly it seemed to be almost country in the city where they lived and that stayed with her a lot.  So those are the kinds of things that she shares with us, you know, particularly all the sisters of the brothers--the four brothers--four brothers, five brothers--the four brothers that she had and just what that meant to, to her.  The older ones that were sort of gone very early on and the younger ones that she helped to take care of.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did she have an opportunity to go to college?
Speaker 2: She did. She was actually like so many cities around the country you had the black high schools that you went to and for us in Washington, D.C. African Americans went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] or to Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.].  Armstrong was where those that would go into the trades would go to school and Dunbar was where the sort of more advanced or, or people who were tracked to go to college went.  People always wanted her to go to Dunbar, but she actually went to Armstrong and she came out of there and did some teachers college training after she had finished high school.  Not clear to us that she finished that but I know that she started her, her, her postsecondary training at the, at the local teachers college.
Story_ID: 620017
Speaker 1: I'm gonna to ask you about your father's side of the family now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Julius James Dickerson [Julius Dickerson], J-U-L-I-U-S, J-A-M-E-S, D-I-C-K-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth, oh gosh, is January 20th--you'll have to help me out. He was born--he's eighty-seven so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay 1922?
Speaker 2: Two [1922]. Yeah that's sounds right.
Speaker 1: All right. Well, what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well my father was raised by his father [John Dickerson] which was kind of interesting.  His mother died very--while he was very, very young and we don't know much about his mother.  He did not talk about his mother except that she was gone while he was an infant really.
Speaker 1: Now this is in D.C.?
Speaker 2: This is, this is in Washington, D.C. yes.  He spent a lot of time with relatives who lived in Lynchburg, Virginia.  That was sort of my grandfather's, you know, extended clan and it appears that he has some half-brothers that we heard about just a little bit through the years.  It's been interesting. They sort of both had somewhat shrouded histories that we would try and interrogate and didn't get too far and they sort of felt they were creating the family almost from scratch.  Now my father loved my--my grandfather loved my mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson], but he died shortly after World War I [sic.].  He only got to see his first grandchild and so we never knew him.  But he, if there is a grandparent that has a very vibrant sort of legacy in the family it is Papa which is what my father called him.  He had served in the [U.S.] military, he was a carpenter and actually had a pretty good carpenting business, carpentry business throughout Washington, D.C. and so that is a tradition that has extended itself to my father and my brothers [Jan Dickerson, Jaffe Dickerson, Jason Dickerson and Julian Dickerson].  You know, all of them know how to build something, do plumbing, do electrical work all of that and loathe to call contractor to do anything that they could do themselves.  So it was pretty much my father and my grandfather together and then we had the entry of the evil stepmother.
Speaker 1: I'm bracing myself (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, the evil stepmother was of course very mean to him.  She was a member of Papa's church and, you know, they will say that Papa wanted to keep company and this woman said the only way that she would keep company is that they had to get married.  So at the point that they got married she really became very controlling of the family house.  They had a wonderful house on 17th Street in Washington, D.C., 17th near S--17th and T [Street].  So that's an area that today is highly gentrified. I mean it's beautiful and we go by that house.  We've taken pictures on the front porch at that house and they talked about how my grandfather and the stepmother [Mary Dickerson] lived downstairs and my father and mother when they first got married they built a top floor suite for them that you can still see.  You know, a lot of the vestiges of his father's work are still there.  So the growing up from my father was summers in Lynchburg with cousins and then winter he'd be back with his dad.  He attended public schools in Washington, D.C. and pretty much had a loving environment but a kind of tough environment.  A loving environment from his father and as I said once the evil stepmother came into the picture it became very uncomfortable for him.
Story_ID: 620018
Speaker 1: And he, he finished school in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes he finished school in D.C.  He went to Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.]; he came back from Armstrong--you know, came back from the war [World War II, WWII] and through the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] was able to study architecture and Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I don't know that I mentioned my grandfather's name that was John J. Dickerson [John Dickerson] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. John J. Dickerson, okay. What--
Speaker 2: And he was born, again I'm not positive, but my father [Julius Dickerson] had said he was born in Connecticut [sic.] and so, you know, that's sort of the end of the story.  You get that sentence and not much more.  How did he wind up in Connecticut, who was his parents? You know, I--the story begs for us to do some genealogy there's no question about that
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father become an architect?
Speaker 2: Yes my father was a practicing architect for, for all of his life.  He came out of Howard University, he was a very proud Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], he served in the [U.S.] military in the [U.S.] Air Force and retired as a lieutenant colonel.  He worked for many, many years with GSA [General Services Administration] and then as one of their staff architect helping among other things to do some of the design for a couple of the exhibits at the Smithsonian Institution [Washington, D.C.].  The whale hall [Sant Ocean Hall] I remember we went down to see it in the museum of natural history [National Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.] you know, with quite pride looking at his name there on the wall.  Following his GSA service, he worked for a time for the D.C. government with the parks and recreation services and helped to design some of the city parks in Washington and then he retired and started his own firm in Richmond, Virginia.  And so for I would say close to twenty-five years he and my mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] commuted between a Richmond life during the week and a Washington, D.C. home life over the weekend.
Story_ID: 620019
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson] met?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's a wonderful story about how my parents met which we did get on tape.  You know, my father as I said was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and they met on the tennis court and he supposedly saw her trying to play tennis looking very cute and sexy in her tennis whites and volunteered at the strong urging of his best friend, John Howard [ph.], to give her tennis lessons.  She has a wicked backhand that's about all she developed was a wicked backhand.  But--yes they met on the tennis court, they fell in love and they got married and she was very young at that time, I think nineteen or twenty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 620020
Speaker 1: When you think about your, your mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] and your father [Julius Dickerson] their talents and their dispositions and even what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know, I am the third child, I am the oldest girl and I think that I take after both of them in distinctly different ways.  My mother is a marvelous creative spirit.  She's somebody who can always make something out of nothing.  She was someone who saw the potential very early on was an advocate for those who were written off particularly young African American kids. You know, I can recall projects that we used to do in Southeast [Washington, D.C.] which was code for poor black kids in that neighborhood particularly at that time where we would go in and she would not do 'Goldilocks' ['Goldilocks and the Three Bears,' Robert Southey] with the kids she said, "What's 'Goldilocks' around here?"  So charcoal locks came out of that and doing creative plays and playwriting and artwork and all of that.  She's an untrained artist who has done quilt making and painting and flower arranging and furniture remaking just whatever was called for.  And in that African tradition of improvisation where you reuse material and give it another life that was sort of the way she operated.  She was shopping at thrift stores, you know, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] as a way of really extending the paycheck of this government architect who by this time had six kids.  So, you know, that creative side I think comes from my mother.  My father is very well read, a lover of the arts, both of them are lovers of the arts, but because of his training is much more the businessperson, much more administrative.  It's interesting 'cause as I visit my siblings around the country, everyone's desk has some vestige of my father's home desk cans with lots and lots of pencils.  There were always pencils and pens and writing implements everywhere.  He was my best editor, always.  You give him a paper and he would write--I'd get it back with all this red ink all over it.  He was someone who was a stickler for how we spoke.  People used to remark on the way that we would answer the phone when they called: "The Dickerson residence, hello."  And we even had--for a time he was a Toastmaster [Toastmasters International] at one point and he tried to bring the toastmaster tradition of being fined for -ers and -ahs to the dinner table but we sort of overruled him on that one.  But so there's that side of organization and administration and planning and structure that I think I get from my father and the more creative insight and attention to detail and, and just creative spirit that is absolutely my mother.
Story_ID: 620021
Speaker 1: Now, where did you grow up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: We all grew up-the, when they got married they bought a house in Southeast Washington near Congress Place which is where I was born.  I was as I said the third child and it was at that point that they bought a house in the Brookland neighborhood of Northeast Washington, D.C. near Catholic University [The Catholic University of America].  We were one of the first African American families.  It was a very interesting neighborhood.  Most of the residents at that time were older.  These were old small bungalow and they bought this corner house with the idea that they were going to renovate it.  My mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] always had this eye what something could be and she talked my father [Julius Dickerson] into this property that they bought for seven thousand and it was a corner house and they spent the better part of the next forty years renovating it.  I would say today we still have plans for other renovations that should take place at the homestead--Dickerson Manor, they used to teasingly call it.  But yes that's where I grew up.  Our street was a very interesting street the corner of 16th [Street] and Jackson [Street] and there was a sidewalk on both sides of the street from 15th [Street] to 16th and Jackson and a sidewalk on both sides of the street at 17th [Street] and Jackson.  But for our block there's something about the configuration of the street there is no sidewalk along the side of our house--on either side.  So it has this again very country feeling to it.  The backyard was sort of almost like a little valley.  So the street comes down this way and the house is down here which gave it some natural protection from the street.  We could hang out there all summer.  People would walk down that street and they'd never see us.  We had Sunday brunch, we had Saturday and Sunday summer meals on the patio and people literally would walk down the street and never see us. It was kind of hidden that way.  They built one, two, three, four additions to the house.  They'd come in and my mother would say, "I think we should move the stairs," and the next thing you know there was this major project to move the stairs.  We often teased that they had six kids so that they'd have a workforce and I did more sweeping up of sawdust and fetching bricks from one side to the other side and helping to carry lumber and that kind of thing than you could imagine.  And the whole neighborhood, I mean one of the images was hearing the saw, hearing the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday afternoons full blast, the whole neighborhood got to hear it while my father and whatever children were detailed that day to help him building that house.
Story_ID: 620022
Speaker 1: We always ask this question in this way what were some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well next door to us was Dr. Jack White [Jack E. White]--Jack and Sara White [Sara Williams White] and their family of five children and that's where the Jack [HistoryMaker Jack White] of Jack and Jill [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson] lived--
Speaker 1: Jack White, the famous surgeon (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. That's our next door neighbor yep, yep, and we loved Dr. White, we loved his family.  But two more different families you would not find.  We had a strict dinner hour and one of the sounds was this old silver cowbell being clunked outside so that the whole neighborhood knew when it was Dickerson dinnertime.  I can't tell you how many times, you know, I was running to get home 'cause dinner was at six o'clock and there were certain rules.  You were home for dinner. The dinner hour was sacred and it was the only time that all of us would be at that table and we'd be there for an hour and a half, two hours to talk, to hear how everybody's day was.  So when that dinner bell rang you better get down there and I can remember running, running and neighbors would say, "I heard your dinner bell," (laughter).  You knew when you were late okay and I was notoriously late for dinner.  But the second rule at the dinner table was that you could not get disciplined at the dinner table.  That was very important and that was an outgrowth of my father's [Julius Dickerson] experience where my stepmother [Dickerson's paternal step-grandmother, Mary Dickerson]--the evil stepmother would berate him at the dinner table and give him indigestion and just make him not enjoy meal hours.  So mealtime, Sunday brunch and daily the dinner hour was sacred in our household and so everything around that how you set the table, everybody sitting down you know simple meals it's not like we ate well, but that was very important.  Back to the Whites. So the Whites next door, beautiful brick house, lovely family, accomplished family as well.  Jack White, Sr. of course the doctor, Dr. Jack White, the son a writer, the daughter a doctor, just bright very smart not even bright just scary bright, smart kids.  But Sara White was from the South and Sara White knew how to fry chicken.  We did not have fried chicken in our household.  My mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] did not have that tradition. She was an interesting cook.  Some things she did very well. She never really knew how to cook rice (laughter) other things she just sort of made up in her mind, but the smell of fried chicken coming from Sara White's house was something that just always would set my, you know, nostrils and my taste buds to salivating over this fried chicken next door.  I guess we'd get invited every now and then, "Do you want to stay for dinner?" And we'd have to run back and get permission and all that.  So I did get to taste Sara White's fried chicken.  So that was one of those things.  We used to go to the, to the fresh market in the summer and there was this little Italian lady who loved my mother and loved the kids and we'd come home with bushels of tomatoes and bushels of corn.  In so many ways you understand that D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was really southern and very country and we had all these farmers that would come in from Upper Marlboro, Maryland [Town of Upper Marlboro, Maryland] and throughout the surrounding area with their goods.  So Saturday going to the market with my mother was one of those things I loved 'cause she would always slip us peaches or whatever.  I remember having a bushel of tomatoes and you'd eat tomatoes like a fruit.  You would, you know, wash it off and just bite into it with a little bit of salt and oh, it was just great.
Story_ID: 620023
Speaker 1: What were you like growing up? What were you interested in in and what kind of information did you come in contact with that shaped, you know?
Speaker 2: Well the arts were always a part of our life.  We spent a lot of time especially in muggy hot humid Washington, D.C.  The only place you could find air conditioning was very often with museums that are free.  So we spent a lot of time in the Smithsonian museums [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and Ann and Dick [Dickerson's parents, Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson] made a priority for us to have the exposure to dance and to music and to theater.  So we did Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] in the park that was free down near the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.] we went and sat on the steps of the Ellipsis [sic. The Ellipse, Washington, D.C.] and hear musical concerts.  We got hauled over to the Marine barracks to hear the Marine bands which as you can tell not one of my favorites.  We always saw 'Nutcracker' ['The Nutcracker,' Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky]. They just really were culture freaks and we got it from a very early age.  We had a wonderful, a wonderful amphitheater the Carter Barron Amphitheatre [Washington, D.C.] off of 16th Street.  It was kind of like Ravinia [Ravinia Park] is in Chicago [sic. Highland Park, Illinois].  But they would get season tickets again don't know how they managed season tickets for a family of eight and we got to see all the musicals of the day.  We saw 'Guys and Dolls,' we saw 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents], we saw 'My Fair Lady' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe], we saw 'Camelot' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe], we saw 'Carousel' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II].  You know, we'd get to see New York City Ballet.  I'll never forget one day we waited back stage for [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell to come out and everybody had gone and so we had Arthur Mitchell cornered and got to take him back to his hotel, you know, and talk with him about his career and we chatted him up all the way. I'm sure he was very happy to get out of that station wagon.  But it was, it was a kind of defining experience to have the arts always validated and always around us.  So we were avid readers. We all read all the time.  We did a lot of camping as a family 'cause once again you've got six kids and a limited budget.  They paid for us to go to Catholic school so that was a priority and for us to get away we camped around the country.  So we'd camped up to Canada for the World's Fair there, we camped out to Wyoming, we'd camp up into Upstate New York and see friends.  Again really wonderful eye opening experiences helping us feel that we could be connected to the world that it was ours.  There was no barrier for that.  We'd talk--my mother would also really talk about the racism and the history.  I remember going to Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia] and her taking us around to the back of Monticello and pointing at those bricks and saying, "You see those bricks?  Those bricks were built by slaves so don't ever think that you don't have a part of this legacy. You built this legacy."  She would always point that out to us throughout that time.  So I started really doing little neighborhood theater things at an early age.  You know, my first breakout performance on television was actually on one of the kid's TV shows where they invited you to come up, you know, and who can do something.  I'll never forget this was something that akin to 'Captain Kangaroo' or one of those afternoon shows and I put my hand up and they said. "Well come up. What can you do," and I said, "I can whistle."  They said, "Okay, well whistle," and nothing came out and I'll never live that down.  My brothers [Jan Dickerson, Jaffe Dickerson, Jason Dickerson and Julian Dickerson] were in the audience and they started howling with laughter.  So of course the whole family heard that, but--
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh I think I was five or six years old something like that.
Story_ID: 620024
Speaker 1: Well, te- tell us now, how many--well name your brothers and sisters for us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're great. Jan [Jan Dickerson], Jaffe [Jaffe Dickerson], Jill [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson], Julee [Julee Dickerson Thompson], Jason [Jason Dickerson] and Julian [Julian Dickerson].
Speaker 1: Jan--
Speaker 2: Jan, J-A-N, Jaffe, J-A-F-F-E very interesting different names (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jaffe, now.
Speaker 2: J-A-F-F-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah who hated his name growing up because everybody would call him (pronunciation) Jaffe and it was Jaffe.  Nobody knows where my mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] got that from and Jan is really (pronunciation) Jan and Jan Paige, Jaffe Dean, Jill Laurie Ann, Julee Matil.  I always wanted my sister's name 'cause I thought her name was the best Julee Matil, Jason Allen and Julian Gordon. And, you know, I would have to say that again very tight knit family and really raised to have each other's back and would think collectively.  That was one of the--but it didn't stop us from really having quite a field day making fun of each other, teasing.  My mother and father [Julius Dickerson] would go out for a date night and all hell would break loose in the house and that it somehow would get magically put back together.  My brother Jaffe was the torturer in the family and he would invent stuff like tying me up with Boy Scout knots so that the more I moved the tighter the noose got around my neck you know just real torturous things.  So we had a really rich life as young people, we really did, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where, where do you fall in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I'm third.
Speaker 1: Third, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the third child but I'm the first girl and so I'm the end of the first set.  So it was sort of the big boys, the girls and the little boys and that's how things broke up.  Big boys had the BOQ, the bachelors officers' quarters which was the third floor attic converted for them and then the girls had a room next to my parents where we shared a room and then the little boys as they were called Jason and Julian, had bunk beds and they were in another bedroom.  But you remember this is like a two bedroom bungalow [in Washington, D.C.] so this is why we were always building on the house. I mean, my, my mother at times was sort of painting a room and then came down off the ladder to go deliver I think it was Jason or Julian, you know, she was trying to finish that one last little thing before she left.
Story_ID: 620025
Speaker 1: So all of that led me to really being a, you know, very interested in the theater and I started with recreation department, one act plays.
Speaker 2: About, about what year is this? (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I was about eight or nine and we won the regionals and so had great success in lead roles from that time.  When I was a teenager, you know, as I said this whole theater experience happened because another friend in the neighborhood who went to public school had found this neat program called Workshops for Careers in the Arts and he convinced me to go with him which meant I had to hook a half day of school to go down and that was probably one of the first defining--really defining moments of my life.  This was the organization that was the precursor to the Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.].  It was called Workshops for Careers in the Arts the brainchild of Peggy Cooper who later became [HistoryMaker] Peggy Cooper Cafritz a great arts patron and arts leader in Washington, D.C.  She was in law school [George Washington University Law School, Washington, D.C.] at the time that she created this and this is in 1966, '67 [1967], '68 [1968] right around that time, maybe '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. I'm awful with dates.  I just sort of know the moment and the moment was the sort of rise of the Civil Rights Movement, the aftermath of that with the Black Power movement, the Black Panther newspaper, this outpouring of creative arts, spoken word, The Last Poets, performance stuff, money flowing into communities.  So you had for the first time the Job Corps programs that would pay kids for the summer to be actively engaged.  You had Ford Foundation money [New York, New York] and other money going into urban communities and Peggy saw that and that's how workshops got created.  She had the best talent from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and from around the country come in to be the visual arts or theater arts or dance or--there wasn't a music program, media programs, photography programs.  But I had people like Mike Malone who would bring in [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson to sort of work on us.  We had street theater festivals that we, you know, would perform throughout the Washington neighborhoods which was really hilarious.
Story_ID: 620026
Speaker 1: The first performance we would do every year of street theater would be at the corner of 14th [Street] and T [Street] which at that time was the notorious heart of ladies of the night and they were not happy 'cause we were shutting down business for about an hour or so.  But we would come, block off the street, set up this semblance of set and the mics and everything and for the next hour we would perform. You know, Jesus Christ--
Speaker 2: What was the name of your group?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was just street theater for Workshops for Careers in the Arts.  It was the summer and this was when the dance students got involved in the music and all of that would come together in a musical that Mike Malone would create.  Mike was a genius at really sort of putting together these spectacles of dance, music and we did 'Everyman' ['The Summoning of Everyman'] but it would be converted to an urban story and so Esteban [ph.] he became (pronunciation) Esteban as opposed to the you know, traditional Everyman and it would be given a kind of coloring, no pun intended, but a coloring that would reflect sort of the urban community.  So we would have, you know, three weeks of performances all around Washington and then we'd go on tour.  One year we went to Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] for the play festival, another year we were in Canada, another year we were down in Mobile, Alabama extraordinary exposure for kids who came from all over Washington.  It wasn't just black kids it was black, white, Asian a little bit of everybody was a part of this program and it was the first time there had been that sort of broad opportunity for arts education for Washington, D.C. youth.  It was really groundbreaking and I was just very privileged to be a part of that time.  Debbie Allen was our teacher, Clyde Jacques Barrett, Kenny Dougherty [Kenneth Dougherty] you know people that went on to work with major companies and who went on to extraordinary personal careers, Glenda Dickerson the director.  So that was the era in Washington, D.C. and that was the era that really forged a lot of my instincts about and desire to be part of the arts community.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is mostly in the '70s [1970s], you'd say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], '71 [1971], '72 [1972].  I graduated high school [Academy of Notre Dame, Washington, D.C.] in '72 [1972] and for the last two years I really was at my high school only half day because the other half of the day I was taking theater classes, acting classes, some dance classes, studying scripts.  By my last year I was also part of a small theater company that was run by one of the faculty who was also a Howard University [Washington, D.C.] alumnus Harry Poe, the always outrageous wonderful Harry Poe who passed away I guess about a decade ago.  So yeah and wonderful talent I wish you could have seen these kids.  They could sing, they could act, they went on to wonderful careers in New York [New York], in London [England] with the ballet companies in the Netherlands, excuse me-they, they just did fabulous work.
Story_ID: 620027
Speaker 1: Let me go back and just kind of recap your schools.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) but I didn't want to stop you on them (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Okay so I did one year---you know, kindergarten was at the local public school, John Burroughs Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] and then from that point on I was educated by the Benedictine nuns first at St. Anthony's grade school [St. Anthony Catholic School, Washington, D.C.] our neighborhood parish and I did first through eighth grade there.  I graduated from St. Anthony's to go to Notre Dame academy [Academy of Notre Dame, Washington, D.C.] which was an all girls Catholic school right down at North Capitol [Street] and K [Street], gone now.  They sort of did away with all the girls schools and it became part of Gonzaga [Gonzaga College High School, Washington, D.C.], and then from there I went off to Emerson College in Boston [Massachusetts].  I did Emerson College for a year and a half 'cause during that time I wrote and produced my own show.  We did it first in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and then I restaged it in Boston.  We took it on tour into New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Oh wait a minute, now, what's the name of your show?
Speaker 2: The show is called 'The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience' [Amina J. Dickerson].
Speaker 1: Okay, Black Arts Movement show (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very much influenced by that--by the kind of work that Mike Malone did.  Even [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson came by for one of our rehearsals very, very wonderful to have his endorsement.
Story_ID: 620028
Speaker 1: Let me go back even further here for a second, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: We talked about the grades, the schools and the high schools.  Were, were there any special teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: I wish that--I had wonderful experiences but had no special people within the school.  A lot of my influence came from outside of the school.  But, you know, there were again very influential opportunities that came.  I was a leader at Notre Dame [Academy of Notre Dame, Washington, D.C.], class president or elected to some official things it's sort of foggy right now.  But I took my first trip abroad when I was at Notre Dame.  I went and spent Easter the week leading up to Easter and Easter Sunday in Italy and in particular was at the Vatican [Vatican City] on Easter Sunday that was interesting.  So we did Naples [Italy], Capri [Italy], Sorrento [Italy] and Rome [Italy] and that was a kind of magic moment between my dad [Julius Dickerson] and I because he remembered so fondly his years in the war because Italy is where he first really got to see opera and as an African American treated in very a different way.  You know how engaged and seductive that experience for so many black G.I.'s and he certainly (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did he serve during the--it was World War II [WWII] right?
Speaker 2: It was World War II (unclear).
Speaker 1: And was he an officer?
Speaker 2: He was [U.S.] Air Force--I think he was infantry at that point.
Speaker 1: Infantry?
Speaker 2: Yeah he came back. As a result of being trained, he moved into the sort of desk work on drawing--architectural drawing in the building services or whatever it's called for the Air Force and that's what led to his rise through the ranks to major and lieutenant colonel, et cetera.  But, you know, the war years he was part of the black buffalos [92nd Infantry Division] and he talks about them.  Monk Madison [ph.] and some of the others and the racism that they experienced in the war, at home and the sort of liberating effect of being treated as heroes and respected as men that he encountered in his experience in Europe.  So when I was going to Italy for the first time it sort of opened up a flood of memories for him about his own time in Italy that was a great sharing between the two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was this was your trip abroad?
Speaker 2: That was my first trip abroad well you don't count Canada--Canada is kind of U.S. (laughter).  So that was the first time getting on a plane, independent by myself flying through Chicago [Illinois] and meeting up with people and being part of one of those tours.  I loved Italy and I loved the freedom and if there was a special nun it was Sister Elizabeth Charles [ph.] who was a frail and kind of timid thing which was the exact opposite of me. So I can remember sitting at lunch and here I am sixteen years old and we're someplace in Rome and this wonderful pasta comes and I order wine and she's sort of looking at me like, "You're in Rome, do as the Romans do."  I can remember sort of sneaking out of whatever we were, go get a taste of the Italian nightlife, and I was a little wild at that point in time in my life. You know, I wanted to taste the nightlife and see other things both in the U.S. and on this trip.  It's like I don't know if I'm getting here again and I want to see it.  The other thing I recall is I had a big Afro and the Italians were like crazy about stuff black so you'd walk down the street and you'd hear people murmuring behind you (adopts Italian accent), "Aretha Franklin, James Brown, you know, Jimi Hendrix," you know, which was this kind of affirmations, like: you go African Americans, you know, we know who you are.  So I had, I had a great time, I had a great time.
Story_ID: 620029
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from the Academy of Notre Dame, Washington, D.C.], did you see a theater trajectory ahead of you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I mean the big question was whether I was just going to immediately go to New York [New York] and be part of the theater scene or go on to school and I have to say I think that my--in hindsight and looking at how so many other people--young people today really have all of these benchmarks and we're going to do this by age twenty and then I'm going to do that.  Mine was much more an evolutionary process.  I had a wonderful fate and I trusted that fate to take me where I should be quite literally.  So you know all my friends were going to Emerson so I decided that I should go to Emerson end of story.  Emerson school of the spoken word [Emerson College] in Boston [Massachusetts] but it was not formed out of any direct conscious counsel and quite honestly mom [Ann Stewart Dickerson] and dad [Julius Dickerson] were like, if you want to do this, fine.  I'm not sure that they had really talked about higher education.  You know, in some families there's this whole trajectory of what you're going to be and ours was a little bit more free flowing.  "What do you want to be?  Let me see what I can do to support that," and I had been so much a part of the arts world, I I think in some ways they were surprised that I didn't just go on and try and create a career at that point in time.
Story_ID: 620030
Speaker 1: I had, you know, through workshops been given support to do this show, 'The Journey' ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson] in high school and it was cobbled together--it, it was a story of thirteen African Americans on this kind of mythical journey to discover themselves.  It was a musical, you know, to embrace their freedom as sort of reclaimed as black people.
Speaker 2: This was at (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is at, this is in high school, the play.
Speaker 2: This is Notre Dame [Academy of Notre Dame, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: This is, this is while I'm at Notre Dame but it's really because of Workshops for Careers in the Arts.  I wrote it and I said, I want to do this and again it was one of those things.  A great bonding moment 'cause I wrote the play between eleven--eleven p.m. and like one a.m. at night.  I would sit downstairs after the house was quiet and all my brothers [Jan Dickerson, Jaffe Dickerson, Jason Dickerson and Julian Dickerson] and sister [Julee Dickerson Thompson] and everybody was upstairs and build a fire and have a cup of tea and sit there and write.  A lot of it was inspired by the poetry of the day, and so it was really reshaping a lot of the historic poetic text to create this narrative about this experience.  I worked with another one of the students at Workshops, a wonderful musician named John T. Dews [ph.] who wrote all the songs for it and the art folks did the set for me.  Herbert Haus [ph.] who actually went on to the--a pretty well known sculptor and worked with [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt and others.  So it was the kind of thing I sort of felt like the old Mickey Rooney days, it's like, "Come everybody let's make a show," and that's kind of what we did and it was interesting.  It had a really profound impact on a lot of people.  So that fired me up. I mean,  first of all the fact that I could do my own play in the Marvin Theater [Dorothy Betts Marvin Theater, Washington, D.C.], you know, at sixteen years old, we made a profit, we paid all of our bills.  There was critical appraisal for it--
Story_ID: 620031
Speaker 1: I went off to Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] totally unprepared, totally unprepared--you know, I'm going to college, that's what you did. And Boston [Massachusetts] was a rude awakening for me.  I had not experienced northern racism in that way.  You know, we were on Beacon Street so we're in Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts], where--not too far from Cambridge [Massachusetts] but far from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] all of that stuff.  My brother--Jaffe [Jaffe Dickerson], my older brother was at Holy Cross college but he was out in Worcester [Massachusetts] so he's forty miles away.  Back Bay in Boston was just cold, you know.  Black people there had a very different sense of possibility.  A much more subverted and, and limited sense of what they could do.  The city was a racist city.  The Italian part of town, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two [1972], this is '72 [1972] in Boston?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is '72 [1972], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Boston was going through the busing crisis (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, yeah I don't have, I don't have remembrance of that; I know that the busing crisis went on for what, almost fifteen years.
Speaker 2: That's where (unclear) Patrick [sic. HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] was hit with the flag and it looked like he was being stabbed with it in the newspaper (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh and you'd go into the say Charles Street area and they would literally come out and say, "Go back to where you belong."  You'd go down to the market and you know, I loved markets that's how I had been raised so I found this market.  I'd go down to the Italian market and people snarled at you and they'd glare at you and they'd throw your change on the table.  It was--that, and the cold we're right off the Charles River and it's like, I really don't need this. And it was, I was in the black dorm 206 Beacon Street and it was the first time I had ever met other black Jills.  There was not one but two others in the class and I was just like, wow (laughter) who'd a thought that and James Spruill and the faculty that was there were interesting but also a little unprepared for the kind of talent that was coming into the school at that time.  I wouldn't say that I was the only one but you know, we came with a lot more experience and a lot more wherewithal, I don't--a lot more, you know, sort of self-initiated sensibilities that I think they had had.
Story_ID: 620032
Speaker 1: Do you think it was because--I often think, think this when I go to the airports, that--do you think it's because D.C. [Washington, D.C.] is basically a black city in a lot of ways?
Speaker 2: Well I came to understand that.
Speaker 1: D.C., Atlanta [Georgia] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah absolutely, I mean, that was the era of D.C. being known as Chocolate City and its vanilla suburbs.  Now D.C. itself had been a--it still is the last colony and we may have finally been able to elect a mayor but think about this we had--we were governed by the committee on Capitol Hill for D.C. affairs [U.S. Senate Committee on the District of Columbia; U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs].  We did not have a mayor until literally the mid-'60s [1960s] with Walter Washington who was appointed to us.  The first elected mayor and then he was elected mayor and then we had [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and Marion comes out of and his first tenure--his first maybe two terms were really terrific 'cause he was ensuring a place for us at the table.  He was saying, "No you can't just do this, you have to come by me, you have to come by the citizens.  What's in it for the citizens, what's in it for us?"  A lot of the programs that were started afterschool, the percentage of money so things changed and we really had this different sense of ourselves in Washington even though Washington had been a more racist city.  When I would talk to my mother [Ann Stewart Dickerson] she would never shop in one of those stores down there Garfinckel's [Washington, D.C.] because of how they had been racist.  She talks about how she helped to break--integrate the National Theatre [Washington, D.C.].  So it's not that D.C. didn't have that but there were so many of us in the city that there was a different sense of our presence.  You know, we were the government workers, we were the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], we did have Howard University [Washington, D.C.], et cetera and that changed our perception of who we were and sort of our place in the scheme of things very different, very, very different from Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 620033
Speaker 1: So in the midst of this I'm a freshman [at Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] and I say I want to do my play ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson] again and the faculty doesn't quite know how to, how to take that but I'm given the permission to do the play.  Now I should say there's something about this play that I don't talk about a lot but I conceived a ritual as a part of the play.  This is when you have [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer sort of the black ritual experience and all of those things that are happening out of New York [New York].  But I haven't really seen or participated in that so this is my creation and there's a kind of montage where the characters have white face on. You know, it's sort of a little bit of 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward] kind of stuff thrown in there for good, good, good measure and you know, we sort of created the ritual and I was raised Catholic as I've said.  So this whole thing of spirits visiting was not something I knew at all, okay.  There were people who came out of kind of Pentecostal traditions when we had done it in Washington [D.C.] and so Peaches [Peaches Thompson (ph.)], she was just always the lead character, Iya Daley [ph.].  She would always get the spirit during these rituals and stuff.  And, you know, there is this place where it would hit this pitch and then I don't know how I knew what to do to bring people out of that. But you know, you become first of all responsible for whatever is going on with these folks and you have to bring them back safely.  So I'm, I'm all of a sudden bringing people back.  So that was the experience in Washington and that experience happened again in Boston [Massachusetts].  So people had this kind of notion that I was a sorcerer or something because of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because of the state that people in the play would get to in that particular ritual (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah in that particular moment.  I mean it would really-and, and you know, people's eyes would roll back in their head and it was like--
Story_ID: 620034
Speaker 1: We're talking about ritual theater in, in your play 'The Journey' ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what you were trying to accomplish.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You had to ride herd or try and control the energy on some level of the actors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the energy of the room.  You know, again, as, as someone who did not have that ritual experience in the church and not out of an affluent African experience.  It was at once quite exhilarating and scared me to death but you recognized it as the director you are responsible for these souls that are now in your hands. You know, I guess it was one of the first times that I understood how things work through you.  Sometimes you don't have to really understand everything but if it works through you and you just have faith in it, it sort of helped me know what to do how to bring people back down to the state of normalcy of calm.  It did get me a reputation as something of a sorceress or something.  But they were just magical performances and I think that was part of the power of, of that show.
Speaker 1: I didn't ask this, well I shouldn't, but I'm going to ask this anyway. Did it make, does it make you reflect basically upon what happens with spirituality with people in general? I mean, like when people do that in the church they can do it in Yoruba or they can do it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and it's so funny, 'cause--
Speaker 1: --but that's a core of whatever the spirituality is.
Speaker 2: It's about a connection and it's about an openness.  You have to be open for something for you to receive that, for you to touch those places in yourself.  It was so funny because just that makes me reflect on attending candomble services in Brazil and then coming back to a black Baptist church on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] for the christening of some cousin's children and a woman got the spirit.  The way that people move in circles and the way that they react when, when, you know, divine horseman when your head gets taken, when the spirit enters.  You really see that that really is of a piece there's not that separation by geography, by religion, by cultural tradition.  Ultimately it is about possession in this most glorious way. And so that's what was happening in this production, you know.  I had read about it and certainly I knew about it from my exposure to the black theater experience and [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer and all of that but then it's in your rehearsal room, okay, or it's on your stage. And the idea that every time you did that ritual this might happen out there with an audience and how do you help people move through that to come back to script.  So it was, it was an exhilarating time.  It really, really was.
Story_ID: 620035
Speaker 1: You know, I, I very much wanted to do the production again, so, without, you know, I, I--I'm at Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] now. I'm in Boston [Massachusetts] and I don't know if I had talked about how jolting that experience was.  After being in this really wonderful, warm, embracing, affirming environment of Washington, D.C. used to being everywhere you always saw black people everywhere. You always saw black people everywhere, poor people, middle class people, wealthy people, people who were traveling in and out.  So you had a very different sense of yourself and then you arrive in northern racism in Boston. You know, I'm in Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts], I'm at, I may be in the black dorm but you go out of that, you're on Beacon Street and people are looking at you like what are you doing here, I'm very close to say Charles [Street] and you know, I remember people coming out and sort of saying, "You go home," you know, "you don't belong here."  I loved the markets as I said, this fresh corn by the bushel and all of this.  You go down to the market when I learned about that which is in the Italian part of the city and people said don't be there after dark and you didn't understand that until you really felt the chill around you and the stares.  And you know, you know when people are not used to seeing someone like you in that environment.  But you know, I, I also felt this was an opportunity to really understand how much of that translates into another environment, you know, of what you think you can do and who you think you are. And Emerson was interesting. It was mass communication so you had people there for speech therapy, you had people there for film and television and radio and you had the theater program and you know, some luminaries had come out of the school.  But essentially it was a small underfunded school okay, and it's like Emerson College as opposed to Emerson University and, and so there were limitations to what was available there and the faculty was in my mind, you know, I don't want to disparage anybody but it wasn't an outstanding faculty; they were okay.  So for me the idea that I could do the play ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson] again there was very important. And you know, I don't know that they were used to people just coming as a freshman and wanting to do that but that was kind of the emboldened stance and sense of confidence that all of us coming out of workshops had in the other places that we went. And you know, many of those kids went on to CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] arts or they went up to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and you know, had I really set my mind on that could have done that but hadn't really been as focused on postsecondary and didn't get a whole lot of counseling from home or from school.
Story_ID: 620036
Speaker 1: So I went to Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] because my friends were there and they ultimately gave me this opportunity, said, "Sure if you want to do your play ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson] you can do it." So some of the cast from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was actually at the school.  We sort of traveled our cohort move from one place to the other.  Other people knowing that we were doing it came in.  The musical director, John T. Dews [ph.] came in from CalArts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] and we did restage it.  That was the time that I really got to see again how Washington, D.C. had helped us have this broaden sense of possibility for us as African Americans, I mean, play notwithstanding just black people.  Because we had a fair number of local African Americans who this is an era where everybody's getting scholarships and being allowed to be admitted and stuff.  And so we had some guys from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] who were a part of our class and they were blown away by, you know, these other black people.  It was their first exposure to a lot of black middle class people.  It was their first exposure to a lot of these new ideas.  They were used to going to a party and keeping their coat with them.  One of them, one of them, made such an extraordinary sort of transition to being open to this process through the process of doing the play, Billy McDonald [ph.].  He wouldn't even take his shoes off, he was not comfortable not wearing his shoes in rehearsal, okay, which is what we do as theater people: take off your shoes, get ready, warm up, do all of that stuff.  And, you know, he went on to really make some wonderful lifelong--life changing discoveries as a result of the play.  So we did the play, we had spirits come once again and you know, people oncampus didn't quite know what to make of me but we decided based on the success that we wanted to do something else with this show.
Story_ID: 620037
Speaker 1: I was making forays into New York [New York], you know, taking bus trips during the weekend.  I met [HistoryMaker] Joan Sandler who was at that time the, the executive director of the Black Theater Alliance [New York, New York]. You know, I had gotten to meet other people in the city and I'm not really sure how I met this counselor, Betty Salz [ph.], at the addicts rehabilitation center but she said, "Well why don't you bring the show here?" And so I took that idea back up to my colleagues and we decided we're going to take the show to New York City and we won't be on Broadway, we'll be in Harlem [New York, New York].  That's a great--you know, it's great sort of notion for where we are in the black power sister brother movement with the people and stuff but all of these people for the most part myself very much included had not a clue what kind of tough experience led people to a life as an addict and certainly what that recovery process was.  It was a life changing--very, very profoundly moving event for us.  I mean, we got on the bus, we took the show down and we're in an environment that doesn't have resources to see me on the stage, no lights nothing and we are going to be in lockdown.  Once you go into that space you are in that space.  But it was probably one of the most profound and moving and affirming performances that we ever gave of 'The Journey' show ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson].  Somewhere I have it on reel to reel and I would love to translate it, so I could hear it transferred to a place to hear it because in the opening moments of the show Peaches Thompson [ph.] who had been our lead Iya Daley [ph.] in Washington [D.C.] with this really crystal clear beautiful soprano voice and we opened it with 'Oh, Freedom' you know, and she hit a note in this auditorium and somewhere from the back of the theater it sounded like somebody's uncle; the image that would come to mind is somebody with white hair and a white beard sitting on a porch with his Bible.  Oh it was something 'cause she sang 'Oh, Freedom' and you could just hear him affirm.  It was like she sent out the call and he answered in this deep bass, "Yes, Lord," and you know, just moved by the first notes of the show.  So it was great, it was pretty amazing call and response.  I could see the journey, the ritual journey that these actors were taking was something that these addicts were looking at as their own journey you know, through the dark challenging moments of their addiction to you know, some possible--whatever they were drawing from they were drawing a lot from it. I still had this extraordinary plaque made for us and afterwards, many months later, it came and we stayed in touch.  You know, we'd never you know lived with the roaches and the rats and all of that overnight.  It was a sobering and very important experience about the transformative power of theater about the connection of black people wherever they are.  It, it was great.
Story_ID: 620038
Speaker 1: So we came back to Boston [Massachusetts] and with this sort of renewed sense of, you know, our stuff (laughter) and what we were going to make in this world and we created an organization called Black Infinity [ph.].  And, you know, the mission was to create art and theater in ways that would help move people.  And that was the sort of first trajectory for me into a first foray for me into the whole arts management arena because all of a sudden I'm looking at how to recreate this organization, how do we make it a nonprofit, how do we find the money.  I'm talking to, you know, the bank leaders and I'm taking lunch and it's just moving in this direction that I couldn't have anticipated.  And, you know, his is early days of NEA [National Endowment for the Arts], early days of NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities]; corporate funding is very nascent especially for black theater and black organizations.  I don't know if they were humoring me or what but we got some money to do some stuff and it made me feel like Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] was not big enough.  So I came back to Washington, D.C. that summer not really intending to go back. You know, I didn't have money they weren't giving me money and so I was like I'm through with it and I also had this probably ill informed perspective about the ability of this faculty that were not on Broadway and had never been on Broadway, or had never--you're not in the legitimate theater so how do you know how to train me so I can be successful there.  I came back to Washington, I was working a summer gig in, you know, the mayor's office or something or some summer job in D.C. government and applying for stuff and as I was applying for stuff, I of course went to see what was possible with Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.] and their improvisational theater company Living Stage [Living Stage Theatre Company].  Bob Alexander [Robert Alexander] ran that it was his creation, his baby.  Bob was a renegade himself, you know.  On the main stage of the arena, Zelda Fichandler and Tom [Thomas Fichandler] had built this incredible regional theater (unclear) house they're in their twenty-third season or something like that at this time highly regarded.  And in the old vat room downstairs in the basement is Bob doing his version of sort of Viola Spolin meets Iowa Theater Lab meets Richard Schechner and the, sort of guerilla theater, theater for the people, theater coming out of the people, theater in this kind of interactive--much more directly interactive approach.  You know, we had 250 songs, we had things that would start scenes but the whole thing was to respond to the audience and get the audience involved.  I auditioned for the Living Stage at Bob's invitation.  He said well you're not really up to snuff to be, you know, a full member of the company but I have a role for you.  You can be the community relations director, you'll, you'll do all the booking for the theater, you'll be a backup, you'll, you'll be one of the singers and you'll be a backup actor.
Story_ID: 620039
Speaker 1: Any other black actors in the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes there were I mean Living Stage [Living Stage Theatre Company] had--the lead shining beautiful glory of Living Stage.  The person who had really gotten the whole training of Bob [Robert Alexander] and taken it to this other level was Rebecca [Rebecca Rice].  Rebecca was an extraordinary actress just a powerful, powerful woman.  So at one point Rebecca was like the, the, the you know, core and then Jennifer [Jennifer Nelson] went on to lead a theater company in--very successful theater company in Washington, D.C. which just only recently--she left and I think the theater is still going and then there was another younger guy who came somewhere during my tenure there, Larry [ph.].  So yeah it was multiracial, multicultural.  The other person that worked with me sort of lower than me was this young Irish gal Ellen Bartosik [ph.] who was a great friend. So yeah it was an integrated and most of our audiences were, were African American and urban audiences.
Story_ID: 620040
Speaker 1: So I am now back in Washington [D.C.] living at home earning a really nice salary in the theater watching Zelda Fichandler and, and Tom [Thomas Fichandler] and this theater.  Watching and being a part of Bob's [Robert Alexander] work and it's again without knowing hindsight we'll say oh here are the lessons that came out of that.  First of all watching Zelda and Tom built this theater as a nonprofit entity with work that is being brought in from all over the globe.  Their work they were doing 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] and other productions that they're sending to Broadway.  There are people working in the theater, great repertory and the people that came out of that repertory house Dianne Wiest and just all kinds of people who went on to incredible careers had a home there and knew that they had full lives and they had the opportunity to do a variety of work.  So that was really instructive to me that you didn't have to be on the stage and in fact being on the stage every eight weeks, twelve weeks you're out looking for work again.  These people had full time work, doing the work that they loved, really making that work possible for audiences and for actors and for designers and all of that very instructive. Bob's, the lesson from Bob was really about as he would say the power of the imagination and the transformative power of theater to create--to help people touch their own creative possibilities.  But also how that, that opportunity helped them imagine themselves in their communities in different ways, helped them work through issues, helped them see answers to things; so theater really as a tool, as a vehicle for creating community change.  And after about three and a half years that was when I first came to Chicago [Illinois] was through Living Stage [Living Stage Theatre Company].  We had--we were on our way to the Ann Arbor theater festival or the theater festival--yeah I think it was in Ann Arbor [Michigan] and so we picked up a couple of gigs in Hammond [Indiana] or something.  I stayed somewhere up near Diversey [Parkway] and Clark [Street] and we had been on the bus, a little van crossing the country all day and then you hit Chicago and it's like wow you could feel the energy here. It was just amazing, just amazing.  I said I think I could live here this is a pretty nice city.  I remember walking into a bar around the corner from the hotel Ellen [Ellen Bartosik (ph.)] and I and you know, within the first five minutes some fight breaks out and somebody is thrown the length of the bar and I said, "Oh okay don't see that happening in Washington, D.C."  But still I was very intrigued by the city and I said well maybe one day I'll, I'll come and live here.  You know, this is like '78 [1978]--no it has to be before that. It has to be '74 [1974]--'73 [1973], '74 [1974] somewhere around there.  So I go back to Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.] but I'm sort of feeling like I've done what I can do here. You know, I'm not advancing through the company 'cause Bob has a very specific idea and you can't be too mannered or too, too straight and you know, my pre-theater experience is much more script driven.
Story_ID: 620041
Speaker 1: So I'm looking for what's next and across the transom from a friend in Boston [Massachusetts] comes this application for the summer Institute in Arts Administration at Harvard  [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I'm like wow 'cause it's talking about what Zelda [Zelda Fichandler] is doing and really talking about it not just for theater but in this multidisciplinary way.  So you've got dance, you've got music, you've got museums, you've got opera houses.  I said, "Oh this is for me," so I applied and wonder of wonders, I'm accepted.  I'm one of seven African Americans in the class and I'm the youngest person in the class and they were kind, okay, because I didn't know what the hell was going on.  Like I got in because probably I'm at Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.] and I'm doing Living Stage [Living Stage Theatre Company] work.  But these are people that are dealing with multimillion dollar budgets and very sophisticated problems and so when it comes to writing the case study, you know, I'm just grateful because it left a lasting impression.  I think I held on to the case studies and all the curriculum materials for probably the next twenty years and went back to them.  But it was a very, very helpful step in my understanding of the emerging arena of arts and cultural policy and funding in the U.S.  So I come back to Arena sort of now thinking, okay, what do I do with this?  I go to a cocktail party reception of the Washington [D.C.] members of the Harvard class and that night this gentleman, Warren Robbins [Warren M. Robbins] walks across the room as we're meeting at a place called the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.], hadn't ever been there before and he comes across with his director of development and they say, well, you know, "Would you like to work for the Museum of African Art?"  I'm like, "Well you don't even really know me and I don't know anything about museums." And he says, "It's okay, we--," you know, "if you're a part of this you must have something going on and we'd love to teach you."  So that was the next direction.
Story_ID: 620042
Speaker 1: You know, in so many ways, museums allowed me to do everything that I had been building to.  I mean there's this whole audience and, and, and you know, sort of what we would call today stakeholder engagement and participation.  It's community based, it's definitely dealing with black culture, it's dealing with it on a global basis, you know, in the context of interpreting that collection African art of course is part of dance, it's part of music, it's part of poetry so this is like a dream job for me.  I start as the assistant to the director of a special project that is to take an African program into the D.C. Public Schools [District of Columbia Public Schools] and the woman that is hired--you could never do this stuff today.  I mean, you'd have to have credentials out of the wazoo and experience and the kids would have that it's a very different competitive arena.
Speaker 2: Administration was new then (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Arts administration was new but even programming was new.  You didn't have African--you needed--one of the things that they knew was that you needed somebody black to take a program on  Africa into the D.C. Public Schools if it was going to have validity and so that's probably the major reason that I was as articulate, you can talk, you look like you can think.  Warren [Warren M. Robbins] was very material and he chose people to do things 'cause it was his museum [Museum of African Art; National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.]. It was a private museum so I think you can do this so I want to hire you to do that.  These days you have HR [human resources] and all these other kinds of things and you know, I'm sure there are new opportunities where kids with talent find ways to break through.  But this was an amazing thing for me to have that opportunity.  I mean, I, I brought a great deal to it; I was given a lot of freedom with that role.  Soon after I got there the person that was the director of the program said, "Oh we don't really need this program." She left. I became the director of the program and that grew to the director of elementary and secondary education programs for the museum all the public programs.  We're on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], we're in the sort of contiguous A townhouses, on A Street right behind the [U.S.] Supreme Court the cornerstone of which is Frederick Douglass' first home in Washington [D.C.] and I just loved it.  There were nights when I--I had the keys to the museum so we'd do a program and I'm locking up at nine o'clock or whatever and you could feel--I swore I felt Frederick Douglass' presence in that place. It was just wonderful.  And, and they also had this incredible collection of 19th century African American artists.  So I'm in my office and there's Henry O. Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner] and Edward Duncanson [sic. Robert Duncanson] and Edward Mitchell Bannister and Edmonia Lewis and William H. Johnson. I mean, all of these were the works that I lived with.  People would say, "Well what does that have to do with African art?"  It was black culture and as far as Warren was concerned if it's out there and it's not being used, "I need to get it," so that's what he did.  Now that collection when they became part of the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] in the, in the early '80s [1980s] it became part of the collection of the national museum of American art but that's how they got what is really a seminal collection of black art---you know, African American art into the, into the Smithsonian collection.
Story_ID: 620043
Speaker 1: So at this museum [Museum of African Art; National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.], I get to do everything.  I'm training docents, we're doing tours, we're doing public programs, we introduced Kwanzaa.  We used to have the most wonderful Kwanzaa celebrations there where again stuff you could never do today people were invited to bring pot.  We'd have this great community potluck with people from all over the city preparing food, insurance would never let us do that.  But they were just wonderful days.  I'm meeting all kinds of people from the continent because we're in Washington [D.C.] so we have all of the diplomatic corps the African diplomatic corps, which is again they're starting to really come into their own because this is the decade after independence so '74 [1974], '75 [1975] this is ten years after Ghana, Nigeria, you know, Senegal.  All of these countries have become independent we're the home for that.  African American institute [Africa American Institute; The Africa America Institute, New York, New York], USIA--United States Information Agency would bring people all the time.  All of those programs are dead now but it was an extraordinary opportunity for me to learn, for me to grow, for me to give, for me to become a connector really for the local community to these roots internationally and it was great, it was just great.  So during this time, you know, the museum is making plans first of all to get adopted if you will by Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and that happens.  And they're starting to make the plans for a new building to move them from A Street down onto the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] where they will be with all of the other Smithsonian family museums.  As I said I'm doing lots of different kinds of programming and one of the programs I'm probably proudest of was the program that we did around Langston Hughes.  Rod Rodgers of the Rod Rodgers Dance Company in New York [New York] had come to Washington [D.C.] with this idea to celebrate--commemorate this big anniversary for Langston and he was doing the big program at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and so whatever you want to do you just go on and do it and stuff.  And so I went to Eleanor Traylor [Eleanor W. Traylor] who was this wonderful scholar and artist personality from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] knows Langston's text.  Eleanor is just brilliant, brilliant, brilliant.  Hangs out with Toni Morrison, hangs out with all these people and is brilliant in the same way but just slightly different path.  So she's on faculty there and I convinced her that she needs to do this.  She writes this wonderful piece and the next thing you know we've got Sweet Honey in the Rock performing.  So it was basically an actor, Jay Stewart [ph.] who had been with Bobby Hooks [HistoryMaker Robert Hooks] black theater [Negro Ensemble Company], great actor who ended up here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: He was with Kuumba [Kuumba Theater Company].
Speaker 1: Yeah he was with Kuumba here and got to do some directing and stuff and then unfortunately he died of cancer.  I don't remember the name of the actress but she's hilarious.  They're doing simple stories and essentially talking about Langston and his evolutions so, "I've known rivers" ['The Negro Speaks of Rivers,' Langston Hughes] and then sort of Langston in Harlem [New York, New York].  So we get into all the simple speaks his mind stuff and we got 'Simple on Indian Blood' [Langston Hughes] and simple just all the wonderful stuff.  And then Langston as this international figure and the work that he started to do to bring the diaspora writers.  The writers and poets of Africa, the writers and poets of the Caribbean and Cuba together.  So that's the arc of the thing and then Sweet Honey punctuating that with songs throughout and the jazz band.  I so wished that I had Chicago musicians at that time 'cause we didn't have very much good jazz or good jazz musicians that I knew easily to put into this show.  But it was great; it was just one of those magical nights where you were transformed.  You know, people in the audience, there was this call and response and you could feel it in the house and it was just fabulous.  I remember that it was going to be a big snow storm that day; I was scared to death 'cause in Washington when they say snow people go and hide.  They get their milk, they get their eggs, their lover, their brother and whatever and they are gone.  So I remember going out on the patio at my mother's [Ann Stewart Dickerson] house and pouring this libation and saying, "Lord--God I'm not saying don't let it snow just don't let it snow until the show is over."  Sure enough it starts snowing as people are leaving the theater that night and it doesn't stop snowing for the next two days.  But it's a great success, a great, great success and I just harken back to that very often as one of those theater moments that you just are really proud to have been associated with.
Story_ID: 620044
Speaker 1: Time for me to start, you know, thinking about what my next move is.  I get a call one Sunday morning from a, a woman who is interviewing for a job in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and she said, you know, "The African American Museum [Afro American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'm looking at this job and you know, I don't know anything about museums tell me about them."  And so we go through an odyssey of talking about museums and the work of museums and Philadelphia and the sort of emerging community of African Americans museums around the country and so I end up doing some work helping them do an institutional study to figure out what to do with that museum, you know, what are possibilities.  Put a wonderful team together Barry Gaither [HistoryMaker Edmund B. Gaither], Howard Johnson [ph.], historians, artists, administrators.  We came up with a good plan and then she said, well, "Now you have to come and help me implement this plan." So that led me now from the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.], secure job, government job you know Washington [D.C.] likes its government job to this nonprofit world in Philadelphia and moving for the first time to live and work in another city.
Speaker 2: How did you find Philadelphia, I mean what was it like, or how was it different from D.C.?
Speaker 1: Well Philadelphia is much more ethnic than D.C., you know.  D.C. gets to be a little homogenized and it's more sort of native Washingtonians and all of those that work in the government, you know, which afforded a kind of middle class lifestyle for a lot of people to real ethnic enclaves very much like Chicago [Illinois].  I mean in some ways I came to feel like Philadelphia helped prepare me for Chicago.  They had Rizzo--I mean we had Rizzo [Frank Rizzo], you had Daley, you had the Irish neighborhood, the Italian neighborhood, you had, you know, much more of a Latino population that I had never really lived with in a city.  You know, very much, again akin to we had Puerto Ricans in Philadelphia; we've got the Mexican population here in Chicago.  Very strong old Catholic traditions and other very strong, strong, strong black history.  Richard Allen, African Methodist Episcopal church, Marian Anderson in the same way that you have this sort of--in Boston [Massachusetts], they called them the Brahmins. I'll use the Brahmin of Philadelphia, you know, Philadelphia descendants.  You have this aristocracy also of African Americans that come from, you know, the era of just out of slavery.  You have this great migration that has brought a lot of people from North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida up north and so they come for the factory jobs and come for other things and have made a place for themselves.  You've got a very vibrant artist community; you've got a great jazz community.  You know, this is the city of Sun Ra and Philly Joe Jones, yeah, so great, great jazz again in a way that you don't have in Washington but you do have in Philadelphia.  That's not to say Washington didn't have any of it but D.C. is small. The fact that we were you know, this, this district and not a state.  They didn't have voting rights, couldn't vote for a president, you know, all of that until Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] makes it a very different than the local politics that emerge out of communities like Philadelphia and Chicago.  I liked the city. It was gritty.  I liked the fact that I could, you know, take a train in either direction and be in D.C. or in New York [New York].  I, I enjoyed the city I, and I, I thought I was going to be there a lot longer than it turned out that I was.
Story_ID: 620045
Speaker 1: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was interesting because Philadelphia was one of those trials for you as a young person, you know.  I, I arrived; I thought everything was going well.  There was an executive director who was not necessarily as secure, that's my read on it.  But ultimately I'll never forget we were being interviewed and photographed for a newspaper article and she was just very cool and distant that day.  This is somebody who coached me--not coached me, encouraged me.  You know, had, you know, had really--I made the decision to come to Philadelphia because I thought that we would be not only a, you know, great working relationship but great friends and so considered this just like a big sister to me and stuff.  I could have worked in the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.] for a long time to come.  And so it was a move I didn't have to make and I made it thinking that this was a bigger opportunity.  So I became the assistant director.  The museum [Afro American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] itself had lots of challenges, challenges that I came to experience in our community of museums on a national basis.  First of all the space was not a space that was really designed as a museum space.  It had been conceived as a permanent installation and the problem with the permanent installation is that people see it once and there's no reason to come back.  So how do you engage the local community?  The arc of it had been the great story of the black experience.  That's great but what does that do for the local stories that need to be told.  For the visual artists who say this is a black museum and I want to see my work there for the stories of local achievement, local struggle, local, you know, history that needs to be represented in a museum that calls itself the African American museum of Philadelphia or Detroit [Michigan] or Los Angeles [California] or Houston [Texas] or wherever these museums may be.
Speaker 2: That was a key point this seems to be the crux of an issue in every city. Detroit and people up in arms about the depiction of slavery and other things and the lack of information about their own involvement in the Underground Railroad.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So are you telling big narrative or are you telling the local narrative?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Or can you tell them both?
Speaker 1: Or can you tell them both.  I think there is another challenge for us is that we're expected to be all.  When I say we the African American museum community is expected to be all things, okay.  You're a history museum.  They're a cultural and community center, they're an art museum so that's a challenge.  There's a challenge of collections development. You know, what are the material objects, the three dimensional object, and in this day and age the technology that allows you to tell that story in a dynamic fashion whatever the story is that you're telling.  If you're not just hanging art and I don't mean that in a pejorative way but if it's not an art installation would have to have a thematic kind of coherence itself and you know, ideas and thoughts behind it.  But if you're telling the history story which is the link primarily for local schools and for local individuals to come in, I want to understand that story.  What are the artifacts that you have to tell that story?  And nine times out of ten, you know, one dimensional photographs or paintings or whatever is not a way to do that in a dynamic way.  So we have a facility in Philadelphia that was in, you know, this kind of architectural scheme was designed to be a ramp and you start at the top and you come down and the story unfolds but no space to store artifacts and no collection storage space, no space to mount exhibitions.  So if you want to change a gallery no wall because it's built as this ramped kind of thing.  So if you do take a part of it out how do you build walls in there?  You know, it was just made to have--it was conceived in a way that did not look long term.  It was one of the bicentennial babies and in Philadelphia there was a lot of bicentennial money in '76 [1976] and everybody got a piece of it.  There was the Swedish museum [American Swedish Historical Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], an African American museum, a Jewish museum [National Museum of American Jewish History, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] all of them birthed out of this particular moment and all of them had difficulties of their own.  But this museum had strong politically--you know, a black political leadership behind it and, and had you know, had some good scholarship and had some wonderful stuff in the beginning.  But ten years in then you've got to say well what's the next chapter and how do we keep ourselves relevant?
Story_ID: 620046
Speaker 1: So, I was brought in to help with that and in the process of trying to help with that you know had brought other leaders in the field to talk about it, to think about it.  You know, like all African American--nearly all African American cultural institutions it was economically challenged.  It was resource challenged and so that did not make it easy. But this day, you know, I figured out that something was up and sure enough we take the picture, the photographer tries to get the director to smile, she won't smile, she takes me to lunch someplace, "Well we're going out to lunch after this," and she says, "it's not working out, you have to go, have your stuff out by three o'clock this afternoon." And I can't for the life of me--you know this is like a bad dream.  "What are you talking about?  You know, I am your younger sister, we have done this work together, I have been here six months, we have all of this stuff."  I mean, this is a woman that would call me and say, "I'm taking a play day and you run the museum [Afro American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] today," or something.  And so on some trumped up notion of something, I was summarily dismissed and so I moved from my comfortable home and job.  I've left my house in Washington [D.C.] for this apartment and I'm in a foreign city. I'm a big girl and I cannot go home and cry to my parents [Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson], you know.  I got to work my way out of this somehow.  I ended up--I mean at the end of the day a lot of people--everybody wanted to know what happened here, what happened.  Twenty years later people still say, "What happened?" You know, I have my theories, I'm sure she has hers but I knew that I--that there was no grounds for this. There really was no grounds for this.  So I sued them. It took me a long time but I won the suit and I got a settlement.  I mean it was just craziness (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did she ever give a reason?
Speaker 1: She was gone from the museum months later and you know, it's just one of those things where I felt extraordinarily vindicated because I went on to lead a museum, to have leading posts in museums, et cetera.  She who for whatever reason--like I said I have my thoughts about it and the purposes of this I certainly wouldn't indulge, indulge your time in that way.  But it was a great lesson, it was a great lesson and as I came to understand it was preparation (laughter) for Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).
Story_ID: 620047
Speaker 1: While I was there something interesting you know as I said, God just sends me this stuff, I placed my hands in his faith and in that six months I had seen the announcement for this position to head the DuSable Museum of African American History [Chicago, Illinois].  I had some interaction with Dr. Burroughs [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] the founder in Washington, D.C. 'cause I should also say that there was a lot happening during my time at the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.] with the whole sort of formation of the African American museum association [Association of African American Museums].  So you had the Boston [Massachusetts] museums with Barry Gaither [HistoryMaker Edmund B. Gaither] and wonderful people at the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts].  You had Elma Lewis School [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], you had museums in New York [New York], you had of course Dr. Wright in the Detroit African American Museum [International Afro American Museum; Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan], you had efforts in Rhode Island and with [HistoryMaker] Rowena Stewart and others.  So I had had some--and in Washington, I'd be very remiss if I did not mention the name of Dr. John Kinard--the Reverend Dr. John Kinard who was the founding director of the Anacostia Neighborhood Museum [Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.]. That was a new model for community museums that had come out of sort of again that late '60s [1960s] era of reflection and the desire to be inclusive.  So S. Dillon Ripley who had headed the museum had tapped John to create a neighborhood museum in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] and John was just one, one seminal person.  I'm sorry he's not here to tell his story because he influenced so many young people.  He would just ride up in his Cadillac, said, "Get in. Let's go to dinner," and he would just talk to young people and encourage all of us to be a part of this.  So I had met Margaret and I knew this was an important museum and so when I discovered that I was fired I put my hat in the ring for the DuSable Museum.
Speaker 2: Okay I just wonder did you encounter James Spady in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--
Story_ID: 620048
Speaker 1: So Chicago [Illinois] you know, again consulting with so many people, I guess I had a sense that it was going to be something of a challenge but you know, youth loves challenge, youth is invincible.
Speaker 2: Well, to put it in a historical perspective this is a museum that started with a collection of Dr. Margaret Burroughs [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] years (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. Margaret Burroughs but Dr. Margaret Burroughs was one of six founders okay.  Her husband Charles [Charles Burroughs] was one of them, Eugene Feldman and a number of other people.  As it came down to it, you know, Margaret was absolutely the driving force and had the vision, had the reputation as both a talented artist, a very, very talented artist and art educator.  You know, so many people in the Chicago Public Schools took on from Dr. Burroughs that she herself had acquired material others had acquired material and the museum started in her home.  In one of that wonderful twist of fate when the park district of Chicago [Chicago Park District] was making some changes the old park district building in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] which had been a prison--had been a lockup, prison is too extreme, but had been a lockup for the park district police was converted to become the home of the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  And, you know, it was said that this was the first African American museum which is not accurate.  The first African American museum really was on the campus of Hampton college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], the Hampton museum of art at Hampton University [Hampton University Museum, Hampton, Virginia] is really the oldest.  You had Wilberforce [National Afro American Museum and Cultural Center, Wilberforce, Ohio] and others that came after in the 1860s we're talking about and then Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and others in the early 20th century you know Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and a number of them.  In terms of municipal museums, or that is city based museums, DuSable is one of the oldest along with Detroit [International Afro American Museum; Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan] but there were others that had preceded that.  So I applied, I'll never forget having no money, you know.  This was time when you are not employed, you've got to figure out how you're going to make money to do everything and I was just not going to call on my parents [Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson] to bail me out as long as I could.  I worked as a Kelly girl [Kelly Services, Inc.]. I did day work--day temping and I got invited to come to Chicago to interview with the board and I had no interview outfit (laughter).  It was like piecing and no money to go buy anything.  So they paid for the ticket but they didn't pay for anyplace for me to stay, so through Barry [HistoryMaker Edmund B. Gaither] I got to Sandra Furey [Sandra Furey Gaither] who was here working for Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois] and [HistoryMaker] Ronne Hartfield in Chicago and they were so gracious.  So literally I came and dropped my stuff at their Christmas party and then went off to this interview and then reconnected to stay at Sandra's house that night.  It was an interesting interview because clearly you could see there were tensions in the room about what wanted, what they wanted in a person and what they wanted for the future of the museum.  It was a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a bunch of board members (unclear).
Speaker 1: There were board members.  You know, he board was led by Erwin France who was himself politically active in, in, in Chicago and had a distinguished reputation and his own set of detractors and you had the sort of loyalist I'll call them who wanted to support Margaret's own sense of what should happen.  I think this was my first real personal encounter with the challenges of founder syndrome with an institution where someone who has given her blood, sweat and tears and all of her life to something is understandably challenged about what should happen when they are no longer in charge.  Who should be in charge, who has the privilege of now taking care of my baby?  This was something that for this era of museum directors was going to be faced or was being faced all across the country.  You had Ichabod Fluellen who basically had the museum in his house and in the trunk of his car up in Cleveland [Ohio].  You had Dr. Wright [Charles H. Wright] who was soon to face some of the same challenges in Detroit.  You had [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis in Boston [Massachusetts] you know, even though Barry had the museum there [Museum of the National Center of Afro American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts], was the school and all of that.  So the whole idea of succession was not something that we talked about, not something that we thought about.  Certainly these were charismatically led institutions.  They were created because the sheer force of will of individuals to make these things happen.  So the idea that there were anybody else--there was anybody else that, that could succeed them was not something that people had even given a thought to.
Story_ID: 620049
Speaker 1: I got hired to be the president of the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  I was not the president's-the, the founder's choice and I had a very difficult four years at DuSable Museum.  It was very well known thanks to Dr. Burroughs [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] and others all around the country and in fact outside of the country as well.  I arrived in Washington [D.C.] to do a review panel for the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH] and people would say, "What's up with the DuSable Museum?"  You know, people--friends of mine met John Biggers [John T. Biggers] in Texas and he was talking about that woman in Chicago [Illinois]; never met John Biggers before.  Loved his work but was very hurt you know, that without knowing me he was a detractor.  Got to Senegal, West Africa and people in Senegal, in Dakar [Senegal] were talking about the troubles of the DuSable Museum.  So, you know, the effort to sort of discredit or remove me was a very active one and you know, again God never gives you something that's more than you can handle and there were extraordinary lessons, benefits, learning and successes during that four year tenure.  I say to people put steel in my back and I came out of it with some wonderful expressions like Mrs. Hummins [ph.] who was Margaret Burroughs' sister who worked there.  Margaret's sister, her husband, her brother-in-law, her grandchildren everybody was on payroll there and Mayor Harold Washington's half-brother Ramon Price as well.  So, you know, coming from Washington, D.C. as an outsider in an area where Chicago itself overall was still very cool to people who were not from here.  Sandy Boyd [Willard L. Boyd] who was at the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois] as president and the museum directors in the city were just extraordinarily supportive and gracious and all of that.  But Sandy had been the president of the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and came to head the field and he had not the same level of challenge but resistance none the less.  So it put steel in my back.  Ms. Hummins used to come in and say, "Ms. Dickerson [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson], Ms. Dickerson I want to speak to you. I'll be brutally frank and I don't flatter women." (Laughter) And I have never forgotten that line.  So you know, you asked me earlier if I had a favorite line, it's not a favorite line but when I have direct news to bring to people I always tell them the story of Ms. Hummins, "Brutally frank, and I don't flatter women."
Story_ID: 620050
Speaker 1: What were the successes we had there [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]?  I mean, we struck up a partnership with the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture [New York, New York] and were able to bring in some wonderful exhibitions.  I think, you know, in some ways you come to know that sometimes your job is not to change things but to frame the changes that need to happen.  And so the discussion about accreditation, the discussion about getting the collections in, in order, of elevating the quality of scholarship and the quality of the installations of the exhibitions, you know, doing the self-study for the institution, bringing in some of the resources like Bob Burke [Robert Burke] was the like number one, Colonel Bob Burke, god bless his soul, the number one museum security person almost in the country.  When I asked Bob Burke to come, this is an African American man that ran all of security for Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and Bob said, "Of course Amina [HistoryMaker Amina J. Dickerson], don't spend any money. I'm going to come on my dime."  He came to do a security audit for us and when the museum directors knew he was in town, it was even the directors the other security people.  Heads of security at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] at the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois] and others said, "Bob, can you spare us some twenty minutes? Or something?" But he was coming for us.  So I was able to bring those resources and I understand that I what I did was frame some of the challenges that the museum was going to have to come to terms with.  Didn't get to solve them, but did sort of help them say what are we working for as an institution, we're not just here to be here every day, we are here really to create an institution that's going to be long term.  What does that mean in terms of collection and how do we meet the standard of excellence that is commonly observed in our field and in our discipline?  So that idea of accreditation, which is still elusive for that institution and most black museums in the country.  There's only one maybe two--maybe three I think Birmingham [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] has gotten accredited that's a newer museum that's out of the '90s [1990s] group, I call it.  Of course the first one was Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] and Hampton [Hampton University Museum, Hampton, Virginia] has its accreditation but there're two hundred plus African American museums so a lot of work to do there and framing that issue.  We did carnival [DuSable Museum Carnival Ball] which was a real embrace--carnival of the diaspora and we tried to insinuate--Margaret [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] had a huge long and important relationship with Africa, with Haiti, with the Caribbean.  So I don't mean to suggest that they had not done stuff but we upped that and we did it in a way that we could have a fundraiser akin to what the other major museums and cultural institutions were doing in Chicago [Illinois].  But in a way that supported our work and came from a kind of African centered place.
Story_ID: 620051
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the collections of DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and the condition of those collections.  And, I know, people constantly donated in Chicago [Illinois], things (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I think this issue of the standard of care of collections is one of paramount concern not only for DuSable but for all of those multiple generations, i.e., the university museums and then the civil rights babies and the bicentennial group and the municipal museums like California [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California] and some of the others that came in the '80s [1980s] and, and early '90s [1990s] and even most recently the new center in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] the center named for August Wilson [August Wilson Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So the issue of collections--the standard of care of collections is one that's long standing.  Part of it is that most of these institutions operate in buildings that were not designed to be museums.  So all of the resources that are needed to really  provide that quality standard, storage, climate control, rolling bins, archival quality material, different temperature controlled rooms, cages and resources to hang artwork all of that are usually very expensive and not carefully thought through in the renovation of the building.  Most of the attention goes to the public space, to the exhibition space, to what we can rent out and both the preparatory space for exhibitions and the storage space are really secondary and just poor.  I would say that we have not had a level of control of collection holdings in many instances that adheres to the common standard.  You know, it's like if you're in the library there's a cataloging system and there's a similar kind of analog for how you catalogue collections in the museum and then adhere to that.  That goes again back to resources in many instances; the resources to maintain that kind of system over the years.  But it also goes to the training of people.  It's not that you can't get that and it's not that we should not be focused on it but we haven't.  So as a result, the standard of care in most of our African American museums, I'm very pained to say, does not meet the standard and is the reason why most of these are institutions that are not accredited museums may be doing some great service to the public but in terms of our cultural patrimony that is given to these institutions in trust to preserve them for our generations and the generations to come.  That is an obligation that we have generally failed to meet.  And I know from my days in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and my days in Chicago [Illinois], the painful memory of things that we wanted to do that we didn't have the money for or didn't have the talent on staff--the expertise on staff to do.  But more so the challenge of really getting people to understand the sort of more arcane operations and their fundamental importance to the long term life of the institution led to, you know, discoveries of things when I was in both places that had not been preserved, had not been cared for, had suffered damage you know, to paintings, to materials.  And it has led now to a real hesitation on the part of people with holdings about where to put that material, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 620052
Speaker 1: We've got a number of really significant African American collectors.  I think you had mentioned earlier [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson and the Charles Blockson material that was an extraordinary archive [Charles L. Blockson Afro American Collection, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that was the founding material that helped to launch the Philadelphia African American museum [Afro American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  You've got many black art collectors who are anguished about what to do with their holdings and where to put them.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah and where did his go, to Delaware?  Part of it is the Hatch Billops Collection [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives] in New York [New York] is about to go to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] that's the agreement that they've made.  Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] does take a lot but Schomburg has its limits too and so the material that might come there is redundant and the thing is we should have these in repositories where they are accessible all around the country.  And unfortunately this is a challenge that I also see now being echoed by the growing younger body of museums in Africa and in the Caribbean.  So I think we have a, you know, real fundamental challenge to change that paradigm to a higher standard of care and higher standard of scholarship which would yield I think a different relationship with our core audiences and bring us broader audiences because of the quality of educational experience they will get at a really fine accredited museum.  And so I left there, I used to cart around a whole set of catalogues when I meet to with funders when I first came to Chicago [Illinois].  I would go and say, you know, "This is the catalogue done on this and this is the catalogue done--." These were catalogues of African American exhibition material, you  know.  Blacks in the Olympics something that [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Bunch had done years ago when he was out in the California Afro American Museum [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California], the Rhode Island museum, this museum and say, "This is the standard that we want to meet."  And unfortunately I don't think in the museums now what close to fifty years that it has gotten close to that yet.
Story_ID: 620053
Speaker 1: The thing I will say, I mean, as many people know, the, the, the debate around my appointment was very broadly--widely known and very painful for a lot of people.  I mean a lot of people [HistoryMaker] Etta Moten Barnett and the guy [Daryl Grisham] that ran Parker's Sausage [Parker House Sausage Company, Chicago, Illinois]--. Oh god I see his face just many, many people tried to broker rapprochement because we all had this image in our mind of the older generation passing the baton to me as the younger generation and working in partnership.  I regret that we were not able to achieve that, I really regret that lost opportunity for Margaret [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] and I.  But I also, years later after I'd left, came to understand why it was so hard for Margaret and others like her to give up their roles and a lot of it has to do with the lack of opportunity for them once they leave the stage of the institution [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] that they have founded.  It's a lot easier to leave where you are if you know where you are going to land and we don't have sabbaticals or appointments to commissions or endowed chairs or things that will allow this leadership who gave up so much to create these institutions.  Their personal opportunities for wealth development, wealth generation were pretty much put to the side for their service to these organizations.  There is no place for them to go to be able to maintain even a modest style of life.  Most of these institutions don't have pensions, 401(k)s or any of that stuff.  The attention that they receive is sort of accolades that go with being a leader of the institution however frail its operations may be.  We haven't created the bridge for them to a next place to be and without that you're unwilling to give up the place where you are.  I came to understand and be very sympathetic about that for Margaret.  In some ways Margaret had the park district appointment; she was a commissioner there [Chicago Park District].  It did provide stipend for her but it didn't provide the kind of acclamation from community that being a steward of our history and cultural patrimony provides.  I think that's something we're also going to have to think about. We're about to come up to the next generation and need to move off the stage and provide a place for the next leadership, young people to come.  Those in their thirties--late thirties and forties and the best time to do this work is when you're young.  You've got energy, you can make sacrifices all that stuff and we need to be thinking about that for not only museums but we have the same problem with theater organizations, music organizations, organizations.  So I think it's a big nut for us to have to crack, I really do.
Story_ID: 620054
Speaker 1: Any particular thing that was done at DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] that you're the proudest of or that you have a, you know, fond (unclear)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well as I said that series of exhibitions that we were able to do in partnership with the Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture] in New York [New York].  Those were really high quality scholarly exhibitions.  I loved the idea of the Carnival Ball [DuSable Museum Carnival Ball] as a fundraiser that gave us a positioning and allowed us on a local level (cough)-I'm sorry, on a local level to embrace other communities of color of black culture here and the fact that I was able to stick it out four years and define what those challenges are.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there until--
Speaker 2: (Cough) I need to take a break.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I think just being able to withstand all of that said something to me about my own strength and endurance and sense of my own temerity and it also--I think a lot of people watched that.  As I said everybody knew about it.  A lot of people watched it from the sidelines and it helped me understand that, you know, there's that old African proverb: no matter how long the night, the day is sure to come. And I had a wonderful new day when it came.  I was greatly supported as I indicated by the museum directors.
Story_ID: 620055
Speaker 1: I was given the opportunity to go work at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] and to become a game changer there in terms of bringing greater diversity to their programming and to the discussions internally from an exhibition point of view.  I got stretched, you know, I wasn't just dealing with African American culture and history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1989, right?
Speaker 1: This is 1989 but it gave me a larger stage in many respects in ways of bringing the perspective of others into that institution.  As we used to talk about it so that people would come into the museum and see themselves in that place.  I felt like it really provided for them some new and important insights about the work that they were doing.  We had the Jacob Lawrence exhibition during that time which was probably one of the--there were two exhibitions there, 'I Dream a World' ['I Dream a World: Portraits of Black Women Who Changed America'], which was a magnificent sort of 360 experience of interpretation and of course the Jacob Lawrence 'Migration Series' where we got to pay tribute to one of my idols, somebody I call my adopted grandfather and work that was extraordinarily important for everybody to see because it talked about the American experience of the black migration [Great Migration].  So I got to do great work, I got to have interaction with some absolutely, incredible artifacts that go back to the founding of this nation.  To bring Frederick Douglass' voice into the museum, you know, as a part of the interpretation of that exhibition--of the Civil War exhibition actually.  They have as a museum this sort of bifurcated history too.  So they have all of this early American material that's starts from the Revolutionary or pre Revolutionary War and extends to the Civil War and then they have the analogue to that which is Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] history and Chicago's story.  So people come for those iconic artifacts like, you know, the copy of the Declaration of Independence and the material related to Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] and Lincoln's death, the body mask--the face mask and things of this nature.  So it really allowed us to insinuate the narrative of the black experience into the larger American narrative in a way that had not really been, been attended before.
Story_ID: 620056
Speaker 1: These special exhibitions as I said the Jacob Lawrence one talking about migration [Great Migration] and, and what that black experience was and to be able to play host to Jake was, you know, very special to me personally.  'I Dream a World' ['I Dream a World: Portraits of Black Women Who Changed America'] which is the photographs of African American women--seminal women in their fields from around the country that became the vehicle for us to do one of the again community based projects that meant so much to me and so much to so many others.  That was the sojourner mentor program [Sojourner Program] where we had the intensive mentor activity that was for sixty girls over a six month period of time and just based on the demand created another version of that that was a one day mentoring program.  We had mentors that came from all around the city from every walk of life, all different kinds of experiences.  Michelle Robinson at that time, now of course Michelle Obama and her sister-in-law at the time Janis [Janis Robinson] were two of our stalwart mentors.  But we had women that had come out of public housing and they came back to mentor other women--other young girls.  It was just a phenomenal thing; Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] came. You know, the girls got to meet Oprah.  They got to meet Gwendolyn Brooks, they got to meet women architects, they got to meet women surgeons, they got to meet women who like themselves had come from very limited circumstances but had gone on to change their communities so that was really fabulous, really, really fabulous.  I felt terrific about the time that I had there.
Speaker 2: You were at the historical society [Chicago Historical Society; Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] for how long?
Speaker 1: Eight years-
Speaker 2: Eight years.
Speaker 1: About eight years (pause).
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And during that time I, you know, as I said the historical society experience was a great one and it also gave me the opportunity to begin to do more work around the country.  So I became very involved with national sort of history museum and American Association of Museums [American Alliance of Museums].  I did a lot of speaking because this issue of diversity and community became a really primary theme in the discussions you know, within the museum sector about our roles and responsibilities and obligations.  So I definitely did a lot of that work around the country, got to speak you know, in London [England] and in Scandinavia up in Norway and so I really got to do I think really valuable work personally and professionally.  I got married during that time [to Julian Roberts] (laughter) and I learned a lot about leadership and developing teams and developing people.  I had terrific young people working for me there.
Story_ID: 620057
Speaker 1: Tell us about how you met Julian?
Speaker 2: One of the joys of my life in Chicago [Illinois] was that the richness of the cultural community--the theater community--dance community actually dance was the stepchild here.  It's gotten better but dance is still--when you look at the great things that have happened with the theater community and with certainly the music communities, symphonic, jazz, gospel, blues any of that is world renowned and so stepchild was dance.  But in Chicago you had a very unique company in Muntu African dance theatre [Muntu Dance Theatre of Chicago] which had been started by Alyo [ph.], a Senegalese dancer who had come here I guess in the foment of the black consciousness movement and created Muntu.  So one of my old and dear friends from the East Coast Amaniyea Payne had come here first as a guest artist, guest choreographer and then was offered a full time position as artistic director.  So that allowed me to become more involved with Muntu and to really focus on their work and the company got steadily better under her tenure.  Much more professional, much more creative work being done and at the time there was a gentleman by the Julian Roberts on their board.  And so at their gala they always do a gala in December Christmas performance or holiday season performance and so anyway he approached me at this event and said, you know, "I've been watching you since your DuSable days and I just want to tell you how much I admire you and something else, something else and can I take you to lunch?"  Well I really thought that he was trying to get work with the historical society [Chicago Historical Society; Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]. You know, I totally missed that it was about me, okay.  It's like, "Yeah okay sure, we can have lunch."  He calls me the next day and says, "So when canwe have lunch?" And I said, "Well I'm really busy for the rest of the year," so their concert usually takes place right around Thanksgiving or after Thanksgiving.  And so I was telling him I was unavailable basically for the next two months and he said, "That's in January, that's the soonest?" And I said, "Yeah, that's the soonest."  So he called me in January and we set a lunch date and I was preparing shortly to go to see friends in France, in Paris and we had lunch and he came with a gift for me and that's when I guess I got it.  It was like, oh this is not about the museum. This is really about me.  I was still like playing it off; I'm on my way to Paris.  I'm about to hang out with the African diaspora friends I have in Paris; one of my dear friends and her cohorts so we're going to have fun.  And so I wasn't really focused on it but I knew I had an event when we came back and it would have been just nice--it was a former DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]--I mean it was a DuSable Museum event and so somebody had invited me to come and it sure would be nice to walk in there, you know, with an escort.  So I asked him if he wanted to escort me for that and this was after I was coming back from Paris so big long lapse in between and he said sure.  So he shows up to take me that night and it was a difficult night for me. I won't, I won't suggest it wasn't.  It was just a little awkward, a little cool reception.  So it was great that I had come there with somebody and I guess he sensed that because at some point in the evening, you know, I was feeling a certain kind of way.  He must have sensed it and just sort of put his arm around the back of my chair and that act meant so much to me.  I can't tell you why but I just felt very reassured and comforted and supported and all of those things.  So I said, well maybe I need to look at this a little differently (laughter) and we had a wonderful courtship and started to see each other pretty regularly after that.  It led to us deciding to hook up as partners and so I guess we had been together for about a couple of years--no, not even a couple of years, maybe about eight months and decided that you know, we should be an item permanently and we have been partners ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a good story.
Speaker 2: It was a real good story and we travel well together. We have some shared interests, we love Brazil together and love to sort of do that together. You know, I think the big test for us was whether or not we could travel together.  It's not just sort of, are you going to be compatible in the place where you're going but how do you move through the airport and all of that.  We did that pretty well the first time we tried.  I forget where we went but we went somewhere and said, "Okay looks like this really could work."  Then I think the other thing that I admire about him is it's not easy to have somebody like me as highly visible as I am as your mate and so he's very gracious and you know, we both are able to travel and do our sort of parallel work and find the common ground as well and that's been terrific.
Story_ID: 620058
Speaker 1: Where did you go after the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: The historical society and I should say I had, I had come there in the era of Ellsworth Brown.  Ellsworth was great, was a great friend, colleague very supportive.  He was succeeded by Doug Greenberg [Douglas Greenberg].  Doug and I got along okay, but you know, seven year itch and it was time for me to try to do something else and I wasn't sure what that was and through the auspices of dear friends at the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], I was given this really incredible opportunity to be a distinguished visitor, which is not to be confused with fellow.  Distinguished visitor is space, time, support and salary to be at the foundation.  Of course you know the fellows are the quote unquote, genius grants even though they hate that term and that sort of money to continue to do the work they want to do.  But I really wanted to work on this book around the history of African Americans and museums.  During that time, I was there ten months as a fellow, I was given the support that allowed me to do a lot of seminal interviews with individuals.  Start to transcribe them and really carve out this sort of structure of the book, do a little of the writing but I also knew during that time that I needed to figure out what I was going to do after that ten months.  So I was almost as focused on the next thing as I was on the book at the time which is one of those opportunities I regret.  I didn't get to fulfill the way I would have liked to.  I just didn't have that luxury.  I also had an appointment at the Newberry Library [Chicago, Illinois] as a Newberry fellow at the same time and had they'd been sequential it would have perhaps worked a little better but it was hard to sort of be in residence in those two places and look for a job and continue to be active and visible in the cultural scene.  But it was a great ten months and I did get a lot of work done. You know, I still have lots of files and lots of boxes and lots of hope that I'll get back to write that book.
Story_ID: 620059
Speaker 1: It was during that time that my colleague and dear, dear friend [HistoryMaker] Ronne Hartfield called me about an opportunity to take on a, a consultantship in the arts and education for Kraft Foods [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.].  And so as I was crafting things, I also applied for a Kellogg fellowship at the same time and you know, both of them would have complemented each other.  You do the part time work and then you have the fellowship and the fellowship was going allow me to interrogate issues around civic engagement and attitudes toward youth and youth development which came directly out of the arts education work.  And so I was very excited about this sort of being a balanced plate that would support me but as things turned out Kraft Foods offered me a job full time.  Not just to be the consultant but to come in and to be the director of their philanthropy program.  You know, after years of working on the nonprofit side being their consultant and NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] and NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities] and a reviewer and consultant to foundations and begging for money, which is all you do as an executive director and as the president of DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and you know, even in my role at the historical society [Chicago Historical Society; Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois].  You're always chasing dollars, you're always stroking people.  So the idea that I would be on the other side that is in the position to be able to make grants as opposed to asking for grants is the dream that more than one nonprofit leader has had.  You know, especially after you have that interaction with the foundation officers like, I can do this and I'd make good grants.  So that offer came the exact same day that I got the letter from Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] saying that I had been selected in the sixteenth class of the Kellogg fellows.  I was distraught, I really wanted that fellowship, I really believed in the thesis that I wanted to explore the idea of working with others in that way.  Travelling the country, you know, the practicum all of that stuff, I wanted that.  That was my grab to academia and you know, ever since the program at American University [Washington, D.C.] and the master's in arts management and of course working at the historical society you're working with scholars at the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.], you're working with scholars.  So this was an opportunity to really live in that realm in, in, in a meaningful way.  I even tried to talk my future boss, Michael Mudd at Kraft into allowing me to do both of those things.  I said could I do that and he was kind of--he was real sweet, real gentle and I guess he was thinking, what is this woman talking about?  He said, well, "I think this is really going to be you know, the kind of work that is so, so large in its scope that it would be hard to do the two things."  Never even thought about the fact that Kraft is a food company, Kellogg [Kellogg Company] is a food company even though the foundation is separate, the idea that I worked at Kraft and would carry this moniker--this name that would say Kellogg with Kraft would be absolutely against corporate policy.  You just don't do that (laughter).  And, you know, it wasn't until I'd been at Kraft for maybe another month or so that it dawned on me that here you were trying to drag the name of their competitor into the job title that you would carry at Kraft.  So I had to, to decline the Kellogg fellowship and knew two or three people who were also appointed to that class and heard about it and they sent me the materials and they kept me involved even though I wasn't there.  But I did not get to do that.
Story_ID: 620060
Speaker 1: What I did get to do though, was really fantastic work.  I came at the beginning of sort of a new era for the corporate contributions program at Kraft [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.] and we funded at that point hunger which was the primary portfolio for the company, made sense as a food company to be involved in eliminating hunger.  We also at that time funded parental involvement in education and of course this very strong and primary programming arts in education which allowed me to work with countless arts organizations in Chicago [Illinois] and some nationally as well.  And over the years I was with Kraft, nearly twelve years and just stepped down from that role in June 2009 voluntarily, and that's another great story that I want to tell.  But during that time we really did some wonderful things and the hunger portfolio we were able to really situate the importance and to fund structures that allowed for the collection of larger and larger volumes of--I mean tons of volumes pounds of food that was healthy food.  It was fruits and vegetable and so we really helped what was then known as America's Second Harvest [America's Second Harvest - The Nation's Food Bank Network] and now known as Feeding America really changed the perception of the importance the critical importance of fresh fruits and vegetables in the diets of poor people and to prevent the abundant waste that was going on.  Land filling perfectly good fruits and vegetables and instead design systems to capture and redistribute that mostly free of charge to the poor around the country.  So that today the number one category of what's distributed is fresh fruits and vegetables through the system of two hundred plus food banks around the country. Very, very proud of that work, very proud of what I learned, the partnerships that we had.  It really is amazing that in a country that has so much that we waste so much and that so many people go without food.  When I was doing the work up until those last couple of years.  We were working with a number of anywhere between 28 to 30 million people who experienced some form of food insecurity that is sometime within the course of a month they do not have enough food to feed themselves and their families.  Of that it was about 12 million kids and a rising number of seniors who had, you know, to choose between their medicine or their rent or food to eat.  I heard a statistic in November of 2009 that just shook me to my bones, to my soul.  Forty-eight million Americans suffer hunger, suffer food insecurity today and that doesn't even get us into the international numbers of what's happening in Africa, in Asia and parts of Latin America and parts of Europe. So the hunger problem is what has been termed a wicked problem. That is the beginning of it is something that goes back for centuries really.  Has gotten much worse than the current--this current century and the end of the last cycle does not have easy solutions.  Any solution that you propose is going to have other complications but all you can do is try to solve some elements, some point of the problem that I think with fresh fruits and vegetables particularly understanding how valuable and important that is to reducing heart disease and high blood pressure and, and diseases that are chronic for people of color and particularly for African Americans.  High levels of heart disease just all of that.  I'm very proud of that work.  I was very, very proud of the partnerships that we had with arts and cultural institutions in Chicago in particular.  You know, not only the big guys and we love working with all of them but a lot of work in helping teachers acquire skills to incorporate the arts into their curriculum and to use it as a learning tool in schools, small and emerging organizations, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did, did you--
Story_ID: 620061
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you bring your sensitivity to that segment of the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Of course I mean I couldn't help to that was my default (laughter) and you know, we also funded for a period domestic violence and that was very compelling for me personally and for what was a largely female team.  Just to understand that, you know, the implications of that is not somebody who comes from a certain demographic and a certain sort of structure and lifestyle and history.  You know, you can be working on the executives' floor on the C Suite at Kraft [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.] and somebody in that office either them directly or their daughter or their children or their sister or their mother could be a victim of domestic violence.  So, you know, for us to fund that externally meant we had to do a lot of work internally with a jar about identifying that, about support, about creating an awareness of how needed to be supportive of individuals, male or female, that might find themselves in that position.  So I had really wonderful run.  I think one of the things I used to ask myself is like, why am I in this environment? I'm a nonprofit kid and I'm here in the heart of one of the oldest revered corporations in America and I felt that it was to learn and to understand what the value of sort of corporate lessons.  How do you take the best of sort of corporate practice and look at ways in which that can help build the capacity and the strength and the possibilities for the nonprofit structure?  And that was also the reason that I chose to step down.  I really wanted to figure it out, I wanted to sit down and say okay how do I take the best of this corporate experience and translate that and how do I also find new ways of bringing the robust and profound role of the nonprofit sector into better juxtaposition with the corporate world and that's what I hope the next chapter will be.  In the meantime though I think one of my proudest acts at Kraft was making the decision to step down and then to create a succession process that first of all identified a bright talented dynamic young leader to come after me, to convince our leadership that was the person that should have that post, to find the resources to have her coached into the position and me coached out of the position so that we had a kind of seamless--as generally seamless transition as we possibly could.  To use that as a vehicle to talk about the importance of women supporting women, of how you could do succession well, of how vitally important the idea of such kinds of transition are to the fabric of what's going to happen in our society over the course of the next decade.  As more and more people in their forties and fifties and sixties, you know, age out if you will of leadership roles and the importance of really preparing the next generation to succeed us but not to succeed us doing what we did but rather to give them the tools to think very creatively, very much out of the box for a set of circumstances that are unlike anything we have experienced ourselves in our tenure as leaders.  I mean, the world that they inherit, the funding structure, the community structure, the multinational structure, the climatic structure everything is going to be different.  And with the economic downturn of last year it's not going to go back to what it was.  So they have got to fully be prepared to meet these new challenges with new sets of skills and with a different set of ideas truly innovative ideas to steer these organizations to what are going to be some very challenging times.  And the sooner that we understand that we've got to help them get prepared for that the better prepared they will be as a, as a generation of leadership that, you know, is about to come onto the, to the global stage.
Story_ID: 620062
Speaker 1: Looking back on it, on what you've done so far in life, what would you--is there any major thing that, that, that you would change or do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't have regrets, you know, even the difficult years at DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] taught me so many lessons and as I said having some steel in your back really helps you get prepared for the next challenge ahead. You know, I at times felt like--there was one summer that everybody around me was in law school and I thought I was like, what are you doing that you're not in law school and you know, or that doing the straight sort of full B.A. and then M.A. and all of that.  But I never would have had those other extraordinarily rich work opportunities and learning experiences and exposures that I had.  You know, if there is one thing I'm sorry that I was not raised in the Baptist church because I always had this goal to be a singer (laughter) and actually did a little nightclub singing in Washington [D.C.] while I was at Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.] but would have had a complete music education had I been in the black church if you will which was not something you got in the Catholic church at all. You know, I say that in jest but I don't know that I have regrets.  I have certainly you get to a certain age and you say okay now you really need to hunker down for the things that are not at a bucket list or any of that but everything needs to count at this stage going forward 'cause nothing is promised.  But I have met so many extraordinary people from around the world.  I've had the opportunity to sit with world leaders and you know, to travel.  When I say sit with world leaders in the back of the auditorium but at least I was there.  To travel very broadly, a lot of that I hope is in my future, to create partnerships with all different kinds of people, to wear very proudly my heritage as an African American woman.  I mean, I remember working at the Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.] and sisters were trying to wear cornrows to work and they were calling me for justification so that they could wear their hair braided on a plane or in a law office.  You know, that wasn't that long ago but I never had any of those challenges.  I was always able to really be the individual that I was, flaws and all, and to grow but I never had to deny being an African American woman and to have that respected, honored and supported in the work that I was trying to do.  Perhaps I would have loved to have had children.  You know, to have gotten married perhaps a little earlier but I have lots of children.  I sort of, I don't want to say I co-raise but my sister [Julee Dickerson Thompson] is very generous with her five that I feel that her kids are my kids and treat them that way and of course have lots of godchildren.  But there are no real regrets 'cause I think you know, while I don't have them of my own I am then in a position to support lots of other children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 620063
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I, I am so troubled by the violence that seems to be endemic in our communities.  Chicago [Illinois] has lost so many children this year for no reason.  I mean, the, the brutality of young people, the sense of hopelessness that leads them to just snuff out a life without a thought is horrifying to me.  It is again I've just come across this theory that talks about wicked problems and I think this is a wicked problem that has at its root many different things. The lack of an education system, the changes in community, the profound failure of public education despite millions and millions of dollars from the private sector, from corporations, from foundations on an annual basis and it doesn't seem to get any better.  So I am really very deeply troubled about the sense of possibility that--before our children.  Their own sense of that possibility and how we see the world and what's going to be possible for them and especially as we move more and more into a globalized reality. You know, I heard a shocking statistic from a futurist who said that somewhere by the year 2025 something like 500 million men will live and die, never having had employment. That scares me to death.  What do young boys do when they have no gainful meaningful place to direct their energies?  So that's one of the things that I anguish deeply about.  What can we do, how do we focus on that.  At the same time I am deeply committed to advancing the position of women and girls in our society.  I mean, the, the, the activities in Africa right now, the war practices that use women as the fodder for this, is abhorrent and so frightening to me that a culture or cultures that so revered family and community and elders and ancestors could do this to women, to children.  You know, the Congo is just one example. What's happening in Guinea today and 2009 scares me to death and so that's the other thing that I would love to figure out how all of what I've done before can make a larger voice for that as we go forward.  I'm very, very scared about--I wish I could be more hopeful but I'm very scared that, you know, we've got to come to some cataclysmic event before people will wake up and the fact that we're not standing up outraged about this and screaming about this every day.  That our boys are being killed walking to school that women are being raped and beaten and abused in this way.  That to me is something that has to change.
Story_ID: 620064
Speaker 1: One question we always ask too is what today would you consider to be your leg-, your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I think I am coming to realize that part of my legacy is nurturing next generation talent.  That people that were on my staff thirty years ago still seek my counsel. Today, I mean, there's a young woman waiting to meet with me now, that there's a way that I have that allows for visioning for young people.  It allows them to think about their futures and their possibilities in those futures in a, in a really reassuring and affirmed way and that helping them meet their potential or to meet their challenges is really a great, a great, a great opportunity that I've had and I see that in some of the talent that's out there.  You know, I've laid my, my licks on them and they are growing up--I shouldn't say growing up, they are evolving into fine leaders in their work.  So that would be one and I think there's been a tradition of supporting artists and community work and affirming that and trying to shine a light on that.  That has also been very characteristic of my work.
Story_ID: 620065
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Ann Stewart Dickerson and Julius Dickerson] think about your careers? I mean, you know, what did they (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they take great pride in it, you know.  They, they, they smile a lot and they are immensely proud of the achievements.  They continue to challenge me about what's next, what are we going to do next, where are you going next?  I, I feel that I have honored their investment in me in a major way.
Story_ID: 620066
Speaker 1: Before I ask about my last question is there any questions that I have not covered or asked that--or anything that you haven't said that needs to be said or asked?
Speaker 2: No I think you let me ramble enough (laughter) to get to almost any thought that I had.  I did say I wanted to mention [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing back there when I was talking about the museum elders.  I think the idea that I'd like to do a lot more public speaking and writing in my future that's part of the next chapter.  But other than that, you know, you've given me a chance to reflect and been quite generous with that.
Speaker 1: Well I was surprised when you didn't have a favorite saying because if I recall correctly you always start a presentation with an African proverb.
Speaker 2: Yes but that's the glory and beauty of African proverbs is that they are really tailored to the environment, you know, to the moment.  I guess if there's one that's, is resonating more and more these days is, lift as you climb, which is the motto of the national council of Negro women's club [National Association of Colored Women's Clubs] and the whole idea of our responsibility to those that come behind is something that I'm living with more and more and more.  And, you know, this whole idea of these problems in Africa and these problems here at home, and problems in Brazil, problems wherever we are and you know, the only way we change that, that narrative is to become engaged and to empower those who are behind us to do their best work and that's what I hope to do.
Story_ID: 620067
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Loving, nurturing, supportive and visionary.
Speaker 1: Okay well thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you, Larry [Larry Crowe]. It's been great.
Story_ID: 620068
Speaker 1: That is wedding day, September--actually it's not wedding day that is broom jumping day.  Julian [Dickerson's husband, Julian Roberts] and I had a broom jumping in Chicago [Illinois] that was officiated by Baba Ateba [ph.] from Muntu African dance theater [Muntu Dance Theatre of Chicago] and held at the South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois]. The same place that Michelle [Michelle Obama] and Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] had their ceremony. So we had a wonderful turn out of family and friends from all over.  They said, "What do you wear to a broom jumping," (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: What year does it say on the back of that one, Larry [Larry Crowe]?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It says 1995.
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995]? Okay, so that was just before.  This is a photograph of me with residents of a very, very rural village in the hills of Hunan province in the southern part of China.  The gentleman that you see--the Anglo gentleman that you see to the left is Larry [ph.]. I don't remember his last name but he was from the arts academy in San Francisco [California]--San Francisco School of Fine Arts.  We were there as part of a study group that was asked by the government to come in and look at possibilities for them to use cultural assets that they have to develop a cultural tourism base.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: That's me with mom and dad [Julius Dickerson].  On the left at the bottom is Dick--Julius "Dick" Dickerson as he prefers to be known and, or as the children have named him Papa and on the right is my mother Ann Dickerson [Ann Stewart Dickerson] better known as Annie or F.L. for fearless leader and Mimi as the grandchildren have named her and that's me at the top.  That's in our dining room downstairs in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, I got it. Hold on a second. You can (unclear). Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay. This, this is taken in November of 2008 at the brand new Palmer House Hilton [Chicago, Illinois] after it had reopened.  To my left is [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves the opera star who was in town.  This was actually the gala to celebrate the opera 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Danielpour] which I played an instrumental role in bringing to Chicago [Illinois].  In fact, my father was honored that night.  That's him in front of me and of course my mom on the left of those seated.  Because it was one of our opera weekends that we had in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I guess about three years ago where in conversation with Anne Roosevelt from Boeing [The Boeing Company] we said we need to bring this to Chicago and that we did.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Very proud day graduation day it took me forever to get out of that school. This was my graduation from American University [Washington, D.C.] where I got my M.A. in arts management and the reason it took so long is that I was a part-time student and I was writing my thesis on institutional challenges of institutional development in African American museums while I was the director of the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. So I'd work until eight o'clock or nine o'clock and then come home and write on my thesis all night long.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: During my DuSable years we hosted all kinds of wonderful musicians and this is in the front row some of the legends of the Chicago blues, blues scene including Honeyboy Edwards [David "Honeyboy" Edwards] and Pinetop Perkins just a great group of people.  On the back row are the sponsors of it. Actually to far left is Billy Branch, the harmonica player, and then the rest of--flanking me are officials from Miller Brewing Company and this guy on the right was actually our collaborator who brought them in.  He actually did a lot of work around the blues in Chicago, Lincoln Beauchamp.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Do you remember him?
Speaker 2: Yeah is, is he gone now?
Speaker 1: He's been in Canada for years, yeah. This is one of those funny photographs and I put it in here to just show everything is not serious and official.  This is sitting out on the patio of the Dickerson house.  This is just judging from that sweater and the outfit somewhere in the '70s [1970s] and I was just cooling out.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: A picture of my husband Julian and I.  This is a photograph taken at Black Creativity [Black Creativity Gala] about four or five years ago.  But people all love that photograph so we decided that we needed to make it a Christmas card or a New Year's card one year so I love it, very informal.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yep.
Speaker 1: Other way, other way. Oh, it doesn't matter if he flips it?
Speaker 2: No, no, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, gotcha. This is a picture of me with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover.  It was taken in Paris [France] at the occasion of one of the triennial symposiums on the African presence in Europe that was hosted by the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France] and led by one of their, their scholars a gentleman who is now passed on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't remember his name.  This is me certainly after I had come back from a trip to Senegal.  So this has to be in the, in the late '70s [1970s] and that is my niece Jamila (unclear) Thompson [Jamila Thompson] who is the light of my life and is now thirty years old and working for Congressman John Lewis [HistoryMaker John Lewis].  That is my daughter as much as my sister's and she shares her generously with me.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in 1986 with a very young trumpet leader. Oh god, I'm blanking on his name. That's Wynton Marsalis. How could I forget? Wynton Marsalis stopped by the museum that day and I was telling him we were about to do carnival [DuSable Museum Carnival Ball] and I didn't know how to second line so this was just before he taught me how to do a second line.  I showed him this picture years later and he looked at it and said, "God we were young," (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of courtyard of the old Museum of African Art [National Museum of African Art, Washington, D.C.].  I had asked if we could do a fashion show of really highlighting the array of absolutely exquisite design by African women and that's what that was.  I should, I should just note that in the background are those (unclear) designs that the museum had.
Speaker 1: That is one of my first big benefits as a head of DuSable Museum.  We did a concert with [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Joe Williams and [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis. And so this is backstage with Harold Washington, mayor of the city, and Joe Williams both of course have passed on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is rehearsal for my play 'The Journey' ['The Journey: A Black Ritual Experience,' Amina J. Dickerson] in Washington, D.C.  John T. Dews [ph.] is in the foreground, that was the musical director, and sitting to his right is the great choreographer and dancer [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson.  He just dropped by rehearsal that day and it was really terrific to see him, great encouragement.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is me performing with street theater at Lincoln Center in New York [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York].  This was a scene from our version of 'Esteban' [ph.], which was 'Everyman' ['The Summoning of Everyman'] in its adaptation. We got recognition for this, we didn't take first place but we certainly had a great crowd and a great time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is at the DuSable Museum and it's just me greeting people for one of the many, many programs that we hosted at the museum.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: No actually that dress is from Peru, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, I see.
Speaker 1: This is now at the museum of African arts so this is taken in the late '70s [1970s] and this is hosting a group of African, primarily African museum educators and professionals.  As you can see I have on that same Peruvian dress and I'm on the far right sitting down on the front row.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's just an informal picture taken of Julian and I in our very early days. This is about 1991.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with the supportive women's organization from the DuSable Museum. This was the first benefit that I did for the DuSable Museum which was at the Oak Brook Polo Club [Oak Brook, Illinois] and this was high cotton for black people to be at the Oak Brook Polo Club.  I got so mad, that's why I decided to do carnival after that.  I wasn't taking all of our money out to the suburbs anymore.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: That is during my producer, director days and that is me putting makeup on for a production of 'The Journey' in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 2: This is me at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] and that is in the process of leading a tour through the galleries.  This was, this is 'Bridges and Boundaries' ['Chicago Crossings: Bridges and Boundaries'] and I was looking at the shared experience of African Americans and Jews.
Speaker 1: This is photograph taken by the well known photographer Roland Freeman. Roland had a love affair with our family--has a love affair and he just popped by one day took a picture of me, my sister Julee [Julee Dickerson Thompson] in the middle and my mother Annie.  I think she looks much more severe than she ever was but that's what Roland asked for in that photograph.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is another Roland Freeman photograph of the family at that time.  There's actually one grandchild who was not born yet Akeeba [ph.], I mean JaJa [ph.] but this is me with my siblings, their spouses and their children.  It's amazing to look at this picture and know that the little girl in the back is now dancing in 'Lion King' ['The Lion King'].  The little girl in the black dress is working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], the little man on the right just proposed to his girlfriend of six years to get married. All of them are doing well and I guess this is our way of saying we are truly blessed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. The bottom one first. No, it's fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You know, my mother and father had really a wonderful courtship and marriage and early in their marriage though my father was sent overseas for war [World War II, WWII]. So they sent wonderful pictures back and forth to each other and so I don't know how I came to be in possession of this but this is a picture that my mother signed to my dad and I just thinks she looks so gorgeous in it that I had to take it down.  She's an absolute gorgeous lady to this day in her eighties.  The top photograph--or, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Okay, okay. No problem. The bottom photograph or this photograph is a photograph of my father taken by the well known Washington photographer, Addison Scurlock, in his studio in Washington sort of where every major African American would go to get their picture taken.  You know, akin to having a James Van Der Zee shoot you in, in New York [New York].  It's a little frayed at the ends but we wanted to preserve the Scurlock studio cabinet for it, card for it and again this was a photograph that my father sent to my mother.  So, those are loving photographs for them--from them to each other early in their marriage.
Speaker 1: You have an attractive family.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: You have a nice looking family.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
