Story_ID: 196820
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Say that again?
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you give us your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name and what else?
Speaker 1: And spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Oh, and spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Which name do you want, just the, the whole--
Speaker 1: The whole name, yes.
Speaker 2: Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, Ethel, D-A-R-D-E-N, then Ethel Darden.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: What is my daily, what?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth and what?
Speaker 1: And place of birth?  Where were you born and what date were you born?
Speaker 2: Say that again to me.  Spell my name?
Speaker 1: No, what is your birthday and where were you born?
Speaker 2: First name is Ethel.
Speaker 1: No, ma'am, no, ma'am, I'm sorry, I said, what is your birthday?
Speaker 2: My birthday, oh.
Speaker 1: Birthday, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, birthday.
Speaker 1: And where were you born, yeah.
Speaker 2: My birthdate is February the 17th, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was born in the city of Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, ma'am, what is your occupation or what did you do for a living?
Speaker 2: I was an educator.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And, ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Today's date, I can't tell you.  It's--other than I do know it's June.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, it's June 1st [2004], yeah.
Speaker 2: First.
Speaker 1: Yes, 2000 and--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Two thousand and four [2004], right.
Speaker 2: Oh, 2004.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Soon to be 2005 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Soon (laughter).
Story_ID: 196821
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, you know, into any deep questions, we always ask five kind of lightweight questions, you know, just to get warmed up.  So the first question I have for you is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I don't have a favorite food as I know of, just--I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is, I like the month of June.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I don't travel that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is, do you have a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite thing?
Speaker 1: No, saying, favorite saying, something that you say all the time?
Speaker 2: A saying, you said?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite saying.  (Laughter) "Whatever will be, will be.  The future's not ours to see, que sera, que sera." ['Que Sera, Sera']
Story_ID: 196822
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your parents, about your parents?
Speaker 2: My parents? --
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --or pets?  Oh, they were lovely people (laughter).  They were, they were strict enough, just strict enough.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: What were their names?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: You want the whole name.  Ella Mary, Allen was her maiden name.  Charles Roby Boswell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was my father's name.
Speaker 1: Okay, do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And my middle name is Roby, my father.  My twin sister's middle name is Ella and that is for my mother.
Speaker 1: And your twin sister's name was Esther, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was her name Esther, your twin sis--
Speaker 2: Esther, E-S-T-H-E-R, she spelled it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you had, you had four other sis--three other sisters, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Three.  Okay, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Alberta [Joseph].  You want her last name?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Married?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Joseph is her--was her married name.
Speaker 1: Okay, we've got two more.
Speaker 2: Oh, two more.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Then Doris, no, wait a minute, Bessie is next, Bessie [Foster].  Oh, Foster was her last--her married last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were all Boswells.  Alberta last--she, let's see.  Doris [Allen], you don't have in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, Doris.  That's the last one, that's last one, okay.
Speaker 2: Doris, D-O-R-I-S, Doris Boswell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Allen was her last, married name.
Story_ID: 196823
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family tree.  How far back can you trace your family?  How far back do you know anything about your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean who my family was?  Only my grandma, grandmother and grandfather and my grandmother was Carey Alberta Allen.  My mother's--I don't know mama's maiden name 'cause she was Ella Mary Allen.  Well, that was her--'cause that was my father's name.  But her people, I didn't know anyone.  Who else (unclear)?  Doris, Doris was--Doris Majeska, M-A-J-E-S-K-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Doris Majeska Allen.  That was her married name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Last, she had two husbands.
Speaker 1: Right, that's your sister, right?  That's your, those are your sisters, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the third sister.
Speaker 1: No, I was--
Speaker 2: Doris was the third child.  And Esther--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I wanted, I was trying to find out something about how much you knew about your family history, how far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Not too far.
Speaker 1: Not too far?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, not too far back.
Speaker 1: Are they from--weren't your parents from Talladega [Alabama] originally?
Speaker 2: Talladega, Alabama.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Charles Roby was the father's name.  Charles Roby Boswell, and mama's was Ella Mary Allen [Boswell].  So my grandmother, I knew her and grandfather and their daughter, another daughter was mama's sister.  And her name was--I've forgotten (laughter).  Alberta, she was Alberta, I guess 'cause she was Aunt Bert, and Alberta was my oldest sister, you see.
Speaker 1: Yes, now, do you know when your mother and father were born?
Speaker 2: When--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you know their birthdays?
Speaker 2: I know Doris' birth--I know the, I know that Doris' birthday was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's your sister.  But I'm asking you about your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Mother and father?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Do you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know it.  My twin sister knew it because she was with them when they died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had--I do feel they were in their nineties.
Speaker 1: And when did they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me see.
Speaker 1: --when did they die?  Do you know when they--
Speaker 2: They passed in, oh, this is my history all in a room.  And that was here--I just read it last night, but all of them were gone, and they went one right after the other.  I had--they came along just about, (unclear) this past year, in their eighties, in their eighties, yes, because--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my husband [Lloyd Darden] died, '84 [1984].  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they had already, my mother had died.  They all had died.
Speaker 1: By then?
Speaker 2: My mother--my father and mother died in their nineties.  My husband was '83 [1983], and then I had one '84 [1984].  I had a sister whose stepson died in '85 [1985], and it just went on down.  Doris, in '90 [1990].  That's when I moved in to live with her.
Story_ID: 196824
Speaker 1: Now ma'am, it's true--your parents [Ella Mary Allen Boswell and Charles Roby Boswell] were from Talladega, Alabama, right?  And they went to school at Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then they moved--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They married in the chapel there, and moved, had spent their honeymoon in Texas, Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they went to Texas for a honeymoon or did they just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they thought they'd remain there.  In fact, mama was teaching there in Alabama, in Talladega.  They married, as I said, in the college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why did they go to Texas?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Papa, my father went there.  I don't know whether he went there, but he went there, and he found a job, I guess, teaching.  And mama was teaching there in Alabama.  And he sent for her.  That's when he came back, and they married, see.  And she was, went to Texas, and they both became teachers in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they--when did they get there?  Do you think about--did they get there just before you were born or--
Speaker 2: Did they get what?
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean about what year do you think they got there, that they arrived in Texas 'cause they--you were born in 1900, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they must have been there for how many years before you were born?
Speaker 2: It was '40 [1940]--in 1940, I think they observed their fiftieth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1940 here in-
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1890, yeah.  So they got married in 1890 then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I guess so.
Speaker 1: So they must have been--if we say they were about twenty years old then, I guess they were born around 1870 then, right?
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was around that time they had their celebration in Chicago [Illinois] of fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think (laughter) (unclear).  I'm seeing pictures now, whether this was Dallas [Texas] or Chicago or where because they didn't get to Chicago to live.  They died in Dallas.
Story_ID: 196825
Speaker 1: Tell us some stories about your parents [Ella Mary Allen Boswell and Charles Roby Boswell].  Do you remember any stories about 'em that are interesting?  Things that they would do or say?
Speaker 2: About papa and mama?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We used to talk about (unclear) "Oh, mama."  I was trying to think of something.  Mama talked to dad, I don't know.  I can't think of a real story now, but I know we used to tease them.  They used to have their little tete-a-tetes--go over, we'd drink a little, their little wine.  And we caught up with 'em (laughter).  I can remember like in the hall closet I saw this, something wrapped up in there.  And it stayed in there (unclear).  Finally, I saw it disappear.  And they had, our favorite cousin was Judge Mason [ph.].  And they would visit this, these two couples had certain times they visited each other.  And I caught up with them.  They were having their little wine sips (laughter).  That's about all that I could--but they were charming people I thought.  "Oh, mama, don't do that" (laughter).  We called 'em Ella and Charlie, and that's their names.
Speaker 1: Now, what did they do--they were school teachers, right?
Speaker 2: Both of 'em were teachers.
Speaker 1: Both were teachers.
Speaker 2: Papa left the teaching field to go in with a group of men for opening a Negro bank, but it failed.  And he was out of the teaching then.  So he did this, decorating, and he had been doing that in the summers when the school was closed.  So he fell right into it when he sunk his money into this banking affair.
Speaker 1: Can you remember what school they taught at or what schools they taught at?  What the names of the schools--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Name of the school, College, Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] was the name of it.  It was there, they lived right down the street from the beginning of the college.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when they moved to Dallas [Texas], what school did they teach at in Dallas?
Speaker 2: Then they, they went to school, see, there in Talladega [Alabama], right up the hill, and we visited when we were children.  We went to see grandma and the other Aunt [Alberta] Bert, my daughter--their daughter--my mother's sister was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we enjoyed her, but grandmother.  Now, the father, grandfather was a minister, and he traveled.  He had one of these traveling jobs, one of the elders in the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that's about it. However, they finally--they did come to Dallas.  We had, and Esther was left with them at the end of them, they were in Dallas (unclear) at the time.  But all of us had our turn, having to put each other away.  So Esther, I think, had papa and mama, and Doris had Bessie, and I had Alberta and my husband [Lloyd Darden], of course.  And some of these, some of the others weren't living, like Alberta.  So that was it.
Story_ID: 196826
Speaker 1: Can you remember what your first memory is?  What was your first memory in childhood?  Can you remember the first memory you had?
Speaker 2: First memory?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In childhood.  Well, really this, I wasn't, I wasn't so young when this, that I think about.  But I guess we were.  This was in Dallas [Texas].  We--my parents [Ella Mary Allen Boswell and Charles Roby Boswell] were churchgoers, and they were at prayer meeting, I guess.  At any rate, we were left at home alone.  And we turned on all the lights over the house whenever they left us alone.  So we, we'd always wanted skates, but we couldn't get skates.  We had--we were twins.  You to watch out.  You couldn't buy two (laughter).  So we had an old broken skate there, and we were out in the--on the cement walk that leads to the steps, you know, of the house.  And we were, they left us at home, as I said, alone.  We turned on all these lights, and we got out there on the, with this walk and this one skate, and we went on this one skate, skating.  And a bunch of men came by marching.  And they, they was chanting.  We thought they were saying, "About face, this is the place" (laughter). And they stopped, and they were (unclear).  And we ran in the house.  There had been a story going around that there were ax men in the town, and he was after people who had children, you know, so many children.  So we just knew this was the ax man (laughter), and his crowd.  And they said, "About face, this is the place."  And we flew in the, in that house with that one skate (laughter), going floppity, floppity (laughter).  "Ax man, get out of here" (laughter), "get out of here and get out of here."  It turned out, and the men stopped and they had to let us know, you know, they weren't any ax men.  So that was, that was our biggest scare.  I imagine we were about nine years old, something like that.  But we were scared to death (laughter), to death.
Speaker 1: Now, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: "Ax man, get out of here."  "About face, this is the place."  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was just the two--Esther [Boswell] and [HistoryMaker] Ethel [Darden], the other girls weren't at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were at church, making, helping to make a congregation for Wednesday night guests.
Story_ID: 196827
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Plymouth Congregational Church [ph.].  Now, that was in Dallas [Texas].  This other was in--but that--where was that?  That was in Dallas, yes, that cement walk going up to the steps.  This was the Plymouth Congregational Church.  It was on Hawkins Street [ph.] here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No, in Dallas.
Speaker 2: This was in Texas.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Now--that's okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, I'm sure it was named the Plymouth.  At any rate--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was it.  And it was, Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] was right up the street--the college was up the street from us.
Speaker 1: Is that Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], you're talking about or--
Speaker 2: No, no, this was--
Speaker 1: --or what college?
Speaker 2: --Talladega College.
Speaker 1: Now, that's in Alabama.
Speaker 2: In Alabama.  See, we were there visiting.  But now this--wait, I'm getting mixed up.  This running up the thing was in Chicago--no, it wasn't in Chicago.  Mama [Ella Mary Allen Boswell] and them weren't there.  But it had a cement walk with that skate, and that was somewhere, a two-story house, and we ran up these steps.  That was on Allen Street in Dallas.  That's where that was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 196828
Speaker 1: Reflect on some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  What were some of those?
Speaker 2: What were some of sights?
Speaker 1: And sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: In what city?
Speaker 1: Any city, well, Dallas where you grew up?
Speaker 2: In Dallas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What did it look like and what was it like growing up?
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was it like?
Speaker 2: What was Dallas like?
Speaker 1: Yes, and how is it different from today?
Speaker 2: Oh, Dallas, it's in Dallas.  They advertise in Dallas, putting it on the map, and that was history to me.  I didn't understand it right at first, you know.  Every sign you saw around, "It's in Dallas," "It's in Dallas."  That was trying to get even with New York [New York], selling Dallas to the country.  So that was interesting.  And that, it finally dawned on me as I grew older, you know, that that was advertised, the way they were advertising.
Speaker 1: So when you were a little girl there were signs up about Dallas?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: There were signs advertising Dallas?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Big signs advertising Dallas to New York and the other places around.  "It's in Dallas."  In other words, you don't have to go to New York to get this.  "It's in Dallas."  Everything, anything you want, it was in Dallas.  "It's in Dallas."  And I did finally--I didn't realize it at the time what it was all about.
Speaker 1: Now, did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was too young to know.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the neighborhood that you lived in?  Was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: The name, where?  In what?
Speaker 1: In Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: In Dallas?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the college.  We were right down the street from the college and the neighborhood we lived in was--it didn't have any particular name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were close to the city and then up on the hill, it was this college with their buildings.  And you couldn't go up the hill.  They were--well, college hill.  People lived up there around 'cause they had about three or four buildings up there.
Speaker 1: Are you talking about Dallas or Talladega [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Now, that's Talladega.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm trying to ask you about Dallas.
Speaker 2: Now, in Dallas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --now, where did I live?  (Laughter) On Allen Street [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Was that in the black--was there a black neighborhood in Dallas, where black--all black people lived or did they just kind of live everywhere?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did black people live in one area or did they live all over the city?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were segregated, other than you would find sometime, across the street, it would--maybe not on the same side of the street because I remember we had white people that we played with, children we played with.  And white grocery store was on the corner--this is on Allen Street.  We were segregated, but we weren't hostile.  We played together.  I remember we had a family that lived across the street from us, girls and boys, and we played games.  And we had one game we played was, "Over the River, what kind of liver" (unclear), something about (unclear), "But you can't catch me.  You may--maybe you can catch a fly, but you can't catch me."  And they were, boys and girls (laughter) and white and black, running, you know, trying to keep from getting caught.
Story_ID: 196829
Speaker 1: Can you remember the name of the school you went to in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: The school that you attended in Dallas when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: School?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: In Dallas?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Number two [George W. Carver School for Negroes, later, George Washington Carver Elementary School, Garland, Texas] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Number two, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Number two, but it had the name of Washington, I think, George Washington eventually, back of that was George Washington.  But it was Number two that we called it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The high school, of course, was Dallas Colored High School [later, Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas].  And the whites was, had a name.  We were segregated completely in Dallas and especially physical education--we didn't have any of that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Was I good student?  I was a student (laughter).  I was, I wasn't a, one of these, you know, egos (laughter).  I got out, I got along.  I got out all right.  I didn't have to make over any grades down there.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I don't really--let me see, may have been spelling.  Yeah, I think so because we played games with spelling, and even arithmetic, you had games that you could play, in the learning--
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But spelling, I think I enjoyed.
Story_ID: 196830
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that you remember from those days?
Speaker 2: Teachers?  In the fourth grade, I remember Lillie Shaw [ph.], Ms. Shaw very well.  We thought she was "it."  And another one was Mrs. Wilson [ph.].  Ms. Wilson was a music teacher.  She was mighty fine (laughter).  And we kind of (unclear) after them, you know.  And didn't--I remember one teacher came along, I turned my head and was looking back when she came.  She put her other hand and turned it around.  And I started crying 'cause Ms. Wilson had to correct me (laughter).  I didn't want her to have to, you know--I was looking around and she turned my head.  (Laughter) We [Darden and her twin sister, Esther Boswell] were crybabies.  And if one saw the other crying, she didn't have to know what it was about.  We were at the playground, and there was an upstairs and you could look down on the playground.  One was up there talking to somebody and the other one was down here playing.  She saw her crying, and--the other (laughter)--she didn't even know what she's crying about.  "Don't hit one.  You got two."  And we had a cousin who was a boy in the other, the cousin's side.  And he was our age.  He took care of us.  They knew not to bother us 'cause Roger (laughter) would get them.  "Don't bother those twins.  Let 'em alone."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One of her parents were high school--grammar school teachers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had fun.  And people would say on the street, "Honey, is y'all twins?"  (Laughter) And we would say, yes.  So we said, you know--they'd always answer and say, "I thought you was."  "Let's, let's tell 'em we're not.  Let's see what they'll say" (laughter).  "Honey, are you all twins?"  "No," (laughter), and they'd say, "Eh" (laughter) as if to say, you lying (laughter).  But we enjoyed--those were little games we enjoyed.
Story_ID: 196831
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Dallas Colored High School, later, Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas], did you know what you wanted to be when you grew up, when you were in high school, did you have an occupation chosen for yourself?
Speaker 2: Did I have what?  An occupation?
Speaker 1: Yes, did you know what you wanted to be when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Well, yes and no.  I really--we [Darden and her twin sister, Esther Boswell] loved ballet dancing (laughter).  And we wished that we could be dancers, ballet at that, but we didn't, we didn't have the money or anything.  But we wished that if, hoped when we married and had children, we'd be able to give the children dancing lessons.  Finally, I got it in my head--this was after, a old lady, that after all the children may not have had a, a strike of rhythm (laughter), and that is what we were hoping, we could marry a man who could take care of us.  You couldn't teach in Dallas [Texas]--that was, was it Chicago [Illinois]?  No, it was Dallas, after you're married, if you're married, you (unclear)--so that's why I was really marrying, and, 'cause I was enjoying signing my own checks and it made for a bad relationship for the ladies who say, I'm going to have--I'm gonna have boyfriends, it's their husbands, you know.  They lived a lie (laughter).  I said, well, the board, they're wrong.  They were the ones sinning for not drawing that line as he did.  But the school, Dallas schools were good schools, but we were segregated, of course.  And that's what we really wanted physical education so as to get in some dancing.  But they didn't have it in the black schools.  So we were out of that.
Speaker 1: Okay,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I've had a good life, I think, I feel as though (unclear) it's been getting--I was very, we, were--you couldn't get us to tell stories, you know.  We, they shooed us, say, "Here come the twins" (laughter).  They didn't talk ugly things around.  "Here come the twins" (laughter).  But we didn't like that 'cause we, we knew how to throw things off, you know.  But we knew to turn around and go the other way, a bunch of 'em would sit and talk in the--so great life, just don't weaken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Wiley College [Marshall, Texas].
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, go ahead.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, other than mama [Ella Mary Allen Boswell] wouldn't permit us to be in anything unless the other one was in it.  She didn't want one to exceed, you know, we had to be together.
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was good and it was bad (laughter) 'cause we didn't have a challenge.  We just, your sister, you know.  The challenge with us was not being able to buy a pair of red shoes at one time.  You see them for twenty dollars, they'd have to be forty dollars.  Mama's got to--bring out there.  So it helped us, I guess, in later 'cause we weren't spendthrifts.  We knew (laughter), knew how to save our money.
Story_ID: 196832
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Dallas Colored High School, later, Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas]?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: What year did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, did you graduate from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Did what?
Speaker 1: Did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was '17 [1917].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventeen, [1917], but I didn't marry until I was forty-two.  Esther [Boswell] married a little earlier than that.  Esther married in, in her late thirties, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She found a husband who let her stop--they didn't permit married teachers.  So when she found somebody, a dentist was her husband, and they remained in Dallas [Texas].  He had such a good practice there.  They wanted to leave Dallas because (unclear), and I read in the one booklet that came out that she had written what the worst thing that had happened was that she had remained in Dallas all her life.  And she didn't get, wasn't out of Dallas.  But she was there for mama [Ella Mary Allen Boswell] and papa [Charles Roby Boswell].  That was her mission.  All others were in Chicago [Illinois].  And one came to Chicago and she brought the others up and tried her best to get us up there, but we didn't wanna leave because Chicago was in bad with their money.  They weren't getting any money.  Doris [Allen-Anderson] was teaching, and we were sending her money.  They get, (unclear) so you could get it.  What do you call that when you, somebody will buy you, you know--I've forgotten the word.  At any rate, she didn't get (unclear) (laughter) until it was time for us to come, and we finally got up there.  Esther didn't, though.  She was left at home.  She was there with mama and papa when they died.
Speaker 1: Okay, but ma'am, did--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I was left here.
Story_ID: 196833
Speaker 1: Tell us about Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Wiley College was a church school.  And it was a lovely church school is what I wanna say.  You had the restrictions there with the boys, the young men and the--and they had, they had a good, what is the program, good program for their, for their literature, and that sort of thing.  It was, it was one of the best Texas, black church schools, I would say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Music department, and it's stretched out now to much more than it did have when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How did you like it?
Speaker 2: How did I like it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and were you there with your sister?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was Esther [Boswell] there too?
Speaker 2: Let's see, three of us finished.  Two finished from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and three finished from Wiley.  And they were comparable.  They were good schools, both of them, Wiley and, and Talladega.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but did your twin sister go to Wiley with you?
Speaker 2: My twin sister?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  They had in school, at one time, Alberta [Joseph] and Bessie [Foster] were at Talladega.  They came out there, and at one time when Doris [Allen-Anderson], when Doris went in, Alberta or one of them were in college, they had three at one time.  But they were lucky that they were in Talladega with grandma and that made it easier.  Came to Doris and Esther and [HistoryMaker] Ethel [Darden], Doris was in Wiley.  Doris graduated the year that Esther and Ethel--we went to Wiley and Doris was in her last year at Wiley.  So they had three when we were there for one year.  And they didn't have--we didn't have any arts that could take (unclear) with this.  Grandma having the two girls before us made it nice.  And I--they were working.  They were out--Doris, that first year we were in Wiley, Doris was graduating.  That was, that was hard on them, you know, money wise.  But we made it, and we graduated and what did we do?  That was all.  Doris was teaching then.  She got on teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she had to leave the city to get work.  And I think she went to Arizona 'cause she--it was slow in Dallas getting a job.
Story_ID: 196834
Speaker 1: When you were at Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: I've read that you were one of the founders of the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] chapter there, the original chapter?
Speaker 2: No, it was--my chapter, the chapter I was in Dallas [Texas], I--AKA hadn't come to Wiley.  Zeta Phi Beta [Sorority] was at Wiley before AKA, and so finally there were four ladies in Dallas who were AKA, and they wanted a chapter there, a graduate chapter so that they could take them in.  Well, I--Esther [Boswell] went with Zeta when it first--well, I didn't, somebody in there I didn't like (laughter).  At any rate, I didn't follow Esther.  Mama [Ella Mary Allen Boswell] would have made us because she wanted us together, but I think it was good we were apart.  So when AKA came to Dallas, there were only four AKAs there for the chapter, but it took five to make, to organize a chapter.  So these four girls knew me, and my standards and all that, and they--I went AKA, with the Alpha Kappa Alphas.  So Esther (unclear), I said if mama had known, (laughter), she--but she wasn't around at the time.  So that was four girls and I made the fifth.  So that was the beginning for Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it has grown through Texas.  See, it hadn't--the sororities weren't fluent in the South right then.  So that's the history there--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) there were four here.  They needed one more to come in.  So the girls knew me and you had to pass certain ideals and that sort of thing.  And then, of course, other girls came in there teaching, who were already AKAs.  And then finally we have a, have it through Texas, most of the small towns and in some of the white colleges have taken in--
Story_ID: 196835
Speaker 1: How did you get to Chicago [Illinois]?  Why did you decide to move to Chicago?  Or how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met my husband [Lloyd Darden] there (laughter).  I visited my sisters.  And I had friends there, see, 'cause Esther [Boswell] was married, although Homer [ph.] always told 'em, he had two wives.  He got a bargain, and so, I then was traveling back and forth to Chicago.  And I had girlfriends who were there.  And it was a young man I met who was taking out a Dallas [Texas] girl who was already engaged.  And she had been--but her future was in Cleveland [Ohio].  And she was in Chicago.  So she would go out with a young man who was one of the people there, you know, who go around with the ladies (laughter) when they come to town.  So they set me up, playing bridge, and this young man was there.  We made it together after one of those times.  So that's my story.  So finally, I married.  I got, I was able to give up my checkbook (laughter) and take his.
Speaker 1: Now, you were teaching school here in Chicago then?  Had you started teaching in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I taught at Howalton [Day School, Chicago, Illinois].  I didn't teach in the public schools.  My sister, Doris [Allen-Anderson], came here.
Speaker 1: So you started at Howalton then?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: You started teaching at Howalton School?
Speaker 2: I started teaching here.  That wasn't my beginning.  I taught in Dallas, and then I came here.  And the way I came here to live was that I met this gentleman and played bridge together.  And then we corresponded, and he was friendly.  I knew the people we--together, and we were writing.  And we got together.  My sisters invited him for bridge (laughter).  And we got together, and that's--we corresponded, talked on the telephone and all that.  (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you got married, ma'am?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how old were you when you got married?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, forty-two.
Speaker 1: Forty-two, okay.
Speaker 2: Forty-two.  Now, Esther married when she was maybe thirty-nine or something like that.  At any rate, she married first, earlier--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because she married a dentist.  And he was able to take her (laughter)--he was a Dallas person.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived in Dallas a long time before you moved here?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, but I had been visiting in Chicago when Doris and them, they saw to it we got out of Dallas.  They were trying to get us into Chicago.  But I didn't like Chicago to live in.  I wasn't seeking Chicago to live.  California, I had been there, and I preferred California.
Story_ID: 196836
Speaker 1: Tell us about Howalton [Day] School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Howalton Day School.  Doris [Allen-Anderson] was teaching here, and she happened to be--and this was in the '40s [1940s], that this happened.  The schools were in bad shape when it came to their, whatever, their rating.
Speaker 1: The Chicago Public Schools [CPS]?
Speaker 2: The crowded, the crowded schools.
Speaker 1: The public schools here, you mean?
Speaker 2: The public schools.  So Doris was teaching in the public schools, and she saw what was going on because she was in this department where they examine the children.  So when summer came, she and two other teachers had a summer school, taught delinquents.  So when they, they were very successful.  And I helped them, you see, no money from it.  And the Rosenwald [Apartment] Building [Chicago, Illinois], Ms. [Oneida] Cockrell had a kindergarten there [Rosenwald Nursery School, Chicago, Illinois].  And there were people on the outside like--I'll just call his--well, [U.S. Congressman] Ralph Metcalfe [Sr.], and his mother, prominent people who, who would have been sending their children to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  But there was a--they were, a quota system for blacks into the pri--the white, better schools.  So Doris and two other teachers had a summer school.  And when they were ready to close--they closed the summer school, Mrs. Cockrell's kindergarten in the Rosenwald, those parents--there was a group of parents there who didn't want to send their children to the public--graduate to the public schools.  So they asked Doris and these people not to close their summer school, but to extend it to a regular school, with a regular, you know what I'm trying to say.  So that, that was Doris, was the leader, and she got another teacher, June Howe [Currin], she's an art teacher.  She's a graduate of Chicago Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Irma [K.] Johnson had--these children were in Mrs., in Ms. Cockrell's--these came from Ms. Cockrell's kindergarten.  Mimi Shaw [Mildred Henson Shaw] , Howard Shaw was head of the Rosenwald.  Wait, did I get through with the teachers?  Doris and--Doris, and who was that I named?
Speaker 1: June Howe.
Speaker 2: June Howe, that's what I want.  Howalton, Allen was Doris--I'm spelling Howalton for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "H", and Howalton, "H" stands for Howell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A-L was Doris, her name was Allen then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "L", H-A--Howal--wait a minute, Howalton. --W-A-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Was there someone named [Charlotte B.] Stratton?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Was there somebody named Stratton?  How did the "ton," how did the "ton" come in?  You got How--Al--
Speaker 2: Say that again?  I had that thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you've got Howe and Allen and was there a--I've heard there was a Stratton, somebody named Stratton?
Speaker 2: Stratton is "N", she's the "N".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--H-O-W, Howalton.  At any rate, (laughter) there were five people there, six.  And this H-O-W-A-L-T-O-N.  And it was taken from their names, these people, June Howe and Allen, was Doris, "T-O-N, the "T" was Stratton, and because that "T" was--and "O" and "N" (laughter).  But any rate, that's the way it got its name, from these--I have it written down.  So these people, then others, these twenty-three--there were twenty-three of them who formulated this first group for Howalton.  The word spread.  The public schools, they begged these people not to close that, but to extend it to a regular school.  So they started with the first grade.  And Doris and them didn't, see, they extended what they were doing in the summer into this first grade.  And that's, went right on in.  And that's how it came out--
Story_ID: 196837
Speaker 1: In your opinion, what made Howalton [Day School, Chicago, Illinois] special?  What made it different from the [Chicago] Public Schools [CPS]?
Speaker 2: Well, the classes were much smaller.  The children can have more attention in class at--they have the attention more at the--in the small, with smaller, and that's about it, smaller classes.
Speaker 1: Was the curriculum different?
Speaker 2: Did it make any difference? Oh sure--
Speaker 1: No, was the curriculum different?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Was the curriculum different?
Speaker 2: Oh, the curriculum.  Now, we followed the Chicago [curriculum] and because most of those children would be leaving for Chicago [Public] Schools 'cause this was just an elementary there.  We also inculcated our own--what is it, curriculum.  But we also, we paid quite a bit of attention to the Cincinnati [Ohio] curricula.  The other thing, listen now, one thing we had connection with a college here, right on Michigan [Avenue]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Oh, on Michigan?
Speaker 2: You know who, the college.  Mrs.--we had connections, we met a Professor Ivans [ph.] who teaches at Roosevelt--is that Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: On Wabash [Avenue] and--yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, at Roosevelt.  Well, his wife was a primary teacher and, at any rate, we came in contact with her and she introduced us to a Mrs. Ivans [ph.] who was head of--her husband was head of the elementary department, I think, whatever, with--he was connected with this college.  And she was, and give us advice at times and connected us with a lady who was Miss Irons [ph.] who was on the TV and would tell stories for children on TV.  You know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 1: Oh, are you talking about the, the 'Romper Room' [sic, 'Ding Dong School']?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Are you talking about the 'Romper Room' TV show with the lady with the bell?  Are you talking, or--
Speaker 2: Say that again?  There's a woman that got on TV in (unclear).  The children would wake up in the morning and go to hear this lady.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was that 'Romper Room?'
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Was that called 'Romper Room?'  Was that the--with the lady with the bell and stuff that used to be?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that.
Speaker 1: Okay, no.
Speaker 2: Miss Frances [Horwich].
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 196838
Speaker 1: --She had us to have--we had a meeting with Mrs. Ivans [ph.], and she started us with the, the plan of having parent-pupil contact for their reports. We had a conference day where the parents would come in and visit with the teacher to get his report card.  It wasn't a written--it was a parent-teacher visit.
Speaker 2: I found that interesting, they didn't have report cards.
Speaker 1: --that they would get their, their report and we were the first to start that.  And then the [Chicago] Public Schools [CPS] came in with the same idea.  In fact, it was the popular thing to do.  And we had that connection with Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois], through Miss Ivans.  She would send, have people to come out and lecture--and this Miss Frances [Frances Horwich from 'Ding Dong School'] was an outgrowth from Mrs. Ivans' interest in private education.  Um-hm. Do you remember that?  The children, Miss Frances?
Speaker 2: Oh, I know.  It was called 'Ding-Dong School.'
Speaker 1: 'Ding Dong,' that's right.
Speaker 2: 'Ding-Dong School,' Miss Frances.
Speaker 1: That was it, 'Ding Dong.'
Speaker 2: I saw it when I was a kid.  I remember it.  'Ding Dong School,' you're right.  I thought it was 'Romper Room.'  It's not 'Romper Room,' it's 'Ding-Dong School.'
Speaker 1: Miss Ivans would send speakers if we needed them and started us, gave us the framework on how to conduct these business--I think that's, I think that's it.
Speaker 2: So Roosevelt University influenced a lot of what you did?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt University had a lot of influence on what you all were doing in the classroom, right, then you say?
Speaker 1: I don't know what you said--
Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying that the education department at Roosevelt University helped you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, certainly.
Speaker 2: --a great deal.  Right.
Speaker 1: We had contact, we visited, with the university, we had--went to, we graduated six, at sixth grade.  That was our first graduation to some of the outside places.  And we had two (unclear) girls to go into the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for their college work.
Speaker 2: Who were they?  Do you know?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: I know--Mimi Shaw [Mildred Henson Shaw] and who was the other?  I know her well.  They were two, oh, I think she's Turner [ph.].  It was Patsy Turner, Patricia Turner [ph.], those two went in there.  I don't think Kenneth [ph.]--I don't think any boys (unclear).  I know those two were there.
Story_ID: 196839
Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of some of the parents who were involved [at Howalton Day School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, the mothers--they had a mothers club that helped raise money and all, and Mimi Shaw whose mother was--
Speaker 1: Mildred [Henson] Shaw.
Speaker 2: What was her mother's name?
Speaker 1: Mildred.
Speaker 2: Mildred, Mildred Shaw.  Howard Shaw was the husband's name.  He was head of the, in the housing department.  Miss Turner, [R.] Esdras Turner, an attorney.  His daughter, Patsy, Patricia Turner [ph.], those two girls I know went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I know that, I think those two may have finished their college there, work there.  I'm not sure, but they did go into the high school.  Now, as I said, you check out that Dallas [Texas] [sic, Chicago, Illinois] history 'cause they have all of that, I'm sure. 'Cause mine slips me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 196840
Speaker 1: How did you raise money for the school [Howalton Day School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's it.  That's just what I was saying.  Then we had a mothers club.  There were those who would not only, who only had children in the school or out of the school, who were interested in private education.  And am I doing all right?
Speaker 1: You're doing fine.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, what was the tuition?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What was the--
Speaker 2: Tuition?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, the tuition was, well, I can't tell you much about it.  I know when I started with them, see I got caught (laughter).  I wasn't planning to get into that, but I told them I would go on--I would make one hundred dollars a month, and I said, and when you have to cut it, you can cut me.  I wouldn't take, you know, the salary.  Just pay me when you, miss me when you want to.  Well, they--the parents and the places, some business places, we'd be in contact with, who would give us as much.  That was hard.  We had to raise--but I didn't, if they needed it, I didn't take it because I had a husband [Lloyd Darden] that was--and then I started.  Well, that was, that's when I started there.  I'm trying to think how I got caught (laughter) 'cause I had, had to--I didn't want to go into it in the first place.  Doris [Allen-Anderson], my sister, was there.  But she, that was it.  Those teachers who did formulate this, they weren't there.  And I was there for Doris (laughter).  So that made me kind of--assistant in the private school.  And I did teach in the third grade there when I first went in.  I think they needed a third grade teacher because we went in the school without--we didn't have a kindergarten other than the one we brought from this--so then the second year, we had to get a kindergarten, build one.  So we had our first kindergarten so we could have the second grade.
Story_ID: 196841
Speaker 1: So you started with what you had from Cockrell School [Rosenwald Nursery School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  They were second grade, and we were fortunate in having a good teacher who taught, taught in Saint--I think it's St. Louis [Missouri], yes, St. Louis, had a good record for teachers and she was excellent.  She knew what to do.  Third grade, we moved on up.  And they begged, the children begged to, to go to eighth grade.  But we didn't do that.  We graduated at sixth grade, and those children who came to us, that's when they left us, at sixth grade 'cause we didn't see eighth grade presence.  But we did--we had an eighth grade.  I don't know whether Ralph [Metcalfe, Sr.] was with that eighth grade or sixth grade.  But at any rate, that's that.  And it grew like topsy, as they used to say (laughter).  And then these outside people who had their teas and different functions, we sponsored 'Hello, Dolly!' when she came here--the song, Pearl Bailey.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1964 or so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now, see what they have--as I said, in--at the museum.
Story_ID: 196842
Speaker 1: Is there any event or memory that stands out about Howalton [Day] School [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I'm sure, I'm sure I have many (laughter) 'cause I was there.  I had to be there.  Doris [Allen-Anderson] wasn't there.  She had been the leader, one of the leaders, top leaders.  And my husband [Lloyd Darden] became the, a accountant, one of the accountants.  And I loved, I went in, I was there teaching.  We instituted the maypole.  We had visited [Francis W.] Parker School [Chicago, Illinois] and they had this special day that they had May Day, and we went out and saw them.  Of course, we knew how to do the maypole, but we started it at our school during May Day and had the crowning of the queen and May Day.  And I was, I was the one that taught that.  That was my specialty (laughter), specialty was teaching the, having the maypole dance, raised money on that day, as I remember, had a regular May Day queen.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have (unclear), oh, did you--did you all teach Negro history in school?
Speaker 2: Did I what?
Speaker 1: Did you teach Negro history in school?  Did anybody teach that at Howalton?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you're saying--
Speaker 1: No, I'm saying.  Did anyone at Howalton teach African American history or Negro history to the students?
Speaker 2: Now, that came around the sixth grade, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we opened up the black story, yeah, when it became very evident.  We had pictures around and taught them about our people.  They were exposed to their black history, um-hm.
Story_ID: 196843
Speaker 1: Tell us about Robert Taylor--
Speaker 2: Robert Taylor?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know too much about Robert Taylor other than he was over the Rosenwald [Apartment] Building [Chicago, Illinois] as manager of the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: A lot of the parents came out of the Rosenwald, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: A lot of the parents of the students came from the Rosenwald Building and the Cockrell school [Rosenwald Nursery School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Well, you see this kindergarten came from there to--it was Cockrell Ms. [Oneida] Cockrell was housed there.  And Robert Taylor was the one helped us in beginning there with a apartment for Doris' [Doris Allen-Anderson] vacation school.  This was--she had these--Doris, June Howe [Currin] (unclear)--who else was there?
Speaker 1: [Charlotte B.] Stratton.
Speaker 2: And Miss Stratton, all of them, they--the school was in one of their apartments that Robert Taylor was managing.  And he let him have that, and then we were able to get the field house the next year across the street.  We were there, and then from there we went to the Parkway Gardens [Parkway Garden Homes, Chicago, Illinois] on [S. Martin Luther] King Drive where the--it was social.  They were there, and we (laughter) had to lock--we couldn't lock our doors if we're gonna have meetings in our rooms at night, and we had to, to put our things away so they wouldn't--what is that?
Speaker 1: Oh, nothing, just papers.
Speaker 2: So, at any rate, that's--and when Ebony had his business right in the back, out in the Parkway, in back of the Parkway building--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Johnson.
Speaker 2: That was on Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], see that was Calumet, and we had this playground and all.  Well, when Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson] moved his place, we were happy.  And we got into that building that he was in, the little house part, got into there.  And we enjoyed ourselves 'cause we could turn the latch, and go on about our business.
Speaker 1: Because that gave you more--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church then built their educational building, and they gave us space over there.  We were really in business then at the real school.
Speaker 1: What church was it?  What was the name of that church?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: CME--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --church, what's the name?  I can't, I don't know it.
Speaker 1: But it's a CME over in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, CME.  And the reverend--they were a part of us.  They were very--they welcomed us.  Of course, they did because they were getting all that rent and (laughter).
Story_ID: 196844
Speaker 1: When did you retire from teaching?
Speaker 2: When did I retire?  I don't (laughter), I don't know when I did retire from Howalton [Day School, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm trying to think.  I know I did retire.  I don't know that--maybe I had to retire.  Maybe somebody was sick, and I had to come out.  I was with them in the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal church] building, I know.  Now, where did they go from--oh, I know.  The year they went out to nineties, in the nineties, that's when I left them and whatever year that was.  I didn't take that (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so the school--I've heard that the school lasted until 1986, I guess.  Did it last that long?
Speaker 2: Eighty--oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have the--'47 [1947], it opened.  And it was '87 [1987], I think that it closed.  I have that in, I'm sure they have that in the one in Dallas [Texas] too, and I gave you that address.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In fact, I have it at home there, but I'll, you call me and I'll tell you.  I just found it the other day.  I used to could shoot it off (laughter), but I'm afraid of what I say (unclear) now.  As I said, I'm not as reliable as I was.  So, I don't want my little talk to go--let's check with the main, where it came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I'm out here saying this and that, saying that, but (unclear) I really know about it 'cause I was really a part of it.
Story_ID: 196845
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns, ma'am, for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we're getting somewhere.  I think they want to be us (laughter).  I think we're progressing very--it takes times, and we must know that we are all, are individual, and each person has a right to his, as long as he isn't trespassing on somebody else's rights.  Just let it be because the future's not ours.  We don't know anything.  We think we know, but we don't know.  We want to know, but don't know everything.
Story_ID: 196846
Speaker 1: What is the--now, you're at the--today you're 104 years old, right?
Speaker 2: Hm, today?
Speaker 1: You're 104 years old as we're talking here.  And--
Speaker 2: What is my goal?
Speaker 1: No, no, you're 104 years old, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I wanted to say that, and just to ask you, what is your secret for living so long?  Do you have a secret for living this long?
Speaker 2: I really don't have a secret for living so long.  It's just what happened.  Esther [Boswell], the twin sister, left at eighty-nine, and we just don't know anything.  That's what I say, we don't, we live and do the best we can.  Remember just, respect is the thing we need, respect.  That's my word now.  Have respect for the other fellow and his word, everybody's.  We all have a brain.  Accept his, his words.  No, you don't have to carry them through, but at least let him say, let him make, make his statement.  You don't have to--and don't criticize unless you've been in those same shoes 'cause you don't know the background.  You don't know where it's coming from.  Sometimes he--that person doesn't know the background.  He's just talking what he sees, but many times there's a lot more behind what you see and what someone is thinking, and he has a right to his thoughts.  Respect his thoughts.  You don't have to accept them, and go along with it, but at least let them--you find out and he finds out who he is.
Speaker 1: She says she ate the same thing every day for sixteen years.
Speaker 2: That's what I think. Now, those are just my (laughter), my little thoughts, and these things really have come to me just here these last few years.  I realize everybody has a right to express himself.  You don't have to accept it and still you accept it, but you don't have to carry it through.  You don't have to do it the way he says do it or whatever, whatever I'm trying to say (laughter), accept me right now (laughter).  I'm doing the best I can.
Story_ID: 196847
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what your opinion is of why the school [Howalton Day School, Chicago, Illinois] closed?
Speaker 2: Of Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]--
Speaker 1: No, why Howalton closed?   Why did it close?  What was the reason that it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What closed?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Howalton.
Speaker 2: Oh, Howalton.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Why did it close?  I, I can't remember the way it closed even.  I wasn't there.  I had retired.  I'm sure I had--it was time for me to get away.  And I don't know whether it was a lack of students or what--I imagine it may have been that they couldn't get the brand of, of what--salaries.  No, doubt that was--it was finance I'm sure. Um-hm.  That was it.  And, you see, the [Chicago] Public Schools [CPS] were opening up and taking on teachers and raising salaries, doing better.  They were taking in teachers in more often than they had been 'cause we thought that some of these folk had to wait a long time because that's how we--why some of them came to us, it took long time because some of them were paying, you know, for their jobs.  And that's what, maybe the public schools got to the place they were hiring them more.  And we were getting them when they--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Do you have an assessment of the public schools today?
Speaker 2: Did I have any what?
Speaker 1: No, do you have a--what do you think of the--Chicago Public Schools today?  Do you have an opinion about the schools today?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I'm not in the schools now.  But I know they are having a time.  I don't, I'm not associated with too many.
Story_ID: 196848
Speaker 1: Did you eat the same food for sixteen years?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess I did.  I had a regular, things I just didn't eat, and I didn't eat it.  I watched my food very closely.  I was ill with colon surgery.  And I knew, I realized--I found that my body talks to me if I listen to it.  If I just listen and watch it, it'll tell you what to do.  And when you hear it--I know when the doctor told me early that I was having a problem with the colon, he said, "Eat oatmeal" (laughter).  And I hated oatmeal from a child.  But when he told me to eat oatmeal, you should have seen me eating oatmeal (laughter).  'Cause if the doctor told me that.  I'd heard it, I'd read it, but when the doctor--that was the only thing he told me, to eat oatmeal.  So I'm eating oatmeal.  I don't eat much of it, but I eat it every day.  And I try to drink enough water or liquids, but water--I don't think anything replaces water, the right kind of water.
Speaker 1: Ah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And fried foods and that flour, they are important.  Now, you're making a preacher out of me (laughter).  But I'm not gon' be a preacher--
Story_ID: 196849
Speaker 1: Do you have a message for young people today?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I say, they have to find it out themselves, listen to their parents, to the good things their parents are saying, down to the advice of the older people who are--anybody who's giving you, trying to help you.  Listen to them and follow through.  It's up to you and to think of your body and respect--that's another word I've learned is respect your human--to everybody.
Speaker 1: Ma'am--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Everybody has a right to his thoughts, whether they're right or wrong, but they have the right.  That's their right, just as it is yours, the other fellas.  And you don't have to believe in them, but let him get it out of his system (laughter).  But you don't have to accept it, just let, give him a chance.  Let him blow the steam because he has that right.  But you don't have to let it change you or bother you.  But that's hard to do sometimes.
Story_ID: 196850
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: When I get back on the--
Speaker 1: No, when you look, when you look back on life, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I consider my--
Speaker 1: Legacy.
Speaker 2: Medicine?
Speaker 1: No, legacy.  Legacy, here we go, let's see--
Speaker 2: My, what would I consider my, my legacy?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Legacy.
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't have one (laughter).  I don't have one.  I don't consider--I don't think about that.  I let it takes its place, and then the people will--those who knew me, will send me word (laughter).  I just miss my twin sister [Esther Boswell].  That's all I miss.  I won't say that's all I miss.  I miss family.  That's the main, I miss family (unclear).
Speaker 1: Is that the toughest thing about being 104, is missing your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Is that the toughest part of being 104 years old?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's pretty hard.  It's pretty tough, and I'm really, I don't understand it, who I am, but it was there for me.  And Esther went from an accident, I would say.  She didn't have cancer, but she was in an automobile accident, the husband, the two of them.  And she had brain troubles, and the doctor told her that this cancer, it wasn't any--didn't, cancer wasn't with her.  This growth had been growing for twelve years.  So I don't think she had cancer.  If she did, it didn't give her a lot of trouble because her husband--she was very sick.  She had a tumor there on her brain, and her husband said--no, her husband died.  He had the same thing, but his was cancerous.  And I said, that came from that accident the two of them had.  But his was not cancerous--Esther's was.  And she died first.  And, no, he died first 'cause we said he died from nursing her, stress.  And then when he died, he had the cancer, but she died with her--she, she had--(unclear).  Her, her knot, she had the knot, the tumor, but it wasn't cancerous.  That was it.  She had the tumor.  He had the tumor, but his was cancerous 'cause he had given so much to her, getting her well.
Story_ID: 196851
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you could do it over again?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't think, I don't know.  I would have stayed at home instead of coming (laughter) where I am.  And I think I could have maybe--I think I could have worked it out better.  I--here it is.  The main thing is I'm here.  Well, there would have been more people in Dallas [Texas] where I came up, grew up, but I came here, and I had no one, and the few who were here have gone, you see.  And Dallas, even to this--Dallas, the trees knew me (laughter).  Everything knew me, see.  So I, if I had remained there, I think I might have been (unclear)--I'd have been--I was familiar with the town, and can grow with, grow or lose with it.  But this was--everything here was new.  And then all the people were new.  Everything is new, everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Church, and church.  That I said church, well, but it's--however, Esther [Boswell] said just the opposite.  It was the worst thing she--(laughter) for her that she had to stay in Dallas all that time.  So, you can't win, just be, let it be, accept.
Speaker 1: One last question--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep in touch with the man upstairs.  Let him try to guide you.  Keep him the right, and another word I learned is respect.  What was the one before that, I said?  Respect and what else did I say--two things I--well, letting everybody have his chance.  That's respect. Um-hm. He has a right.
Story_ID: 196852
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, ma'am?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be the mayor?
Speaker 1: No, well--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --how would you?  That'd be a good question, but, no, (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wouldn't be the mayor.
Speaker 1: No, the--ma'am, the question was, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, how would I like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Just give me your good looks (laughter).  I don't have any special way I want you to remember me, that I was kind and tried to be respectful.  I like to be me (laughter), me, and I hope people could see me, and know me, and what they see, I hope they like (laughter) 'cause I don't want to tell them how to--I want them to have their brain and I'll respect it if they don't like me.  That's okay, you know.  I would--don't like it, but so what?  They, they have that right.  They have the right to express themselves to that 'cause they are human, just as I am, and it's your right to hate, if you wanna hate (laughter).  I don't like to hate.  I don't--hate is a nasty word to me 'cause I think the person I'm hating, I think he has a perfect right to have his thoughts.  But I don't have to accept, let 'em bounce all off, let 'em go out, let 'em go out the window (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And go to bed at night and sleep and don't worry about it.  That's the way they are and they have a right to be that way, but let us hope they'll find a different way.
Story_ID: 196853
Speaker 1: That's the man I met (laughter), Lloyd, L-O-R-D [sic.] (laughter).  B-as in boy, Darden, Lloyd B., Benjamin, Darden.
Speaker 2: So his name is L-O-R-D, Lord.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), L-O-R-D.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, it's L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 1: L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you're just playing with us, huh?
Speaker 1: L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: Lloyd.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year do you think this was taken?  Do you have any idea?
Speaker 1: When was this picture taken?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I really can't tell you.  I really don't know.  I had to send--I don't know--
Speaker 2: About how old was he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'cause it's been out of my house--(simultaneous)--I don't know.
Speaker 2: About how old was he then, do you know?
Speaker 1: I can't tell you 'cause Lloyd didn't show his age.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Lucky man.  He didn't show his--
Speaker 2: What does he look like he might be?  Forties, in his forties?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Maybe younger.  How about this photo here?
Speaker 2: Thirties or forties.
Speaker 1: Is that younger--
Speaker 2: Thirties or forties.
Speaker 1: --or older?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about this photo here?
Speaker 1: How about this one?
Speaker 2: Now that's one of the groups.  I can't find out, at Howalton Day School [Chicago, Illinois].  I think that's Mrs. [Marie] Revis.  I don't know whether that's the whole school or whether that's one or two grades or three grades.  And I, I don't know where I am unless it's right over there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  She's not in there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  She's not in this one?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I don't think so.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, Ms. [Josie] Childs believes that you're not in this photo.
Speaker 1: I'm not--this is, I know this is Miss Revis, this is Marie Revis, right there.
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  That one.  I know who that is.
Speaker 2: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 1: R-E--M-A-R-I-E, Marie, Revis, R-E-V-I-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: "V" as void.
Speaker 2: Okay, and about what year is this?
Speaker 1: I don't know that.  And I don't know whether this is a teacher or one of the--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start with the top one.
Speaker 2: That's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Your parents.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: The top picture?
Speaker 2: My mother [Ella Mary Allen Boswell], and I don't know her age, never did, didn't know anything about either one of these rascals (laughter).  That's papa [Charles Roby Boswell] and mama, mama and papa.
Speaker 1: Could you give their names?
Speaker 2: Charles Roby Boswell, Ella Mary Boswell or Mr. and Mrs. Boswell--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about the next one?
Speaker 2: --the parents of [HistoryMaker] Ethel Darden.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the daughters of the Boswells, and that is--I'm trying to see.  Where did that start from--
Speaker 2: Left to right, go this way, from this way to this way.
Speaker 1: I can't tell--that's--
Speaker 2: You wanna look at it like this?
Speaker 1: Let me see it, yeah, let me--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Alberta--
Speaker 1: This is Bessie [Foster], Doris [Allen-Anderson] and Alberta [Joseph].  Can you say that again for us?  This is Bessie, Doris and Alberta.
Speaker 2: That's, this is--who is this?  Who is this?  If you bring it back here, I'll see (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you said it before.  Just say it in order again 'cause you have the mic on.
Speaker 2: All right, I'll say that.
Speaker 1: You have the mic on, so just say, Bessie--oh, I've got one on--no, I don't.  Bessie, Doris and Alberta, the three.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think we've got it.  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay, who is this?
Speaker 2: That's Esther [Boswell].
Speaker 1: That's your twin sister.
Speaker 2: This is Ethel [Darden] over here, the first one.  This is Ethel.
Speaker 1: Okay, we've got one more.
Speaker 2: That's who I used to be.  That's who I used to be.
Speaker 1: That was on Easter time.  The man who took the picture died that following week.  That was at church.
Speaker 2: Okay, where do you go to church?
Speaker 1: Hyde Park, United Church of Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  You know where that is?  On--
Speaker 2: It was like your 100th birthday party.
Speaker 1: That's Ethel, E-T-H-Y-L [sic.] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was (unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  You got another one, Larry [Crowe]?
Speaker 1: No, that's it.
