Story_ID: 529257
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I am the Interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the Videographer and Michael Reed is observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Hattie, H-A-T-T-I-E, Beleatha, L-E, I'm sorry I can't even spell my own name, B-E-L-E-A-T-H-A, Dorsey, D-O-R-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 31, '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Teachey, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Spell Teachey for me?
Speaker 2: T-E-A-C-H-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired Community Economic Development Practitioner.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: At my home in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: September 13, 2007, I had to stop and think about the year.
Story_ID: 529258
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call 'People' Magazine-ish type questions, all right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would like to say my favorite color is between blue and green.  I like somewhat vivid colors.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Soul food.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, not summer, spring.
Speaker 1: Okay and when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: Beaches, I like to hear the water.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying or Bible verse?
Speaker 2: I say--I like to use the phrase my father often so told us, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you".
Story_ID: 529259
Speaker 1: I got it now.
Speaker 2: Let's talk about your, your mother.  Would you state her name and spell it for me please, and?
Speaker 1: Her name was Gladys, G-L-A-Y-D-S.  No, G-L-A-D-Y-S, Gladys (laughter).  I have to stop and think about this, got me nervous this morning for some reason or I'm forgetful, but Gladys Dorsey and her middle name was Alderman, that was her maiden name.
Speaker 2: All right and where was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born in Teachey, North Carolina.  That was her home town.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Oh, she was eighty-seven when she died so I have to date back, so what would that be?
Speaker 2: Well what year did she die?
Speaker 1: She died last year in 2006.
Speaker 2: Okay in 2006, okay that's fine.  Now, did your mother share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes she grew up in what we call the country in North Carolina and she was an only child.  She lost her mother at the age of thirteen, so she was raised by her mother's sister and so that was, that was the person that I call Grandma, because I didn't know of course, her mother, and so I just knew about her mother.  So, she shared stories of growing up in a small town where her family was the prominent family because they owned a grocery store.  They owned a lot of land and of course they were farmers, in that time and period of life.  So she was, you know she grew up wanting to be a music major and that was interrupted of course when she met my father and got married on a vacation when she went to New York [New York], and my father was singing in a choir and she was playing the organ for someone who was on vacation but she grew up in a rural area and you know just, just I guess a normal childhood of growing up in a rural area.
Speaker 2: And who were her parents?
Speaker 1: Her parents are, her mother's name was, oh God I drew a blank, Jenkins, Mary Jane Jenkins and her--my, my grandmother's name was Hattie Jane and she, she was raised as I said by--also my--Hattie Jane was also--her husband's name was Robert Alderman (ph) so those were the Aldermans in the family.  So she was raised by them, you know for the latter years of her life.
Story_ID: 529260
Speaker 1: Now tell me--I'm gonna come back to your mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey], but talk to me about Hattie Jane [Alderman], that's who you consider your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your relationship with her?
Speaker 2: I'm named after her, there is, there is a name in my, in my--on my birth certificate.  I did not find out until I applied for a passport 'cause I had no reason to look at my birth certificate up until then.  No one had asked for it so I got a copy of my birth certificate and "Jane" was on it so my true full name is Hattie Beleatha Jane Dorsey.  So I tease my mother and said "you didn't expect any more children", but I'm named after Hattie Jane so my mother said that was a history in our family that there was always a "Hattie" and so the name Hattie has obviously ended in with me in the rest of the family tree, but Hattie was a wife, you know homemaker.  She had no children of her own, so my mother became her child as she adopted you know and continued to raise my mother after her mother passed.  So I just knew her as someone that allowed me to get away with whatever.  She had this red hen that when I use to go, you know we went to the South every summer and she had this red hen that she named "Hattie".  Now I know that hen has died a many times on the dinner table (laughter), but every time, every summer I went there was a red hen in the yard because you know chickens and everything in the South, and the rural South roamed the yards, and so there was always my "hen" you know that I looked forward to seeing every summer when I would go South, and so those are the kind of memories I have, or when she would come up to New York, that's where my early life was and visit.  You know she protected me with reference to any spankings and everything that my mother was going to do and so she was my protector, she was my grandma, she was someone I loved, and, and I was with her when she passed.
Speaker 1: Where they lived in, in North Carolina, you said they owned a lot, the family owned a lot of land.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land?  How the Aldermans acquired their land?
Speaker 2: I don't but you know but I believe it was as a result at the end of slavery as people made their homestead claims, they just staked out what was theirs, but I don't know if it was purchased or whatever, but there's still a lot of rural land left in the family.  My sister is more like our curator in the family.  I had four sisters, three sisters, there were four girls, and it's only now two of us.  So Joyce is the one who keeps up with the family tree and does all the family tracings and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well did--well do you know anything about any of your ancestors being in slavery?
Speaker 2: The Aldermans yes, a bit about them.  They were--I guess they landed like in Virginia and the Carolinas, and, and so I'm, I'm doing one of those history things where you know you do the swab and see what tribe you came from.  So I've done that because of the black history that just left Atlanta [Georgia].  So I'm anxious to find out what tribe we came from and so that's gonna I think prompt us more to go back and do some more research about us, but I do know that we were up and down from Georgia to the Carolinas and disbursed that way through in slavery and so now we come back together.  It's the Alderman family which is a huge clan as we have found out in later life, you know later in my life and we get together for family reunions every other year, but those Aldermans came and, and disbursed up and down the Carolinas and so more of their history we're curious to find out now that we have sort of reunited.
Story_ID: 529261
Speaker 1: My grandfather was a store owner as well as a farmer and so he had like the country store, and I don't know if you've ever been in, in the South and that smell, it's like a sweet smell and that's the smell I remember as a young person in addition to being able to get the candy or whatever, you know you would go in for, but it was the sodas, and it was the smell of tobacco all intermingled together and it was almost like a sweet, woodsy kind of smell and so that's my memory of the store that my grandfather, that--the other was of course everybody you know killed and cured their own meat, and so I witnessed slaughtering of hogs.  The first time I ever saw a turkey killed and you know how they hang 'em upside down, that scared me to death and just a few things that you know it's just a memories of seeing the great big black pot that they would put your clothes in and boil the water in it so it can get nice and white.  So those are the early days that I remember going south, and of course that wasn't in New York [New York] but that was in the South.
Speaker 2: In the South.
Speaker 1: And saw how they do things.
Speaker 2: Well when--you talk about smells, but what sights and sounds remind you of that time?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds?  I think the church, the music of the church when, when young people, not young people, but when people would gather together and, and sing.  My--I come from on my father's [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] side of a history of, of ministers and so just going to the South and, and the hymns and so we don't it that much anymore but the hymns when and when we, we call--they call it "praise time" now in the churches, but in that church it was the hymns and the, the way that you just expressed your soul, and your, and, and your yearnings and, and it's just--and your belief that things was gonna get better and it all came out in those small churches I think that we attended in, in our youth.
Speaker 2: Okay and what about sights?
Speaker 1: I laugh--my father use to say about the trains.  You know we use to watch the trains go by, that was a joy in growing up in you know in a rural town.  So there was the trains that would go by and near my family's home and my father joked to mother often is that the trains picked up speed (laughter) going through this little small town, so and, and the bell hook you know that they hung the bell from a hook and the train swiped it as they came by.  So those were some of the early memories then you know of course they became the way my father would kid my mother about where she came from (laughter).
Story_ID: 529262
Speaker 1: Now back to your, your grandparents, and during that time in, in--we talked about slavery but was there any talk about interracial marriages?
Speaker 2: No, but from the complexion of my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] you know that you know there was interracial intermingling and all that went on in her life, 'cause my mother had white heritage.  It was very obvious that she was partial white, but it was something that they didn't talk about.  We are just now beginning to--my sister with her (probing?) is just now beginning to glean who some of those people were and so, and we know some of the names of, of the white family that we were intermingled with and so.
Speaker 1: Do you know where they are?
Speaker 2: I know their last names, the Jenkins and the Stallings, S-T-A-L-L-I-N-G-S, and but they were like the big families in North Carolina and in that little rural area and I do know that my grandmother use to sometime help with their housekeeping and raising their kids and all of that but I wouldn't, you know I. I didn't know them.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I know of them.  I remember as a small child going to their house one day with my mother and, but it wasn't--you know she wasn't saying that this is a part of your family or anything.  That was hush-hush and not to be discussed.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you know how much education your grandparents had?
Speaker 2: I would say maybe close to elementary.  There's some of course--my grandparents was--I would say elementary you know schoolhouse.  I know I saw the schoolhouse that was the school where they went--one room, the schoolhouse.
Speaker 1: And, and your mother, how much education did she have?
Speaker 2: My mother finished about the second year of college.
Story_ID: 529263
Speaker 1: All right, tell me what schools she [Dorsey's mother Gladys Alderman Dorsey] went to?
Speaker 2: She went to Shaw University in [Raleigh] North Carolina.  That's when her college was interrupted when she went to New York [New York] and met my father, but she finished--she went to a private school and, I, I think she told me it was in Burgaw, Burgaw, North Carolina, B-U-R-G-A-W I think how it is spelled, but she went to a private school in North Carolina and then went to Shaw University.  She only stayed there as I said for two years and it was at summer vacation that interrupted her college education, and she was a music major.  She loved to play the piano and still did up until the time she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandparents, you said they were prominent but they were pretty well to be able to afford for her to go to a private school.
Speaker 2: Well yeah and of course that when you say "prominent" remember we talk about prominence in a rural area, and it's not prominence as we know it today, but she was an only child. She was catered to and she as some of us might say "spoiled" so you know they made things available for her by sacrifice and going to school was their highlight.  You remember in the days that when we were growing up if you got an education you were gon' be able to achieve whatever you wanted to and so it was their belief as well to educate their child and make certain that she was able to do what they couldn't do.
Story_ID: 529264
Speaker 1: Now, let's, tell me about your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Edward Henry [Dorsey] and he was better known as "E.H. Dorsey".
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Atlanta, Georgia, here in Atlanta, Georgia.  This is his home town.
Speaker 1: And do you know when he was born or how old he was when he passed.
Speaker 2: He passed at the age of sixty-four, pretty young.
Speaker 1: Young.
Speaker 2: But he was, and I would have to date back.  You know I'm not too good on these dates (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, that's fine, what year did he die?
Speaker 2: He died in 1978.
Speaker 1: All right, we can figure that out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about your father, he was born here in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, my father left Atlanta, Georgia as a young man and moved to Brooklyn, New York.  His father was a major minister here in the City of Atlanta, and so I think young men at that particular point in time wanted to get away from, you know the family and go north and going to New York many, many years ago you know was the place to go.  So that's where he went to be with his sister who lived up there and he had, you know his brothers and other siblings had moved to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, but this was not when he was a child, was it (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was when he--after he graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay well did he share any stories about growing up here in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Just being restricted because his father was a pastor, and all of 'em were restricted, you know they had, they were under the thumb of an old, old-fashioned upbringing and so there was always that desire to escape and go and check out the world on their own.  So he didn't share too very much about growing up.  It was just as I got to know a bit of his history in later years and, and from my own memory.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's talk about his father.  What was his father's name, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Reverend Joseph T. Dorsey, and his, and he was better known as Reverend J.T. Dorsey.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of his church?
Speaker 2: His Church was Mount Zion Baptist Church.  It was located where the  [Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta] Civic Center is now located but it's right up the street from the, the replacement church.  He had one of the largest congregations in the City of Atlanta and he was more or less what you would call a "charismatic" preacher, you know.  I think he would be put on the stage of like a [HM Bishop] Eddie [L.] Long or somebody else in today's world, but he was, he--from what I understand he, he just, he just mesmerized the masses.  He was just that kind of a minister, so I didn't know him.  I think I met him--I remember him just like fleetingly 'cause he did when I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, her name was Ara, A-R-A, Morinda, and her middle name was Thurman, T-H-U-R-M-A-N, but she was a homemaker, a preacher's wife and, and I know her, I knew her better 'cause I moved back to Atlanta before she passed and she, she suffered a stroke.  My grandfather died from a stroke.  She suffered a stroke like a few years later, but my memory of her was that even though she was paralyzed on one side, and she drug her foot, she was, she could cook the best cakes in the world and then I got to understand how she cooked those cakes because I had to sit there when I came to Atlanta and cream the butter and the sugar, and I don't know if you know anything about creaming the butter and the sugar, but that seemed like it, it was my--something I had done wrong to deserve this punishment of sitting with a bowl between my legs and churning for what seemed like an hour and she would come back to check the consistency and see if in fact the, the sugar and the butter had blended the way she wanted it to, and if it had not I just had to sit there with a wooden spoon and go around and around with this spoon forever, and but those cakes would just be, you know the butter cakes, pound cakes would melt in your mouth.  So I remember her for her cooking and, and her ability to bake.
Story_ID: 529265
Speaker 1: So you really, didn't spent a lot of time with your grandparents on your father's [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] side.
Speaker 2: Not with my grandmother [Ara Morinda Thurman Dorsey], 'cause we moved--when my father came back to Atlanta [Georgia] to pastor a church here and so when we came back to Atlanta she was still alive so I got to know her as a result of moving back to Atlanta, but other than coming to Atlanta for a visit, no I didn't know them that well.  I didn't grow up among them.
Speaker 1: Was there anything else that your grandmother shared with you?
Speaker 2: Discipline (laughter)?  Severe discipline, she was--I, you know a lot of growing up as--I was the first child of my father and I think I caught all of the strict discipline that they couldn't administer, you know what I could or could not do, and she was you know "don't let that girl" you know, don't--and I would just say like, you know to myself "you're not my mother, you know"(laughter).  "Daddy why you listening to her?" You know, but she was a disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: Now, if you think back what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My early--I, was the oldest in the family but I was also the one that was sick.  So I was--my memories was going to the hospital and my father used to say that everything that "passed in the breeze" I caught it.  So I suffered from rheumatic fever, asthma and I was hospitalized for rheumatic fever because that was the way they treated, you know cardiac illness way back when I was in New York [New York], and so I went to what they call a Home for Cardiac Children in Roslyn, Long Island [New York], and I was away from my family for three years.  I mean truly away, never going back home until they released me and said that I was cured, but so those when I have early childhood memories I just remember being ten years old, being separated from my family, just you know, just pulled away.  And I think sometimes when I reflect back on that, I wonder as a parent how I could have sent away a child for three years, but my mother and my father never missed, the allowed visitation days, and at that particular point in time in their lives, it must've been very hard to make it from Brooklyn, New York to Long Island, and so those are my early recollection of growing up.  And I would say that I had otherwise a normal upbringing.  I was the surrogate parent in a way for many of my younger siblings because I was the oldest so my brothers and sisters if you were ever to talk to them will tell you that I took the job a little bit too serious because I tried to emulate the discipline of my mother and all so you know.  They would gang up on my but my earlier memories was sick.
Story_ID: 529266
Speaker 1: Now I wanna talk more about your father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] because he's the one who left and he was just ready to leave because his father [Thomas Dorsey] was a strict disciplinarian.  Did he talk about his years in New York [New York] growing up after he left Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: My mother talked more about those years and I learned more about my father through listening to my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was not the kind of person that would reminisce about his youth.  In, in you know as you ask that question I try and think about.  Did I ever get the stories from him and it was my mother who was the storyteller.  She would tell us more about who my family was.  A lot of stuff I learned about my father's side of the family, I learned later on in life, and that's by asking questions, but not so much from my father sitting down and saying this is who your grandparents were and, and a whole lot of stuff.  You know you overhear conversations growing up with your parents and all this.  So you know some of this might stick with you later on but not about the early years of his growing up except for I know that he left and to go to chase in, in New York, (laughter) you know to be a young man in New York, because going to New York and, being in Harlem and, and all those places I'm sure that he heard about when he was stuck here in Atlanta, Georgia which was a small town then.  You know he just wanted to be with his brothers and sisters in the New York area.
Speaker 1: All right, well you said that you heard, well received some information about him through your mother.  What did she tell you?
Speaker 2: Well she talked about how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the only thing that my father ever said about their meeting is that he was singing in a choir and my father, my mother was the guest or the, you know a temporary organist because the organist was on vacation and he said he looked down and this woman that looked like an angel was sitting at the organ and my mother at that particular point in time had this long jet-black hair, fair-complected and he said he thought he saw an angel.  That's the closest he ever came to talking about how they met, now my mother on the other side you know said she was running like hell from him (laughter), she said I, you know I wasn't thinking about getting married, but he was in hot pursuit but my family, the Dorseys, was--Thomas A. Dorsey was my father's first cousin, and so Thomas A. Dorsey also had his eye on her, and so, you know she always said "I married the wrong Dorsey".
Story_ID: 529267
Speaker 1: All right so finish telling me the story about your (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, so Mama [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] was you know she played very well.  She was not a self-taught pianist and you know I didn't have that musical--she was formally trained, and so you know she could play the organ and the piano and all.  So my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] being, coming from a musical-like family, you know it just was--I guess enchanted with it and she was very pretty, she was smaller than me and I always think about "Golly, having eleven children and as little as she was, I, I don't know if I could have gone through that, but at any rate that's diverting from their early years and so she just said he chased her.  She was running hard and it was during the summer break and I guess the courtship was heavy and, and he convinced her to get married and in, and I think in a lot of ways she always regretting getting married at that point in time and giving up what she thought was going to be her career in music, and you would hear that come out in, in conversations sometimes when she would just talk about you know what she wanted to be.  So you would just hear that little pang, not so much that she regretted having the children, but you know she would use those old phrases you know, "I brought you in this world and I can take you out of it", you know she would just--then her discipline of us, but she also talked about the memories of, of being in the Dorsey family, because in Atlanta, Georgia they were very prominent and so they were the ones if you ever saw a play about [pianist, gospel singer, and first cousin once removed] Thomas A. Dorsey, or ever read of his road trips, well my father's sister used to travel with Thomas A. Dorsey, [gospel singer] Mahalia Jackson.  So she got a chance in growing up meeting all of those people, convening and, and working at my aunt's house and my father being a part of that group, you know just to socialize in it and their interaction.  So those kinds of stories came from my mother and, and the memories of, of those early days when you know when segregation you couldn't, you couldn't go places and how you had to live and all of that, my mother shared those stories with us.  And so Thomas A. Dorsey was a member of my father's family and his sister co-wrote one of the hymns with him is the 'Highway to Heaven' and I don't know if you ever heard that, but it's the 'Highway to Heaven' was written by Mary Gardner which was my aunt's married name with Thomas A. Dorsey and so she was a gospel singer--my another one of my father's sisters Mattie Dorsey was also a gospel--you know they, they were singers and play, and none of us on my family sort of--my mother's side picked up any of that you know, I can't sing worth a damn so (laughter) you know.  So I sang maybe like my mother, my mother was a signer she played the piano (laughter) so, but that was, that was the background of the Dorsey side.
Story_ID: 529268
Speaker 1: Okay, and Thomas Dorsey, of course, was a famed gospel singer and writer.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: In, and this was back in the early 1900s, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1930s and '40s [1940] I would say.
Speaker 1: Now your father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], so he just developed his, his singing talents in New York [New York], which is just?
Speaker 2: But he sang in a choir.
Speaker 1: At what, do you know what church it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but my father wasn't a singer, he later.
Speaker 1: Oh, he wasn't, oh.
Speaker 2: He later became a minister and I think that he was, he went to Union Theological School in New York, but that was later as my father, as his father passed on and he, you know he just picked up that mantel and assumed you know that it was his calling, and something that he said he resisted for a long time.  So he did that.
Speaker 1: What did he do before he became a minister?
Speaker 2: My father owned a drycleaners in Brooklyn, New York and the, the, one of the trades that was passed down you know that black men did at that time.  He pressed clothes and so he, that was his, where he worked you know with I guess some factory or whatever pressing clothes.  So he eventually he owned his, opened up his own dry cleaners and so did his brother open us his own dry cleaners and that was you know his business, and that's what he did you know my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] worked off and on in between children, but she never had a job for very long 'cause she was always pregnant, and so she was a homemaker for the most part.
Speaker 1: Before your father went to, to seminary what other education--did he go to school?
Speaker 2: I, yeah guess he graduated from high school here in Atlanta, Georgia and then he went to the Union Theological Seminary in, in New York.
Story_ID: 529269
Speaker 1: In New York, all right.  Now, you told me what your earliest childhood memory was of being sick, but let's talk about your early years in, in New York?
Speaker 2: Well, it--when, when I got sick and went to, to this, it was the hospital my--that, I think that in a way began to form who I later became, and, and I say that because it was a Catholic institution.  I was raised in you know from ten to thirteen by Catholic nuns.  There was no thing like television in a room; very seldom did we have the radio on.  I became a prolific reader and I read I think everything they had in the library.  I went through the Bible maybe three times because we were taught you know Catholicism; you know the Catholic studies every single day.  So, those were my early--I think that set the agenda in a lot of ways for who I became because I still and I still read a lot when I get a chance and I learned how to read fast, and I had one-on-one education.  I mean in a lot of ways I had a private-school education without walls, because they taught me at my bedside and then later on I was in a classroom with you know sixth-, seventh-, eighth-grade, ninth-grade students.  So when I finished one book, it wasn't like okay your stuck here, you just moved to the next one, so they had I call it like almost "school without walls" because I just moved through, through the books and math and everything.  Whatever I finished I went to the next level, and that sort of formed my ability to comprehend, my ability to think and, and to be alone, to, to be able to be comfortable with myself because that's all I had for the most part was myself and I was only, I think, I, I can't remember another black child in that institution.  So I was again, I, and I learned how to deal with a lot of white people in that environment, get along.  The nuns were all white, there was--nobody there--I had no role models of, of being a black kid.  So it sort of framed and I think about it who I became and so you know.
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the things that you thought about during that time?  Did you look forward to being well in--because you're saying this formulated who you would be or was the foundation, did you give a lot of thought to when I'm released from here what you were going to do?  What were your thoughts during that time?
Speaker 2: I (laughter) thought about getting outta there (laughter), and tried to get back home with my family, you know I just wanted to be with my family.  I know my baby sister was born while I was there and I--the only way I could see her was look through a window 'cause they didn't allow babies to visit.  So my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] would just stand out, you know they would stand outside the window and hold the baby so I could go and see her, so it was just a desire to get back home.  Did I know what I wanted to be in life?  No.  Did I--it was, it was just get back home to be with my family was my goal, get well to be with my family was my goal, so it was no, no you know surreal thinking other than I "I wanna go home", and, and then going home was a major transition.
Story_ID: 529270
Speaker 1: Before you go onto the next time of, of leaving and going home, tell me what was the, the treatment like as far as the medications that they gave you and just tell me what it was like.
Speaker 2: Okay, for six months I was not allowed to even put my foot even over the side of the bed so I was bedridden for six months.  I could move around the bed (laughter) but I couldn't get out of the bed.  So the treatment was complete bed rest, antibiotics and, and testing to see where I was. That's the only thing I truly remember but it was the bed rest.  Then that was six months, then the next six months, I was called--first of all they let me dangle my feet over the side of the bed so the blood circulation could be restored in my legs again and then for the next six months I was what you call a "part-time get outta the bed" patient.  The next two years I was a patient, I mean I could get up and walk around but it was, everything was very strict, very monitored.  I had to be in bed by a certain time.  It was a dormitory, it was no private rooms, it was a dormitory and I learned, we learned a sign language that we could you know communicate across that we didn't want the nuns to understand so I have a sign language that was made up I think in the hospital, but we could do "A, B, C, D, E, F, G" you know just, just the same as you were blind or, or hard of hearing, but it was our sign language, it's not the sign language they use now, but I, we could spell words just like that.  It would drive the nuns nuts (laughter), so but those were--the treatment was complete bed rest.  Now when I left there, people now ask the question, "Are you sure you had rheumatic fever?" And I said well, that was the diagnosis that kept me in this hospital for three years, so that's what they told me and I had a heart murmur and, but when they let me out of there, they let me out as a cured girl and I could go back home.  I stayed on antibiotics for another year, you know penicillin was the thing at the time, but you know I, I was released quote "cured."
Speaker 1: Well what sent you there?  We never did talk about.
Speaker 2: My mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey].
Speaker 1: About what symptoms.
Speaker 2: My mother, observing her child all of a sudden falling on the ground for no reason at all, and you know I told you I had asthma you know as a child and I would catch every cold that passed by and you know polio was very much happening then.
Speaker 1: Okay, but polio was very much a part of growing up and you know it was in the air at that particular point.  So I think my mother said she just noticed my falling down for no reason and I think she was probably maybe afraid that it might be polio so she would take me to the doctor and then I would go through all these various tests and it was this hospital called the Jewish Hospital [Brooklyn Jewish Hospital, later Interfaith Medical Center] in Brooklyn [New York], and so they kept me there in the Jewish Hospital I think for a few weeks taking me through various tests and as a result of that the diagnosis was rheumatic fever and I remember coming home just overhearing my mother and father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] talking about should we send her away, this is what they're proposing, and I'm just saying "send her where" (laughter) you know "are they talking about me", but that was the conversation about you know that I would maybe overhear them discussing what to do.  So that was how it was diagnosed, how she observed it, because you know rheumatic fever affects your joints and so those are some of the early symptoms, and so I guess my legs would just give out from under me.
Story_ID: 529271
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the hospital from 1949 to 1951?
Speaker 2: Yeah about that--at that time.
Speaker 1: Well I wanna step back just a little bit because we didn't talk about the years before that.  So when you first--the neighborhood, let's talk about the neighborhood that you lived in, in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you live in a home or an apartment?
Speaker 2: Yeah we had a brownstone home, they, my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] and mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] didn't own it, they rented it.  It was on Quincy Street in Brooklyn, New York and it was a neighborhood.  I went to Public School 26 in walking distance.  I, I just remember you know playing the kind of games that young people don't play now, double Dutch, jumped double Dutch, you know hopscotch, my mother tried to teach me music and she made the mistake of putting the piano next to the window where I could see my friends playing and so my father use to hear me crying at the piano every day.  He said "would you let that girl up" (laughter) so " and let her go outside and play", you know so I always regret that she did not insist that I truly learn how to play the piano, but I just grew up just you know, my mother and father from all standards were poor and I didn't realize that until I got to be much older.  I never realized that the toys that we got, like the bicycles at Christmas time because my father and mother were having children so rapidly, that they would go to the second-hand store and buy the bicycles and repaint them.  All I knew is that on Christmas morning that I had the bicycle or the toy I requested.  I didn't realize that my mother had this ritual--but decorating the tree on Christmas Eve, but that was because of the fact that she was able to buy that tree at really reduced prices on Christmas Eve and they were basically probably just giving them away and so those rituals was what I remembered but when you really begin to put two and two together, you understood what she was doing, and we just grew up.  She was a great cook, she knew how to sew so she made our clothes and you know she's, she was talented and you know having grown up in the rural south, I'm sure she learned how to cook and she knew how to can vegetables, preserve for the winter time.  She did all of those things so we grew up healthy, not knowing our real circumstances, but just a happy family, a happy family.  I mean not to the point that were oblivious of things around us, but in a cocoon, in a, in a lot of ways.  I don't--if I think about it today I could never imagine having those many kids.  Now there was four of us, then it became seven, 'cause my mother had triplets in between, and she was the first woman to have all three boys of natural birth in, at The Jewish Hospital in Brooklyn and this was before my father became a preacher, so my mother told us the story about how daddy showed up, then they told him you know "you have three boys" and passed out.  So that's how the newspaper wrote it up, "Passed out" (laughter).  So she said, "He didn't pass out, he was drunk" (laughter).  He had been with the boys drinking (laughter), so when he arrived at the hospital they gave him the news, he said he just--that's what happened, she said it was embarrassing (laughter).  So that was her recollection of my father's accepting the news of having three boys and so the family went from four to seven.  Now, the three boys had brain damage at birth because they weren't as equipped as today in delivery and so there was a process during--where they were coming through I guess the birth channel that the twins, there were two of them identical and one that wasn't you know, we sort think crept in, but the, the twins were more damaged and they ended up being--having to be institutionalized because they were retarded you know.
Story_ID: 529272
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your other siblings, list--you, you were the oldest.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And then tell me you know the progression of and their names?
Speaker 2: My next brother was Tommy and he was named after Thomas Dorsey so his--Thomas Dorsey was his name, then Carl, Carl Winfred was my next brother, my sister Cynthia and then there were the triplets and the triplets was Danny, Bobby and Joe.  Daniel, Robert and Joseph, full names and then, so that was the break, then the next one was Jimmy, James Dorsey, James Vaughn; Joyce Dorsey, George Dorsey, and then Morinda [ph.] and so we carried the family names in a lot of ways, you know from my father's [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey's] side and all and my mother's [Gladys Alderman Dorsey's]  side as well.  So they were always named after somebody on either side of the family.
Speaker 1: So it was a total of?
Speaker 2: There was a total eleven of us.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I have to tell you a funny story.  After the triplets were born, Jimmy came along and my mother said you know "I'm tired of being pregnant" (laughter), you know whatever.  So she found out she was pregnant again and these are stories you overhear, and she said that she jumped off--in, in New York [New York] they have what they call "vestibules" the little coves that you go into your house, you know you go in and shed your clothes and everything, they call them vestibules.  So she said she jumped off this vestibule to try to force a miscarriage (laughter).  She said so seven months later, Jimmy was born (laughter) and became my father's favorite child because Jimmy knew that my mother didn't wanna be pregnant again you know so, Jimmy was my father's--we always tease him that he was my father's favorite.
Story_ID: 529273
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we were talking about the neighborhood and you gave me a description of, of your home, but talk to me more about the neighborhood itself, who lived in the neighborhood, who some of your friends were?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot of the friends.  I remember one, one friend only and I have no idea where she was, where she is now, but her name was Gwendolyn Hayes and I lost track of her needless to say 'cause I moved here as a teenager to Atlanta, Georgia but that was my best friend.  You know we were always at each other's houses playing, but I do remember you know, it was a happy neighborhood, it wasn't crime.
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the people or the stores, where did you shop?
Speaker 2: Well there was a grocery store on the corner.  It's like what we're talking about today, having urban, walkable communities.  Brooklyn, New York was an urban, walkable community because of the fact you didn't have cars, you had public transportation; but you didn't have cars to get into drive every place you wanted to go, so you had to walk.  So there were grocery stores, there was your drycleaners; there was your candy shop, that was my favorite place, the candy shop, the ice cream stores all within walking distance, so it was a neighborhood and it was a mix of apartments, brownstones and so those were the kinds of--when we talk later on about what I do now, some of those memories helped form what I later did in life, and so I would say to you that it was the kind of neighborhood that you'd want to grow up in because you knew who lived across the street from you, or next door to you or even down the street.  You were friends with those people.  You know, you as a mother would visit, that was your outlet, visit and have coffee or just have a conversation or gossip with your neighbor.  It's not like it is today where you go into your home, shut the door and you don't really communicate anymore.  So that's what I remember growing up in that neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York.  Now were there sides of New York that our families told us not to go, of course, my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey]  "you don't go on Stuyvesant near that--you know, you just don't walk that way, because that's a bad element".  So it was before Brooklyn became run-down and deteriorated as many parts of it--it is today and so sometimes we go back and, you know my, especially my brother Jimmy wants to go back and look at where you know he remembered being a young child, and so the house we grew up in is no longer there, it's been torn down.
Story_ID: 529274
Speaker 1: And you said that you went to P.S. 68 which--
Speaker 2: [P.S.] 26.
Speaker 1: [P.S.] 26, I'm sorry, [P.S.] 68 is where I went to school.
Speaker 2: Is that right, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me about the teachers there, was there a, a teacher that might have encouraged you or someone that you just remember?
Speaker 2: I remember being told on when I would cut school or something, and I, and I tell you this because when I was in you know, I call it the "school without walls" when I was in the hospital, I had passed the grade levels so when I came back and went to school in the seventh grade, I was put back in you know my normal class and I was bored silly because I had all that stuff and more and so I would cut school (laughter) and just you know "I don't need to go to school" and you know transitioning they didn't have the psychologist to help you transition back into being from a real sheltered environment into the masses you know like they would do today, and so my way of coping and getting out of being bored silly was just not to go to school.  I would just cut on occasion, but you know you always got caught.  They would call my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] or something, and they would know where to go to look for us (laughter) and so you know I had--all I remember was the discipline, the fact that the teachers cared about your not being there.
Story_ID: 529275
Speaker 1: You were telling me about school and how you were bored because you know you had taken all of those classes.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But in P.S. 26 during that time tell me about elementary school.
Speaker 2: Well P.S. 26 was the elementary school, you know they went from the first grade to the eighth grade back in those days.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So that was the elementary to middle school.
Speaker 1: Oh it was a middle school as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah they didn't have no separation then.
Speaker 1: Ok.
Speaker 2: You just went from one through eight and then high school as from nine to twelve.
Speaker 1: Oh I understand okay.
Speaker 2: Okay so.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So that was the elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I came out, out of the hospital back into the elementary school.
Speaker 1: Elementary school, oh okay.
Speaker 2: As we would describe it today.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But those teachers, you know as I said when you know, know the family, they told on you, but you know my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] believed that we should always go to school clean and being an urban public school you had a mix of students and, and I had my share of opening my mouth and telling my brothers that they had to fight my battles and (laughter) and so you know I, I was chased home a few times by a group of people who were determined to beat me up because I felt my brothers had my back and my brothers would say they didn't want to fight my battles and so we all would run home in order to avoid being beaten up.
Speaker 1: Were kids?
Speaker 2: But it was, it was--I would say it was a happy experience for the most part.
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the fights about because you said you know even though you didn't know at the time that you were poor but you went to school every day, your mother could sew.
Speaker 2: My mother could sew, we looked good, we were clean, the--you know as I said I didn't realize it but in a lot of ways we were probably better off than a whole lot of other kids because my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] owned his drycleaners.  When I say that he probably rented the space but that was his drycleaners and so from outside looking in you know people probably thought we were maybe better off than most.  The--I would say you know that the fact that Mama had a lot of children, but we didn't seem to be bad off as a result of it.  She was a caring parent, my father the man of the house, traditional, it--you know the kind that read what 'Leave it to Beaver' family (laughter).  We couldn't represent that, it was the black 'Beaver' family but it was a bit on that order you know.  The same problems that you know they didn't discuss with us I am sure they had those within my immediate family.  I just grew up knowing all those things that young people do to--trying to bake cakes you know 'cause later loved to bake, but my mother allowed me to do that.
Story_ID: 529276
Speaker 1: She, she just, she, she was an innovative kind of person, playing games with us but also was the disciplinarian.  I mean you know it was not the "spare the rod" family.  We had plenty of rods in there, and but I got everything you know like--I remember, I don't know if you remember the red raincoats with the red boots and the red cap; and she had ordered that for me.  Now there was a candy store that I mentioned earlier that was up the street and they always had the kind of candy my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] wasn't gonna buy for me and so she had I think maybe it was ten dollars--I don't know how much this little outfit cost that she had ordered for me through the catalogue and the candy store was up the street, the money was on the mantel, and I was, wanted you know stuff in the candy store.  So I helped myself to some of that money on the mantel, and this is where I talk about neighborhoods, and I went to the candy store but I didn't buy the candy just for myself, I treated my friends, and so the man called my mother or got in touch with my mother and said "Hattie is down here treating the neighborhood to candy and ice cream and sodas" or whatever.  So my mother came and, and I said "oh no I'm gonna get it", and she was friendly as she walked me back home.  You know she wasn't jerking me or anything you know.  So I said "maybe I might escape".  When we went through that vestibule and there was a tree limb waiting for me and I got the worst whipping for borrowing that money; that if you put anything up under my nose that resembled a dollar, it wasn't mine, I was never gonna touch it again and so that was her way of saying "you know you, you don't do this", and she did not spare the rod believe me.  I think that was the longest disciplinary action taken out on a child (laughter).  I hid under tree, under bushes or whatever.  I ran out the house, I ran under beds, I ran under tables.  I didn't get away from that tree limb, so I, you know that was my lesson, don't bother the money.  And that's the way, she was at home every day so she had, and you--just can you imagine being in the household with eight children or whatever at any one given time and, and managing all of us?  But I, I you know in addition to being bored and all that in school, I learned a lot and I, I would say that a lot of my strength, my strong will, my ability to lead came about because of the fact that I got all those lessons growing up.  I had to be the surrogate mother, I had to help take care of my brothers and I'd tell 'em sometimes when they'd get on me.  I'd say you know I really should hate all of you because I had to take care of you, (laughter) you know growing up you know, but it also taught us responsibility, responsibility.
Story_ID: 529277
Speaker 1: So now when you leave P.S. 68, you're going--I keep saying 68 because (laughter) when I say P.S. I just automatically, I'm sorry think about my school, but P.S. 26  you graduate from the eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And?
Speaker 2: And we made our own dresses and you know 'cause they taught you the homemaking.  I think they'll call it "homemakers classes" and.
Speaker 1: Home economics.
Speaker 2: Home economics, and so I and well part of it was to make your graduation dress and I made my dress by hand.  There was no sewing machine, the dress was made, picked out our pattern and made by hand.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] not have a sewing machine at home?
Speaker 2: Oh, they didn't, that was in the classroom that you didn't, they didn't have sewing machines.  You learned how to stitch by hand and so it wasn't, I didn't take, I couldn't take it home.  It was in the classroom so they didn't have a sewing machine for every student.  So I made my dress by hand.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who your home economics teacher was?
Speaker 2: No (laughter) not at all.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: All right, what other classes did you take?
Speaker 2: Well there was the math, the reading and everything you know it was--I digress a little bit about school.  I use to think that my mother was the most beautiful person I've ever seen, and she use to dress up in between you know when she wasn't having children going to jobs and all.  So she had her little outfits you know that she wore.  Well I thought my mother was so pretty and we were like the same size that I was, when my mother left I would put her clothes on.  The only way that I knew that I wasn't dressed appropriately one day was when somebody said "Why does Hattie wear those old people clothes" (laughter) and so that broke me from wearing my mother's clothes that she didn't know I was wearing you know, but you know it, it was just the, the way the teachers behaved or if you were outta order you know, your parents had to show up.  Even when I moved back to Atlanta that was the case, your parents had to show up.  There was no sending a note back signed or anything.  They had to come and talk to why you had behaved the way you behaved.  So it was a parent interaction.  I wanted to throw that in.
Story_ID: 529278
Speaker 1: Now after being bored and, and cutting classes you still were a pretty good student.
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say that back in the day before they started talking about "gifted" kids and everything else that I was probably gifted and I, I was probably gifted because of being stuck at the sanatorium or the institution for three years, with nothing else do to but read.  You learn a lot so, yeah my comprehension skills was at its peak.
Speaker 1: At its peak--what type of books did you read?
Speaker 2: I, You--they just recently announced that they're gonna have some series on 'Nancy Drew.'  I think it's on TV or something I saw it, and I started laughing because I read 'Nancy Drew' at least three times (laughter) so you know every book in 'Nancy Drew,' you know mysteries.  Just anything they would have in the library that was--well they had age appropriate stuff, but everything they had it in the library "Little Women", you know just little things that kids don't wanna read today, and I said it was basically a white, it was all white.  That's the kind of books I read, Louisa Alcott's, 'Little Women' you know stories like that, Jane Austen, you know.  Those were the books I read and became familiar with and so when I went to, back to public school they weren't reading that, you know.
Speaker 1: So what, do you go to high school in New York?
Speaker 2: I went to--I, I've always had this problem that I never know what I wanted, never knew what I wanted to be when I grew up, and I somehow or another came to a notion that I wanted to be either a dress designer or interior decorator.  So I went off to this school called Charles--it, it was initially named Straubenmuller High School [Straubenmiller Textile High School, later Charles Evans Hughes High School, then Bayard Rustin Educational Complex a.k.a. the Humanities Educational Complex].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, say that name again?
Speaker 2: Straubenmuller, S-T-R-A-U-B-E-M-I-L-L-E-R [sic] High School, and then they named it while I was there.  They changed the name to Charles Evan[s] Hughes.  I really don't even know if that high school is still in existence but it was more or less like a fine arts high school; musical, interior design and stuff like that along with being you know the traditional courses and so I--to my chagrin where I thought I knew how to draw.  I found out I didn't know how to draw you know because you had to draw the long lines for dress design.  So my figures did not come out flowing, they came out like kinda chunky.  So I, you know I kinda got discouraged with that even though I still liked dress designing and then I also had to take interior design.
Story_ID: 529279
Speaker 1: So interior design was you know the things I played with.  All of that was interrupted because my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] accepted a church here in Atlanta [Georgia].  My, also my mother's [Gladys Alderman Dorsey's] father had gotten sick and so she had to go to [Teachey] North Carolina to help take care of him.  So you know in those days you know, you took care of your own so I spent some time finishing, not finishing but taking some classes in North Carolina and then eventually moving here to Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay now let's see your father, now he owned the dry-cleaning store and that's where he goes to seminary in New York [New York] or theological school?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In New York and so he accepts the position?
Speaker 1: He went to school at night
Speaker 2: At night, okay.  So when you leave you go and the whole family goes to North Carolina first?
Speaker 1: Just a couple of us, not all of us.  I went, I, I would call the first four (laughter), the first four and then eventually the rest, but it was you know, we had to go where we had to go to help take care and so I went to, I was with my mother all the time because as I said I was the surrogate mother and so part of my job was to help take care of the younger kids but also I went to high school for I guess maybe almost a year in North Carolina.  That was the tenth grade.
Speaker 2: What high school did you go to?
Speaker 1: It was called Charity High [later Charity Middle School, Rose Hill, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: And how was the transition from New York to North Carolina to that school?
Speaker 1: Oh they thought I was hot stuff you know, I was big city girl, coming to the rural school district you know that all the little towns got on the school bus and you went.  So you know I was, I was the person that you know, that all the girls were mad at because the boys were chasing me you know (laughter) and so you know, I, I and, and I did, I had done things in New York that they hadn't done in the south.
Speaker 2: Like what?
Speaker 1: Oh, you know competing in musicals or you know, I, I always say I had a little ham in me you know so, and, and so I, I would, I like to use my creative juices and that would work with the teachers and put on a school play or whatever else have you and so I, I was liked in a lot of instances and hated in some others you know, but.
Story_ID: 529280
Speaker 1: You were very fashion conscious also weren't you?
Speaker 2: Always very fashion conscious, so it's, you know and my mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] could sew.  I remember I, I liked the arts, you know I went to an art school.  So I loved ballet and tap and everything that a lot of kids weren't exposed to and so I for, for the school's, what do you call "talent contest", I put on, I put together a girls and we did like a little ballet troupe (laughter) my mother made our costumes out of crepe paper and so you know and, and we tutu'd across the floor and danced and everybody was just amazed you know at my little--I don't know if I did "Swan Lake" or whatever you know (laughter), it was something and those were some of the memories I remember at that high school, but it was a rural high school and so anything we did was just off the chart you know, so it was fun.
Speaker 1: Did you take dance lessons?
Speaker 2: I wanted to but I couldn't.  I tell my daughter and I there's--I retraced some of the things through my child.  I remember as a little girl my mother taking me to see the [Radio City] Rockettes and I thought it was the most beautiful show I had ever seen, it was like a fairy tale and so I did the same thing for her when she was young, but and I wanted from that point on to dance.  My joints wouldn't allow me to take dance lessons.
Speaker 1: And what were some, did you sing?  Did you ever learn to play the piano, although you said you don't think that you sing well, but did you learn to play the piano?
Speaker 2: I got past the early, but I have no skill at playing the piano so that was something when you put it in the list of "what you regretted you didn't do when you should have done it" that might be on that checklist.
Speaker 1: So now what year are we in when you're in the tenth grade in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: We're in the early like '52 [1952], '53 [1953] might be, 'cause I graduated in '57 [1957] from high school.  So it was in that period--it take it about '54 [1954], about late '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Fifty four [1954], okay and so your family, well half of your family is there.  Where did the other children go?
Speaker 2: They said my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] was still in New York [New York] you know, it's just my mother would go back to take care of my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And eventually, now in what year do you move to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) my father in that period of time was being courted to come back and pastor this small church in Atlanta.  Daddy King, reverend M.L. King, Sr. was good friends of my grandfather [Joseph T. Dorsey] so he was helping to orchestrate his moving back you know, 'cause I think my father wanted to move back to Atlanta.  My mother didn't want to come to Atlanta, but my father did.  So he's, he basically was in that movement of getting you know his position here, and so while my mother was backwards and forwards dealing with the grandfather, daddy was negotiating this move and so I think there was a little friction going on about my mother moving back her and so she, she eventually did but she, she came under protest.  Let's put it that way (laughter).
Story_ID: 529281
Speaker 1: And so you're only, you're there [Teachey, North Carolina] '52 [1952], '53 [1953] and you come to Atlanta [Georgia]; and what high school do you go to in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: David T. Howard High School.  My brother, my oldest brother, the one next to me and, and I were the first two.  So we came to once my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] found a house and I lived with, you know we lived with his, his mother [Ara Morinda Thurman Dorsey], my grandmother for that first year while daddy got himself established.  My mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] stayed in North Carolina with her family, as you know for the transition.  I didn't wanna to leave New York or any place you know, I, I was protesting myself about giving up my friends and how my father made certain that I moved or, or closed my mouth, was that "okay you can stay, but you're not gonna get any new school clothes".  So I moved (laughter).  I shut up and moved to Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the transition from North Caronia in high school in, in till you come here?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I, when I think about school in New York [New York] and school in North Carolina which was to me brief, and I always said, in a lot of ways discounted you know it because it was a you know a few months there, well not a few months, it was maybe a half year or whatever but it, it was brief but the schools in the New York, the goal for most of my friends was to get out of high school.  My mother and father might have been talking about going to college but that was discounted.  Let me get out of high school and get a job, so I can be on my own making my way, and I would say back in those days that you know for a lot of black people getting a high school education was a major achievement, but so it was--you know I came to the South and started David T. Howard [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and in New York being a part of the in-crowd was the kids that was jumping around.  (Phone ringing in background --I don't know how to help you all get that).
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: But how, it's, it's to jumping around being "cool" was "in" in New York.  Coming here the in-crowd was the smart kids.  So I had to reverse some thinking 'cause I always wanted to be among the in-crowd.  And so the popular kids were smart.  Now I've had the benefit of this stuff, you know being in a institution where I was you know "school without walls" going to a high school that allowed me with creative talents and all, but then coming to a school that was nurturing and segregated and the school I was in New York was not segregated.  The school in North Carolina was but, this was segregated and they were in encouraging us to go to college, and so I had to rethink stuff.  You know what group did I wanna be in, and so needless to say I ended up with the smart kids.  My grade scores in New York were dismal.  I was not, I mean I wasn't trying to be an "A" student; I was trying to get outta school.  So grades didn't make no difference, here they made a difference.  So I went from what I would call a mediocre student to the honor roll and so that you know I just, you know flipped to the other side, and based on being ahead in New York and the south being a little bit behind, I aced you know, it easy.  Oh, they thought I was smart, but I had been through all that stuff already so but high school I would say this was turning point.  This sort of set the direction on where I was to go.
Story_ID: 529282
Speaker 1: So you knew you were gonna go to college now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You just hadn't decided what it was you wanted to do yet?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't have the foggiest idea but my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] and mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] were gleeful that you know my attitude had shifted.  It was a question of where I was gonna go to school, and not "if".
Speaker 1: If?
Speaker 2: I was gonna go.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh I'm still very close to a young lady named Maxine Humphrey, she's now Maxine Wilson.  She and I were the best of friends.  We use to call and coordinate our wardrobes every day.  Gwendolyn Middlebrooks who was Gwendolyn Harris at the time a majorette; James, James, oh what is his last name?  I can't remember his last name but it will come back.  Robert Davis, all of these were my close school mates and they're still friends.
Speaker 1: So did you join more organizations now?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was--class president.
Speaker 1: What were you a part of?
Speaker 2: Senior-vice president of my senior class, nominated for most beautiful, but didn't get that one.  The--I was encouraged because they said my voice was different.  That's because I had come from New York [New York] to study broadcasting which I didn't.  I was encouraged to major in math, which I didn't (laughter) you know and so these were teachers that were encouraging me and friends, I didn't make it to be a debutante you know and me and my girlfriend would run home to see if we got our letter 'cause I just knew I was gonna be picked to be one of the debutantes so I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Who was doing the selection, who was in charge of the--do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, it was a sorority and my mother was not a part of sorority, my father was not a fraternity person.  So needless to say I guess, neither one of us--our, our parents was in that little mix and so consequently I didn't get picked and you know we were heartbroken you know, how could we get passed over, you know "do you know who we are" you know, so we were part of the popular kids but you know it's like the homecoming event.  I was one of the ones who was broadcasting from the stadium with you know the queen and the king and all that kinda stuff.
Story_ID: 529283
Speaker 1: Was there anything else that was important about your high school days at, at [David T.] Howard [High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: At Howard I think, it was, it was a turning point when I came to Atlanta and went to high school there because it was an environment where the teachers were nurturing.  They wanted us to be successful; they wanted us to secure higher education.  They had I think more dreams and more visions for us than we had for ourselves and so it was no, it was, it was a matter of our absorbing what they had to offer.  It wasn't a matter of; of like in New York [New York] sending a note home, it was more enhanced about your parents being involved.  They knew who they were and, and because my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] was a minister here, they had high expectations and I always said that they told me a little bit too much, but it, it was involving.  You know my brothers were members of the band; we were encouraged to extracurricular activities. I mean it was just the whole thing.  It was just a, a very major turning point in, in my life.
Speaker 1: Who was influential in helping you decide where you would go to college?
Speaker 2: The teachers, you know my, my, the teachers, the school environment.  Where I went was where a lot of my friends were gonna go.  My aunt had gone to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  Now Spellman was too strict and I stayed there for one whole semester and got outta there.  It was a Baptist-related school, my father was a Baptist minister, they knew my father.  They would call him up and tell him "Reverend Dorsey you need to take the car away from Hattie, don't let her drive your car".  "Reverend Dorsey Hattie fell asleep in Chapel today".  "Reverend Dorsey she cut biology again".  "Reverend Dorsey, Reverend Dorsey, Reverend Dorsey", plus they invited him to come speak at chapel sometimes and so there was no escaping, you know my father and who I was and, and I hated it.  So I said, "let me outta here", so I went across the street to Clark College [later Clark Atlanta University] and that was a school that my father--it was Methodist so my father didn't have that connection.  It was co-ed and I always said that Spelman was trying to make me a "lady" and I wasn't quite ready to become that yet.  And so Clark was a different environment.  It was not as strict, and so I, I enjoyed Clark and my father use to say, "I'm sending you to school to get an education, not to major in boys", and I was always like "why can't I do both" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they let you make the decision to leave Spellman?
Speaker 2: Yep, they let me do it, I mean you know my father's, my father's position was "get an education".  I mean I wanted to go away to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and he couldn't afford it.  So he said pick one of these schools here, so basically it was "just go to school".
Story_ID: 529284
Speaker 1: And, and I'm sure, I'm not sure whether we mentioned your father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey]'s Church?
Speaker 2: Tabernacle Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And where was it located?
Speaker 2: Over here on Boulevard, it's still there.
Speaker 1: And so Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia], tell me about your days in Clark?
Speaker 2: Um, I wouldn't say.
Speaker 1: What organizations?  Did you belong to organizations?
Speaker 2: Here, there and everywhere I wasn't as involved in college as I was in high school.  I was more--became the socialite, I would say.  I was not the best student in the world.  So it was a "rite of passage" in, in essence.  I had no idea what I wanted to major in.  I knew what I didn't want to do.  I didn't want to be a teacher. I didn't want to be a social worker and I didn't want to be a nurse, and at that point in time those were like the three major professions that you picked, and so I didn't want to be any of those three.  I didn't know what I wanted to be but I had taken typing and shorthand in high school and they offered a course, you know a major in secretarial science at Clark and I just got to the point where I admitted that's what I majored in.  It was the best thing for me as time went on, but that was my major.  I took the business courses and everything else but they believed a girl needed to type and get a job you know so that was one of the things that we were able to do is become secretaries.
Speaker 1: Now you entered Spellman in '57 [1957] and you just stayed there for one semester.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you went directly to Clark the next semester?
Speaker 2: Well I had to almost like begin because I only spent one semester.  So I went to--the year later, you know I skipped a semester and so I went a year later and, and went into the class of '58 [1958] at, at.
Speaker 1: Who was the?
Speaker 2: At the class I started in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: In '58 [1958].  Who was the President of Spellman at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God.  It was Dr. [Albert E.] Manley [husband of HM Audrey Manley].  I had to stop and think (laughter), Dr. Manley.
Speaker 1: And who was the President of Clark?
Speaker 2: You know what I cannot even remember because I, I said now I have to stop and think because I haven't thought about that in so long, but I will call you up and let you know that one (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's okay (laughter), all right.
Speaker 2: I ought to go back and find my yearbook.
Speaker 1: And, so you enjoyed the secretarial science classes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned how to take, to type very well and take shorthand.
Speaker 1: So you did very well in that.  So you excelled in that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't know if excel would be the word, but I did well and I, you know I, you had to take a foreign language, you had to take the business the course, you had to take the social sciences and the English and everything else.  So I did okay.
Story_ID: 529285
Speaker 1: Now the Civil Rights Movement was heating up during this time.  Were you involved in any of the activities as a student?
Speaker 2: Observation for the most part, my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] was very involved.  He was friends with the King family.  In fact if you ever passed the Historic Center, you would see the house with the family, you know was where the Kings grew up and I use to have dinner in that house, so you know and I taught Sunday school at Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] for Mrs. King.
Speaker 1: Okay well tell me about some of those times.
Speaker 2: Daddy was like involved in the Civil Rights Movement, he was the first Chair of Operation Breadbasket which was the predecessor to [HM Jesse L. Jackson's] Operation PUSH and all, but he and, and because Daddy King [the Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] was instrumental in bringing him back, my father mentored A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams King] 'cause he was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Daddy was taking some refresher courses at Morehouse so Cameron Alexander, Reverend A.D. King and Carl Moncrieff were young ministers going to school there.  So Daddy mentored that, Daddy was a, known as one of the few people that could manage A.D. because A.D. had a, a drinking problem and so Daddy was like the person that could, you know if A.D. was acting up or whatever, Daddy was sent to help him.  He was very instrumental in, in like starting up Head Start programs and stuff here in Atlanta.  He believed in buying property to house members of his congregation who you know couldn't afford to live in other places.  So Daddy was, as, as I look back at some of my, the stuff that sort of changed my way of thinking, was that daddy had a profound impact without knowing it on what I do today or what I did in my profession.  I would have to go to church, you know, pastor's daughter, you had to go to church.  I went to church and I would put on big hats and sit in the back, you know getting over Saturday night (laughter).  So but I was absorbing what was happening in high school you know, and I don't know but I was absorbing what was happening in high school and not in high school but in, what my father was doing during Civil Rights, the marches, the saying to your congregation, "You're gonna wear last Easter's hats 'cause we're gonna boycott Richard's Department Store.  We can't eat at their counters, we can't shop.  We can't try on clothes in their dressing rooms, we can't buy".  So he basically stopped a whole lot of stuff you know with reference to his congregation.
Story_ID: 529286
Speaker 1: You were also telling me about the things that your father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], that you were observing during that time and you had mentioned earlier that you know, you also had dinner at the King home.  What was the King family like in your opinion through your eyes?
Speaker 2: Through my eyes, I would say a traditional Baptist family who, who knew about the injustices in our society to what African Americans, and wanted to do something about it; leaders in our community taking a stand.  I remember, this is jumping forward a bit, but I remember Daddy King or Reverend Borders and some of the other ministers being our leaders.  They, they were the ones who stood in the pulpits during the Civil Rights days and told their congregations what to do, and, and what we ought to be doing and how we ought to vote, and, and had the people come, you know the white people who were running for office pay a visit to their church and tell their church, this church what they were gonna do for black folks.  So I witnessed a lot of that, I mean was I all caught up in it?  No, but you know that part I call the "storehouse" in our brain was operating.  It, it's like this is something you just put, you always call a "toolbox," you put it in the back of your brain and you know that you're gonna use it.  You, you may not even know you're gonna use it someday.  So, and it's, it's tactics and strategy and, and using your voice and your inner convictions for stuff.  You know daycare was important, well our churches provided the day care, and, and you know it's, it was just the involving of the black church back in the day.  So that you know, I just, I just grew up in Atlanta [Georgia] with the black church as, as a foundation, and, and maybe not on purpose was I absorbing all of this.  I was, I was a regular teenager, you know I wanted to party, wanted my boyfriends, wanted, you know the stuff that every young girl wanted, you know the fun (laughter) you know, but at the same time building some of the leadership skills that later came to bear.
Story_ID: 529287
Speaker 1: You mentioned Operation Breadbasket and that was something that your father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], the start of the Atlanta [Georgia] chapter.  What do you remember about that?
Speaker 2: Just only that you know his sitting down with Delta Airlines, Coca Cola, saying "you will hire people other than janitors" and you know the Coca Cola they couldn't drive the trucks, you know you had to pull the crates off.  You rode the back of the thing to pull the crates off to deliver but you couldn't drive the truck. You couldn't get any jobs within the company itself and so you know, just his negotiating that, but still it was just, you know I knew it--were that caught up in it.  The Civil Rights Movement and the 1963 March on Washington, I remember the behavior of some of the black folks here and especially the professional black people that you know, and it's still that way you know remove yourself from this activity.  So at the school I was trying to watch on the television the March on Washington and I remember the principal coming in and saying "turn that off", but you know so I kept it on the radio and you know it's just not, you know there was that separation still sometimes.
Speaker 1: So the, the leadership of Atlanta really didn't want to be involved with the foot soldiers who were really about?
Speaker 2: I think that was part of it, it was still, the--it was the ministers that was you know leading, not so much the professionals in our society that was leading it.  So yeah a good, a good terminology was the "foot soldiers" was lead by the black church.
Speaker 1: Was there anything else about Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, I you know as I said I wasn't a spectacular student (laughter), I can't say that I lead any, any activities at Clark other than to get through.
Speaker 1: Well did you join any sororities?
Speaker 2: No, I was going to become an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] and I went to what do they call it, the rush and, and there was is-- you know how you have some vibes with some of the girls?  And I said now if they pick on me in the line like I know they pick on you, I would never be able to take it and there ain't no way, there ain't no way to even go through this thing 'cause I'm not gonna survive it, so I didn't do it (laughter).
Story_ID: 529288
Speaker 1: So you graduate in what year?
Speaker 2: I came outta there in '62 [1962]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-two?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so what happens next after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well you know the pressure then was to find yourself a husband (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there a pressure really, a pressure?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], "Now you know you went to school and you didn't come out with nothing'".  So you know and "you keep going through these boyfriends".  So he was like "when are you gon' pick one"?  So it was that pressure there, subtle sometimes and overt.  My mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey] on the other side was saying, "You could wait until you're thirty-five", you know so my father was saying like "now", but my mother was saying "wait".  So (laughter) it was, it was funny but at any rate I waited.  I've, I've been married three times so my brothers tell me I can't keep a man (laughter).  So I, I got married the first time at twenty-five and, and I would say it was peer pressure.  All my friends were getting married, all of 'em were having big weddings and there was I.  So at some point an unlucky soul passed by and I decided I would marry him.
Speaker 1: And who was this, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Samuel Thomas out of Washington, D.C.  It was a long-distance courtship and I had the big church wedding, hottest day I think in Atlanta [Georgia] at that particular point in time.  Decided I was going to have a candlelight ceremony and that, and there was no air conditioning in the church (laughter) and so I said God was giving me all the hints in the world why I shouldn't do this and I didn't pay him no attention.  I had a pretty wedding, so (laughter).  That was it, it was a big wedding 'cause I was the first daughter to get married and so you know the church turned it all out and I was ready to come home after I moved to Washington within the first month.  I survived it for three, three years.
Story_ID: 529289
Speaker 1: So you moved to Washington [D.C.], what did you do in Washington while you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was again a changing point; I went to work for the Department of the Interior first.  I was gon' give it a shot of being an at-home wife, but didn't last too long because I was bored silly.  So, I, I did get a job and I went to work for the [U.S] Department of [the] Interior just more or less along the line of a secretary.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: 1964, '64 [1964], and so I went to work for the Department of [the] Interior and, and I remember there's, this was a, again as a part of the Civil Rights Movement.  They were beginning to put black people in certain jobs and try to promote us up and all that.  And so they told me they said, "We don't discriminate here," and so I had come in with this older white woman was in her--a former homemaker and I said, "well if I get promotions the same as she gets, I'm cool, so you don't have to tell me that."  So I guess I put this notion there so my husband was telling me you won't get past a grade three.  So I got to grade three and so he said you're gon' be stuck there because you know black women only get twos and threes so you gon' be stuck there.  So I said, you know, it was a job.  So I got my four in three months and he couldn't believe it, then I got my five and so, but I also was--I had put my application in for a job that had a grade level eight.  You know I went to a grade level eight and I had subbed for this woman who had broken her foot and she was close to retirement.  So it was a younger white man who said, "Hattie, I think you ought to apply for this job because I don't think she's gonna stay very much longer when she comes back."  So I saw the grade eight, more money and I said sure you know and I did and they of course told me I was too young and I might get pregnant, and I said well I wasn't planning on getting pregnant but the too young, maybe I could accept, except for they hired a young, blond, blue-eyed young lady and brought her over for me to train her and I said, I was nice to the lady and I said you know, "Good to meet you," but something picked me up by my shoulders and marched me down to the director's office and I said, "I applied for the job, you said I was too young.  You hired somebody younger than me and if I'm too young to hold the job, too young to train her, and I'm not going to."  "Well we didn't know you were serious."  I said, "How much more serious is it than filling out the application?"  So I filled out the application, they said, they couldn't say anything.  So I turned around I went and filed down to the EEOC [Equal Opportunity Employment Commission].  Well I was the first one to have ever done that and it upset the whole Department of the Interior.  I got job offers from all over the department.  Well it, that wasn't the issue.  I didn't want to leave the man that I was working for 'cause he was a good boss.  That was not the issue, it was the fact that they had discriminated and it was evident because I was black and this man who was the department head did not want me.  So I just filed a suit.  I didn't take it too far, you know I got the job offer so I decided to stay where I was.  You know I didn't carry it to court or anything like that.  Then I went to work for Charles Weltner [D-Georgia] who was a Congressman.
Story_ID: 529290
Speaker 1: Charles who?
Speaker 2: Charles Weltner, he was a [Georgia] Fifth District Congressman, the one that [HM] John Lewis holds the seat, and I got a job with him and at that point in time, he was the only southerner to have voted for the Civil Rights Act 1964 and of course he was seen as a rebel and so Atlanta [Georgia] was putting pressure on him to have somebody black on his staff and so my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] called me up and said they're looking for someone, they're claiming they can't find anybody qualified.  I want you to go over there and apply.  So I went over and applied and I got the job, got a fancy title, "caseworker".
Speaker 1: And what for what department was this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: This was Charles Weltner, department of-[U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: In Congress, okay.
Speaker 2: So I was one of the few black people on Capitol Hill at that time.  I would say that with whatever I was unofficially observing my father go through during the Civil Rights period, you know going to work for a Congressman, the dots began to connect, and I began to understand what my father was pushing for and how public policy affected what was happening to us as black people in the United States and so my feeling at that particular point in time was that it was, I guess place where I needed to be and to learn that began to chart my course and I knew then what I wanted to do.  As I said before I had no idea where I wanted to go, so I went to work after leaving Capitol Hill because he decided not to seek reelection because Georgia law at that time, among the Democratic party meant that you had to sign on the dotted line that you would support whatever candidate that the slate had on it, and Lester Maddox was running for Governor at that time and Charles Weltner said I cannot support a racist and withdrew from running for Congress.  It put me out of a job but it also showed me how some people you know could believe and act on their beliefs and that was him.
Speaker 1: So then I left and went to work for the [National] Urban League.
Speaker 2: Now what year, you were at the Department of the Interior in '64 [1964] till, until when?
Speaker 1: About '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: And then '66 [1966] is when you went to, went to the Hill?
Speaker 1: To work for on the Hill.
Speaker 2: And you stayed there until what year?
Speaker 1: He was at--I think I worked for him a little over a year before he decided to resign.  So you know it is only two years, so for each term so he put me out of a job and I went to work for the Urban League.
Speaker 2: And how did you come upon that position?
Speaker 1: I think somebody told me about a job there and, and I knew about the Urban League, because you know working on Congress, [HM] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.], you know who I knew from Atlanta, I don't think he had gone to work for the Urban League at that time.  No, he had not gone to work for the Urban League, but you know I knew the agencies involved in community service, community building, Civil Rights and so the Urban League was one of and they had an opening for an administrative assistant and I applied for it.
Story_ID: 529291
Speaker 1: You were talking about your beginning to work for the Urban League.
Speaker 2: The Urban League, yeah.  Well, connecting the dots happened with what the struggle was all about, the [Civil Rights] Movement, working for [Rep.] Charlie Weltner [D-Georgia] who happened to be one of the most moralistic people that I knew.  His morals were extremely high, and I don't know that I met too many politicians like him since.  So I went to work for the [National] Urban League.  Now that was really going to be what I call the "application" the beginning of apply the, my awareness, my goal and sensitivity to what was happening to us as black people, and so you know just working with [HM] Sterling Tucker was the President of the Washington [D.C.] Urban League, [HM] John [E.] Jacob was my direct boss.  I, you know, I, I was the administrative assistant to John Jacob.  Now what happened while I was there was that you know, the men kept the women typing and being a secretary, and but also they expected us to convey information to people who would call in, and I said how do we--so I began to raise the question.  How do we convey information if you won't allow us to sit in on staff meetings, you won't allow us to participate, you--and it made sense to them so I helped to form the Administrative Association in the Urban League and, and began to change how we were included in meetings and briefed on what was happening so we could be good communicators and involved as well.  So that was the first time I think I applied my organizational skills I had picked up in my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey]'s church into the workplace.  Then I, my father was antsy because now I had divorced and I'm still living, you know in the big city away from him and it was time for me to come back home, and so of course I  resisted that for a while, but eventually he prevailed and I moved back to Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 529292
Speaker 1: What year did you move back?
Speaker 2: It was about the latter part of '68 [1968], the latter part of '68 [1968].  So I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and I ended, I went to work first for Model Cities [Program], but then and that was working under the City of Atlanta and I was the first black to ever pass the administrative or senior secretaries exam for the city.  They didn't want us to pass it for one, so being that I had congressional, federal and then other experiences under my belt, the man who headed up the Model Cities Program wanted me to work for him.
Speaker 1: Now tell me what, what was Model Cities?
Speaker 2: That was the, like the "War on Poverty" program.  It was the program that was basically put in place to try and organize communities and bring growth.  This was after the [1967] riots to communities that were devastated during the riots and so Model Cities was to rebuild communities again, put black people to work in a lot of ways too.  So I went to work for a Model Cities Program in Atlanta that was over there by Turner Field, Summerhill area.  For the most part that was the premise where we operated.  Ivan Allen was Mayor of the city of Atlanta at that point, and he somehow or another, they found out that I use to work for a congressman and the community was pressuring Ivan Allen to hire somebody black in his immediate office, not you know throughout the City of Atlanta, but in his office he didn't have a black face.  So they found out I had worked for [Rep.] Charlie Weltner [D-Georgia].  So I guess they felt I knew how to behave or I could fit into the office.  So they asked me to come work for them.  Now I had just returned back to Atlanta not too long ago and of course Atlanta was changing and so I said well for me as a divorcee, you know a person going through a divorce, to reenter Atlanta would be the best place would be in the Mayor's Office.  That was my primary reason to going to work for him, not so much that I wanted to work for the Mayor, and I ended up working for Ivan Allen, again a person that taught me a principal way of being a politician.  He responded to the black community and if you read any of the history books during [Martin Luther] King's assassination and everything, Ivan Allen was there and I was working for him during that time.  He was, he listened to the black leadership and so I remember one time I was working for him and my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], Reverend Borders, Reverend [Martin Luther] King [Sr.], were you know very involved it the garbage strikes, and there was one here in Atlanta too, and so one day my father and all these ministers was dressed up in their suits and they laid on the ground and blocked the entrance to the trucks leaving because they had you know other people working to you know pick up garbage and Press, I saw him come running down the hall but I had already gotten a notion of what was happening because I had called my father's church to speak to 'em and his secretary said, "Your daddy's in jail."  I said for what?  "He and his friends were laying down in front of the garbage trucks".  I said (unclear) you know, so true enough about five minutes later after I hung up the phone I saw these two staff reporters that were located at City Hall seeing them trying to outrace themselves to get down the hall to talk to me about whether or not I knew my father as in jail, and I said "My father, what for?" You know, I was putting on my best act and he said well you know after they tried to stop the garbage trucks", and I went home and I said Daddy do you want me to keep a job (laughter), but at any rate the ministers back in that time spoke out on behalf of the poor, on behalf of you know people who were disenfranchised and strikes and stuff.  And so, but Ivan Allen never, ever said anything to me about that, I just worked for him, 'cause when he hired me my name was Hattie Thomas, and so it wasn't Hattie Dorsey, it was Hattie Thomas and he didn't know I was my father's child and so he learned that later on you know, but at that particular time he knew it by that time but he never, ever.  It was not an issue, my, my father being an activist.
Story_ID: 529293
Speaker 1: Now you said that you did work in the [Atlanta, Georgia] mayor [Ivan Allen]'s office when [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated [April 4, 1968]?  What was going on at that time?
Speaker 2: Well you know the Civil Rights Movement was going on, but I.
Speaker 1: Well I meant, in the, in the office what transpired in the office during that, that particular time?
Speaker 2: Chaos, chaos the--you know how to deal with the family, public relations just you know everything I mean you know that you could imagine.  Turmoil was going on at that particular point in time.  How do you put out the fires?  How do you keep the city from erupting, this city from erupting?  What was the role of the Mayor you know, how do you protect him?  The police department antsy and I mean it was just chaos as, as you can imagine, but from my perspective as I look back on it now, it wasn't as chaotic as some of this other stuff that goes on, you know, it was, it was you know you're heard the anger you know and all and it was, how do you keep the lid on it, but it was no brutality and I, I don't remember any of that.  Being real I think the--because the ministers and everybody had a tight lid, I think the, the City was just in shock and being in shock you know, how do you manage the shock?  The rest of the cities was in turmoil.  Now the day he was shot I--it was the like the weekend.  I was in Washington [D.C.] with my former sister-in-law for her wedding and so I remember listening to King on the radio that night before he was killed and his message, and you know how something goes through you and I said I wonder why he's talking like that, you know that, it, it was just a feeling that it was a premonition of his and I remember that feeling and then the next day he was gone.  My, my sister-in-law got married and I came home that Sunday and Daddy [Rev. Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] had put A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams King], he had to go and get, find A.D. 'cause he had gone off the deep end and Daddy King [Rev. Martin Luther King, Sr.] had called him, "You gotta go find A.D." and so he brought A.D. and put him in my room at the house so when I was coming home that Sunday, daddy was taking A.D. to Ebenezer [Baptist Church] to preach on that Sunday morning, but you know I just watched my father become involved and, and I'll show you the program where my father was on that pro--I have the one of the few, somebody told me it was worth a lot of money.  I said I'm gon' hold onto it for a little longer, one of the original programs from the [King] funeral and all, but at any rate you know it was just turmoil, just turmoil.
Story_ID: 529294
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at the Mayor's Office?
Speaker 2: He decided not to seek re-election also.  I said that was gonna end my career working for a politician, so after that he decided not to seek reelection so I think I worked for him for about two years and so I was out of a job again, and so I went to work for a black company called the Cannonlene Company.
Speaker 1: Cannonlene?
Speaker 2: It was hair products, it's still here today.
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: C-A-N-N-O-N-L-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay and this is in 1970?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around about that time between '69 [1969] and 70 [1970], and.
Speaker 1: And you're an administrative assistant there also?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and then I moved to California.  I decided one day came out, went out there for a vacation, liked it, came back home and packed up all my--I had an apartment, put my furniture in my brother's basement, packed up my albums and television set, back of my car and one of my girlfriends who's now a judge here helped me drive cross country.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: Thelma Cummings Moore, she's a judge now, a Superior Court Judge and I hi-tailed it to California to give myself six months to see if I could make it out there and stayed for eleven years.
Speaker 1: So eleven years in California, so you moved out there '70 [1970], '71 [1971] is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: And tell me where do you begin to work?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Urban League for a short time out there and then moved to what I call the "Stanford Mid-Peninsula Urban Coalition" and I do--Urban Coalition is a shorter version on Stanford University [Stanford, California]'s campus.  It was ironic you know when I started working for the Urban League a sort time in Oakland [California], I met my second husband and so I wanted to be on the [San Francisco] Peninsula where he was.  He says, I was a G.U. and that meant geographically undesirable (laughter).  He was not going to commute from San Jose [California] to, to Oakland to, to court me you know.
Story_ID: 529295
Speaker 1: So I brought myself into the [San Francisco] Peninsula and I got a job at the Urban Coalition and that I always say is where I grew up, truly grew up, and working for the Urban Coalition, which was small.  They had formed one, the corporate community and the educational community, have formed this Urban Coalition.  The Urban Coalition as you know came out of the riots.  It was headed up by a guy named Carl Hohman who used to be one of my instructors at Clark College [Atlanta, Georgia], but Carl Hohman formed the Urban Coalitions along with a guy named John Gardner, and so the Urban Coalition they said needed to be on the peninsula of California which is Silicon Valley because there were communities like East Palo Alto [California], that was all black, communities like River City [California] that was largely Hispanic, and they had the societal ills of any urban center that needed to be dealt with, and so it was Hewlett-Packard, David Packard, John Hewlett, (unclear), David Packard, Ed Ginzton, John Lyman [sic] and a few others.  He was president of Stanford University, they all came together.  It was Richard Lyman not John Lyman.  They all came together and formed this little small organization and housed it on Stanford University's campus and that's where I ended up going to work and a part of courtship also (laughter), but it fit with my, my chosen path at that time, so in going to work for the Urban Coalition, I grew up and I did go to work as administrative assistant but I had learned lessons along the way.  I had a storage tank full of lessons learned and so I started the campaign, 'cause they wanted not only a 501(c)(3) [nonprofit] they wanted a foundation status and the only way you could do is have a membership campaign.  So remember the Urban League had a membership campaign.  I organized a membership campaign with little old ladies at Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and they taught me another way of fundraising.  They wrote personal notes to all their friends, "I want you to give a hundred dollars, a thousand dollars, or whatever, to this organization I support.  So it was a mail campaign and we raised, we had an 85 percent return.  When a mail campaign is good if you get 35 percent campaign return and that was because of the fact that it became very personal.  So always when I talk about fundraising I always talk about fundraising is personal and I learned that there and then also I learned--and then I shifted from being an administrative assistant to being Director of Resource Development and I also would go over and pick the brains of the fundraisers in the Resource Development Department at Stanford University of how they fund raise.
Story_ID: 529296
Speaker 1: So I learned how to fund raise from the corporate sector and the Urban Coalition did not want government monies so we had to fund raise for everything that we did.  So I learned that who was on my board made a difference.  So I had presidents from you know just inheriting this because I eventually became Executive Director and inheriting this senior board members from these corporations that--all they went and asked their friends was, "I want you to put twenty-five thousand dollars in this, in this organization and they did and so when they would put the twenty-five thousand dollars in the organization, that was because John Young, President of Hewlett-Packard said to do it.  Then, or if they had a good program that they felt--I don't if you ever heard of MESBICs, a small business--Minority Enterprise Small Business and Investment Corporation, that came out of that coalition.  Fair housing programs because they felt that people needed to live close to where they worked and a lot of 'em were minority was also recruited.  So fair housing programs came out of that supported by the corporate community and so I learned, that's why I said I grew up there.  I learned from them that if it made good business sense and it enhanced my ability to do business then I'm for it.  They also buy housing, housing people close to where they worked.  So in Palo Alto, California they built affordable housing and the corporate community guaranteed the loans, okay.  They did--I tried out different stuff.  I said my, all my hair-brained notions of what could work to benefit us came about and, and I had a willing audience, um that makes sense, okay you can try it, you know.  And so I would try it, school-to-work transition programs, a school-within-a-school based on high dropout rates among black kids in East Palo Alto that I said had one-way busing.  I said let me find out how this works, that how other people tackle it.  So I found a program called the School Academies in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] which was a school within a school, um that's a good idea.  So John Young who was President of Hewlett-Packard, I went to him I said "does a young person who works in computer technology have to go to college in order to get a job in your company at entry level"?  And he said, "No."
Story_ID: 529297
Speaker 1: So I learned how to play the corporate community and involve them and make it a part of their agenda.  So if their problem was getting young, you know getting entry level employees which they would've--you know the larger company was stealing from the big companies or the smaller companies you know as they trained them the larger companies would take 'em.  So how do you fulfill this need for entry-level employees in electronics and computer technology?  So I asked a question, do they have to go to college "no."  "Can it be taught in high school?"    "Yes."  So John Young sends his person with me to observe, the school district sends their counselor with me to observe this program in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We come back, and we write the program up, we get foundations to support it and then I get, we get it together working with the school district, getting past the unions and everything else because they didn't really want us to do it, but the superintendent who happened to be the first black superintendent hired in the school district did and welcomed us.
Speaker 2: Do you remember her, his name?
Speaker 1: Harry Reynolds--did and he and so with this coalition of people with these companies backing us, we did two academies, one for electronics and one for computer. Hewlett Packard provided all the computers, we bought an instructor in from his company to teach the lab.  Lockheed (unclear) bought the person in to teach the labs for electronics and we did a school-within-a-school that we had a requirement that it was not going to be a vocation educational program, they had to pass the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test].  They had to be able to pass a SAT.  So it was a basic rethinking of a curriculum and so it went on to be a state-wide model and then adopted by the Department of Education and U.S. Department of Education, but those were the kind of lessons where you--when you know you wanna make institutional change happen, that it wasn't gon' be service.  I wasn't into feel-good programs, I was into change and then I found out that I was labeled a "change agent."  Change the way a school behaved or taught or dealt with the disadvantage then from there from California based on doing all of this and getting grants and everything from foundations, I did not accept but one program that was CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, 1973] and to train you know, outta school population, and my CFO [Chief Financial Officer] said, "You bring one more grant in here from the government and I'm outta here," because they would come in and scrutinize the book so and go through it and, and put us through so many changes because I always felt as a black woman they didn't think I could manage well or just as a black person I was gonna have something wrong, and it was always my determination that, that was not gonna happen 'cause I didn't want anybody to accuse me of taking one red penny and so they would find something on the copy machine that we didn't document the copies right, and so she said, "Bring one more"-she was a white woman-she said, "Bring one more grant in here from the government and I'm outta here," because you know we didn't have any of those problems.
Story_ID: 529298
Speaker 1: So at this point you are the Executive Director of the program?
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and I tried things, I just tried things and they worked you know so (laughter).  I surprised myself most of the time (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that you remarried and what was your second husband's name?
Speaker 2: James Harlow and I carried that name he said he was gonna charge me rent for it for a long time.
Speaker 1: So you stay at the [Stanford, California] Urban Coalition until '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then what happens?
Speaker 2: Then I moved back to, backed to Atlanta [Georgia].  Well I moved, no I didn't go to Atlanta, I went to New York [New York] to work for the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation as a Program Officer.
Speaker 1: What's the name of--say it again.
Speaker 2: Edna McConnell Clark Foundation and my, and my role there was two school-to-work transitional programs and so they wanted me to replicate on a national basis what I was able to accomplish in Atlanta with public-private partnerships.
Speaker 1: In at, oh in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Not Atlanta, I'm sorry in California
Speaker 1: In California?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you're successful at that venture?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the travel--and I adopted Michelle at that time and I had gotten a divorce and as a single parent, as a single woman I allowed my sister to talk me into adopting a little girl and who happened to be a twin so she called me up and she said I have some twins and I want you to take the girl and I said, "You outta your mind," my lifestyle is not conducive to raising a child.  She said I can be, and so I can okay and will give it a try, but I adopted Michele and so I moved to New York and she was eighteen months at that time.  So I had a small child, had to find a live-in housekeeper 'cause the travel was horrendous.  I stayed there for a little over two years.  The travel was more than just a notion.  Grant making was not as easy as it seems.  Giving money away was harder than begging for it so because you had to put your potential grantees through so much.  You had visit the site, you had to get to know the program.  Then I had to go back and convince the board of trustees that this was a worthy group and it was more than a notion, so it was not as glamorous.  I mean it had a lot of high prestige but it was not as glamorous as, as one would think.
Speaker 1: All right, so you stay in New York for two years?
Speaker 2: A little bit more than two years.
Speaker 1: A little more than two years and you have your daughter, Michelle.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Her name is actually Victoria?
Speaker 2: Victoria Michelle.
Speaker 1: Victoria Michelle.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And your sister adopted her brother?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The other, the twin.
Speaker 2: Right, it's just Sean Michael, and then the birth parent had given them Michael and Michelle so we kept those names and added our own flavor to it.
Speaker 1: So in '84 [1984] you moved back to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I moved back 'cause I had left the foundation and I didn't quite know where I wanted to go.  I was in a relationship and I thought maybe I might want to live in [Washington] D.C. and so I went there and I did some consulting work, but I knew that I, that's not what I wanted to be and [HM] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] was convincing me to come back to Atlanta.
Story_ID: 529299
Speaker 1: All right so you're in [Washington] D.C. and you, you say [HM] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] convinced you to come back to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: He was one of the ones who was telling me to come back to my roots?
Speaker 1: Now he's one of your personal friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know all of us knew each other in Atlanta, especially because my father was a minister.  Vernon use to head up the voter education project and then he left here and went up the, what is the college fund, United Negro College Fund.
Speaker 1: College Fund.
Speaker 2: But you know I knew Vernon, I knew [Atlanta mayor] Maynard Jackson, [HM] Julian Bond, [HM] Xernona Clayton use to host parties, we use to all, that was the "clique" you know and we all socialized together.  So you know, yeah, I knew him very well.
Story_ID: 529300
Speaker 1: So it's around 1984 and, and do you come back then?
Speaker 2: I come back to Atlanta [Georgia], yeah in late '84 [1984], late '84 [1984] and, and you know to look for a job.  I wasn't concerned about finding a job, I always felt I could find a job but I didn't--I came back not wanting to be in charge of anything again.  I said I'm gon' work for somebody, you know, I--got my daughter to raise and I want to connect to her, she wandered around behind me from pillar to post.  She needs to have some stability in her life and so "Hattie, calm it down and you don't have to be in charge".  So I went to work for the Voter Education Project for a little while and then went to work for the Atlanta Economic Development Corporation, and, and I said at that particular point in time I was just gonna be cool and be Vice President for Administration, and do my job and not get caught up in all these other things that I find myself getting caught up in, and so with the AEDC which is the acronym, I didn't sort of stick to it the way I had planned.  I formed this group called, within it, called the "Neighborhood Development Department" and that's because of the fact that I had come back to Atlanta and the neighborhoods I grew up in were the most depressed.  I come back to Atlanta, we had a black administration.  We were not better off for it, our neighborhoods were in a state of deterioration and I saw it superficially until one day I was trying to take a shortcut and I went through one of what was once upon a time one our model neighborhoods and I thought I was lost.  I thought I was on the wrong street.  I was on the right street and I said if this neighborhood looks like this, something is wrong.  So I went back to the office and I said who's doing some about reinvestment?  Who's doing something about rebuilding?  Where's the Urban League, where's the--where are the, the folks that use to have a voice?  Where are our churches?  Why am I not reading about the unemployment problems?  Why am I not reading nothing about the state of black America or black Atlanta here?  And you know people were like, "Why don't you go away." You know; (laughter) 'cause there are some of us who made it and I was reading into when I was away that Atlanta was the Mecca, and I said, "Where's the Mecca?", you know?  And so I was asking those questions and getting on people's nerves, and so at AEDC you know they were like wanting to drop me out the eighteenth floor and it's like you know, "Hattie we got enough of that kinda housing when (unclear) affordable housing." "I said what are you talking about?  I don't see affordable housing."  "We got enough public housing".  I said I didn't say anything about public housing, I'm talking about housing that looks like post properties, and then they thought I was really off my rocker.  I say if we did it in California where the property prices were out the roof, we can do it in Atlanta where they're down here at the bottom.  Who's doing something about reinvestment?  Where are the organizations?  And so somehow or another that little fire that I thought I had stomped out that said you were gonna raise your child and take a secondary role this time began to resurface again, and so I was the noisemaker and so finally when this man who was my boss resigned and this other guy--I told him here's my deal I wanna cut with you.  I wanna form this division, I wanna do "x", "y", "z", and he said, "Well Hattie I want you to focus on, on jobs and near the industrial parks and, and employment.  I don't want you thinking about, I just don't want you to think about it."  I said, "You can't tell me what to think about, but let me cut a deal with you.  Let me try and if I fail you and I are the only ones that need to know about it," and so that's the rebirth of doing the neighborhood development activities in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 529301
Speaker 1: All right and you began that organization [the AEDC Neighborhood Development Department] in what year, '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: That operated under the umbrella of AEDC [Atlanta Economic Development Corporation], the Neighborhood Development [Department].  Maynard Jackson came on board as the mayor again and he felt AEDC should be a pure economic arm and housing had no role there.  Now we argued about housing being a part of the economic drivers, as we all see the economy is in a mess because of our housing issues, but at any rate, we argued about that, and so I had a grant from the Ford Foundation to begin the community development corporation movement in Atlanta [Georgia].  So I went to them, I said what do you think about my spinning out?  And so we spun out and formed the Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership.  The best move possible, 'cause AEDC was quasi-public and had public funds, and never had done any fundraising until I came on board, and so with me having worked for a foundation, having worked with the private sector, raising money from a corporate network, knew how to raise money, and so nobody believed that this could happen.  So I formed ANDP, and I think in their minds they probably said, "Whew, that'll be gone in a year you know.  She can't survive, they're not gonna respond".  But it was untapped resources, and so again you remember the lessons learned, the storehouse, pulled that forward and I started a capital campaign just like you would if you were building you know a monument or whatever.  I started a formal campaign, and raised, and I would say from that point to this almost a hundred million dollars in investment loans and grants over the period of time that I headed up ANDP.
Speaker 1: And what period of time was that?
Speaker 2: We formed it in 1991, that was the birth date even though the activities before--was before that until I retired last year in 2006 at the end of the year.
Story_ID: 529302
Speaker 1: It's still ongoing, had a cash reserve of money in the bank for over, for over two years in a pipeline of projects that had, was moneymaking, you know that can carry long beyond that.
Speaker 2: What was your first project?
Speaker 1: Inner neighborhood called Reynoldstown.  They in partnership with the C--one of the first CDCs [community development corporations] formed and had no commercial money in it whatsoever.  It was tax credits and loans from the City and money from ANDP and we did thirty-six units in that neighborhood with the involvement of the residents that lived in that community to turn a very depressed property into a livable space again, so that was my first one.  It was also taught me that I'd never, ever do something like that again that way, and with my determination to get the private sector aware that they had to invest their money back in the neighborhoods and they were obligated by banking law to do so.  So ANDP was an advocacy organization as well as a demonstration organization of how to get it done.  So I advocated on behalf of rebuilding our neighborhoods and what it was gonna take and the involvement of it.  I also had learned a lesson that the only way that you could make things happen was to have the senior personnel of corporations and banks and organizations involved and so the organization head was you know, always had Atlanta's business community at the table, predominately so because I had to raise money, but it also got them involved in areas that they had never become involved before.  It got them involved in making change and communities, understanding that healthy communities that surround your downtown was beneficial to all, and housing that was a mix of incomes was the best economic stabilizer in any neighborhood, and it was just not for the rich.  It had to be poor, middle class as well as well-to-do that occupied neighborhoods that would make them healthy, and then the businesses would come back and so they brought into that principal and so the neighborhoods now have come back to the point that it's now almost unaffordable for the poor to live here and what I also learned in that period of time which when we were rebuilding the neighborhoods with the community groups, was that "anybody please just move back into our communities" to the point like, okay we got to have public policy in place that makes sure that senior citizens aren't driven out because of tax base has gone out, up so high.  That the poor people could afford to live here, because you purposely built a place for them to live and that they can afford to live here.
Story_ID: 529303
Speaker 1: But that didn't happen at first in some of the [Atlanta, Georgia] neighborhoods.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: As what happened with the [1996 Atlanta Summer] Olympics, you wanna talk about that.
Speaker 2: The Olympics was--it came along at, at the time when I was planning ANDC, ANDP [Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership] and it quick started us, because the business community said, "Oops, we actually got this thing, Oh my God and every community that we're gonna have a stadium looks like hell," and we've sold to the world that we have a, a city that the races get along, black and white are in partnership, but you gon' really see our blemishes.  "There's a program over here Hattie's been talking about, maybe we ought to listen a little closer," and there was, it just sort of the stars lined up and so my thing was do not expect me to change the neighborhood in four or five years.  It took twenty-five years plus for them to deteriorate to this point, we're gonna take twenty-five years plus to rebuild 'em.  So if you're coming in and thinking that things can turn at--don't even bother me, and so they--I, I just you know they came on for the long term.
Speaker 1: So when they built the, the Olympic Village, was that a part of your group that was doing, no?
Speaker 2: No that's not a part of my group, that was a part of the--they had to build the Olympic Village.
Speaker 1: But around the Stadium (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The Olympic Village was away from the Stadium, it was by Georgia Tech.
Speaker 1: No, I'm saying your project?  Was that a project near the stadium?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Turner Field.
Speaker 1: Turner Field.
Speaker 2: With Summer Hill was the primary community that was looked at, but Mechanicsville was next to it and then if you go to the, the other side of, what am I trying to say, Vine City was where the schools and they were gonna have some stadium activity there.  All these neighborhoods were depressed where they had planned to site the major stadiums and they were citing them there because the political power in that community was not strong enough to say "no" but they had to negotiate with the community with reference to jobs and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 529304
Speaker 1: So the type of housing was not just homes, but now condos and.
Speaker 2: Condos, apartments
Speaker 1: Mixed-used spaces?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, my feeling is that a community ought to be able to house from cradle to rocking chair and whatever lifestyle that a young person or person in their age and process goes through.  All of us don't go to home ownership right away.  We have to live in an apartment.  So up and down this street, this is part of the community.  ANDP [Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership] built these houses; we've made serious investment in this neighborhood.  This was where I choose to retire to so my company built this house and all this community outside of it.  So I choose to move back into the city, I was living outside, you know not right in the city, but you know in a more suburban kind of environment up until the time I retired.  So I said I wanted to come back in the city, but in this neighborhood we have seniors, we have apartments, and we have a mix of housing choice.  Now can I do something about the taxes?  I retired now, but I still speak out on the fact that we need to freeze taxes for seniors who have been here for the long term.  They can't afford escalating prices of, of the taxes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in this community also is the historic site, so you worked hand-in-hand with you know in that part of the community as well?
Speaker 2: Well we funded, ANDP also was funders of neighborhood groups so we funded CDCs.  We provided loans to them because I raised money to provide grants on taking advantage of my background in grant making, taking advantage of my background in fundraising.  I raised money to reallocate, I started up like within ANDP what would be known on the outside as a community bank but is known as Community Development Financial Institution, ("CDFI") and so I, you know we had money that revolved and we made loans to neighborhood-based groups that got paid back for acquisition, construction and, and building.  So it was a full-service organization, not just about saying that housing needed to be built but providing the mechanisms and the resources and the training and everything else.  I did a training program that Ford and a few other foundations supported at Clark Atlanta University that trained even people from HUD and all about community building and I call it "Community Development 101" so that you understand that if you're gonna negotiate a deal with a developer, then you need to know housing, you need to know how to structure the deal financially.  You need to understand what your rights was on your side of the table and not only just going in there asking them to do something for you.  You had to participate.
Story_ID: 529305
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to tell us about because this, you worked on this project so for a very, a long time to get it off the ground and to make sure that it continues now that you have retired.
Speaker 2: Well I would like to say that Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership [Atlanta, Georgia] with is ("ANDP") shifted the way people thought about affordable, affordability in housing.  You use to say "affordable housing" to people they would say "oh you know you're talking about Section 8 and Public Housing", no, I'm talking about my child who would graduate from college being able to afford on her first paycheck a place to live.  I'm talking about my grandmother being able to live in her community.  I'm talking about the schoolteacher who is priced out of housing because the average pay is forty thousand and the average house is two hundred thousand, okay, and she can't make the numbers work.  I'm talking about the policeman.  I'm talking about people who are good citizens that you would want to live close to you, not being able to live there and the community becoming unaffordable, or the metro region becoming unaffordable, and you've got to consciously do something about that.  So I shifted the, the thought process as to who affordability targeted and got 'em away from the notion that it was all low-income or people on Section 8.  That it was about people who were average, everyday good citizens.  And so that I would say that was the major accomplishment.  I, as I tell my daughter, I say, "At the end of your career would you wanna look back and say you made a difference in somebody's life?"  And I said, I thank God every day because of the fact that I can say I made a difference in a whole lot of people's lives by the way our communities changed to their benefit, and not only that I could say it's, it's hypothetical.  I can touch and feel communities that if in fact I had not had anything to say way back when, maybe it might have happened.  Would it have happened as fast 'cause Atlanta changed, I mean changed within less than fifteen years.  We have downtown housing but people use to laugh at the idea.  We have housing in the neighborhoods where people thought I was sick when I said we could rebuild them and people would move back into 'em because they were decayed, vacant lots, deteriorating housing.  If you lived in it, crime and now I'm you know, I'm the only African American living in this little seventeen-unit community.  I got a couple of Ethiopians; they don't call themselves black Americans, you know they're proud to be Ethiopians, which is great, but black people are finding it hard to continue to live in this city, and so I'm saying what are we gonna do about it.  The mayor [Shirley Franklin] has been absolutely, she's one of my best friends, absolutely on top of it, but she's saying, you know she's the first one, the first mayor to put a trust fund in place and that's because she said I harassed her and gave her ideas and made her see that we had to be inclusive, and so those are the things I'm most proud of when I think about this other part of my career in making a difference and to shift into paradigm and enforcing change.  I use to feel like people saw me coming and wanted to run the opposite way, or if I called somebody they felt like, if I heard a click on the phone, that was because they knew I was asking for some money.  To ask a foundation, the Woodrow Foundation for $4 million and never, ever had they invested in a neighborhood activity like this and got $4 million for my--requested $4 million and got $2.5 million.  The community fell out you know.  Out of that one foundation who was my major benefactor $27 million they put into ANDP.
Speaker 1: And that was Woodrow?
Speaker 2: The Woodrow.
Speaker 1: Foundation?
Speaker 2: Robert Woodrow Foundation, and, and they made that kind of investment, not only because of me, but you know I was the leader of it, but because of the fact that I had structured a board that they could relate to, that it was their "peers".  That was also saying it was the right thing to do for Atlanta, and for me it was the right thing to do for my people now, so that was it.
Story_ID: 529306
Speaker 1: Well tell me specifically what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), that I cared, that I cared enough to take the risks.  I say to--I use to say to my staff that I never got fired for being a risk taker and to step out on what was right.  They might have been annoyed as hell with me, but I stood up for what I believed, and that belief was that I guess going back to what my father [Rev. Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] was all about when I was sleeping in the back of the church overcoming a Saturday night, was that you--if you don't stand up for what you believe in who will, and if you don't step out on principal who will?  And what will your life be worth if you don't, and so primarily I would say my legacy (laughter) might be what that I gave a damn (laughter), but, you know, it--you asked that question and I don't know really know what I would say my legacy would be.  You know that I made things change, you know and I made things change because I cared about the future of African Americans in our society, and I don't think enough of us do any more.  I gave a speech for my alumni meeting and I said we have stopped caring as a people, because we are afraid to correct our young.  We are afraid to, to pay attention and speak out 'cause we don't wanna risk losing what we have gained, so consequently we don't--take the safe way.  We don't have our, our institutions, our schools intervening when John does not show up for class, you know.  They don't have the same things, I didn't show up for class my father got called.  I went to sleep in class my father got called.  I misbehaved my father [Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey] got called, or my even mother [Gladys Alderman Dorsey].  I would have rather for my father than my mother because she was the disciplinarian, so I'm saying to you that I think we stopped caring in a whole lot of ways and we also neglected to pass on the lessons to our young people.
Speaker 1: Well because this information is going to be available for many future generations, what message would you like to send to the future generation?
Speaker 2: There's a group in our country and in the world and they're called Jews, they never, ever forget what happened to them.  We as black Americans try to forget what happened to us and we should never, ever forget.  When people--when I give talks sometime and they will ask me a question, "Do you think racism is past us?" And I say, "Hell no," it's alive and it's doing very well, and it's taken out in different forms and in different ways and we have always got to be alert that it is there and, and in hard economic times it raises its ugly head even more so and so when you see--these times that we're going through right now, it's raising its head even more.
Story_ID: 529307
Speaker 1: So what's next for you, even in retirement?  I know that you're not really retired, you just left that position, so what's next for you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) you don't, you don't--from a non-profit you don't retire to stock options, and so I'm you know, I do consulting work and I've been fortunate that people still think I'm useful in that arena and I've also formed a development company, and I'm gonna practice what I preach as a private-sector developer, but small scale, nothing real big, but small scale.
Speaker 1: And you're also involved in many or other organizations, tell me about a few of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, I basically am an advocate; you know I just can't get away from it.  So I was the founder of the 100 Black Women here in Atlanta, first chapter in Georgia, so 'cause I believe that women you know, we as black women have more power than we know, we as women have more power than we know.  We just don't wanna use it, so 100 Black Women I formed that Chapter, and then I was the National President of 100 Black Women, so I, I, I'm you know for women's rights, I've also was Vice Chair to Georgia Democratic Party for eight years.  So I'm a Democrat, excited about [HM Barack] Obama running for president, like Joe Lowery said, "This is what the Movement was all about".  He's a grandchild of the Movement.  That I believe that only things can change through public policy, so politics is a part of my fiber having worked for a mayor [Ivan Allen, Jr.] and a Congressman [Charles L. Weltner], you know it had to be.  So, you know I'm involved, I'm trying to work my way out of some of it (laughter), you know, but politics you know will still always be there and women's activities will always be there too.
Speaker 1: Well I wanna thank you, is there anything else that you wanna talk about?
Speaker 2: No, I just wanna say I'm flattered to be included among this elite group of people, and you know when you tell me, call me about being a part of history you know I don't like to think about it that way but I'm flattered that I'm thought of that way and so thank you.
Story_ID: 529308
Speaker 1: I guess one of my Christmas parties; I would say this was about 2002.
Speaker 2: This is again I think the same celebration with the mayor of Atlanta [Georgia], Rita Samuels, the Coalition, the Georgia Coalition of Black Women and [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Brooks is also in that picture, he's a state representative.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Discussion.
Speaker 2: In that center there is my good friend that I referenced in conversation who helped me drive to California, Judge Thelma Moore, the one in red, she loves her colors and Thelma is a State Superior Court Judge for in the State of Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Discussion.
Speaker 2: Those are babies that my, my sister and I adopted twins, Michelle Dorsey and Michael Dorsey, her brother, they're fraternal twins as you can tell but that's one of the rare pictures we were able to get them to pose together for.  I think that was Michelle's graduation from school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We gotta redo this first group so let's go back at the beginning and start over again. Okay go ahead, sorry about this we got to (unclear) audio.
Speaker 2: Okay that's me and my daughter, Christmas of 2004 when I finally convinced her to pose.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That's my mom and dad [Gladys Alderman Dorsey and Edward Henry "E.H." Dorsey], one of his church anniversaries and I would say that was about the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's my mom with her four girls, Cynthia, myself standing next to my mother.  On the other side of my mother Joyce and my sister Morinda and the two on the end have left us and passed on.
Speaker 1: What year was this again?
Speaker 2: This picture was probably around 2000.
Speaker 1: I like to call this my three generations, my mother and myself and my daughter of my immediate family which I call my little family structure and this was taken about 1999 or 2000 for--at the tenth anniversary of ANDP [Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother's maternal--this is on my mother's side.  These are her family members, her parents.  As indicated in my interview my mother was raised by her mother's sister and husband 'cause my mother's mother passed away when she was thirteen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICES):  Discussion.
Speaker 1: You wanted those.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICES):  Discussion.
Speaker 1: Oh, you want me to do that one, I'm sorry I was looking (laughter).  Alexis, I was getting an award by the 191 Club and I just got that, was supported by [HistoryMaker] Alexis Scott who is the editor for the 'Atlanta Daily World' which is one of our longest running black newspapers, and Walter Huntley to the right who was my boss at AEDC [Atlanta Economic Development Corporation].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's right, what's the next one?
Speaker 1: This is at a rally with the Mayor, Calvin Smiley, the Mayor of Atlanta, Shirley Franklin, Calvin Smiley who was, who is still at the State House of Georgia, been elected forever.  Also at that point in time was heading the Georgia Democratic Party and this was a NAACP rally about three, four years ago.
Speaker 2: Georgia Coalition of Black Women headed by Rita Samuels and we were honoring Shirley Franklin.  We just had a prayer meeting of sorts for Shirley Franklin and [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr. Joseph] Lowery is there, our Lieutenant Governor was there and a few other people.
Speaker 1: This is also--you already got this one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)  No go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is also a political rally and Michael Thurman you see in the picture along with Shirley Franklin and myself in attendance, and no telling what we were laughing about.
Speaker 2: Another one of our Civil Rights icons, James Orange along with Shirley Franklin and myself at another rally so you know in Atlanta we have a lot of rallies.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is the last one.
Speaker 2: This is my executive assistant Cori Williams when I was at ANDP at a Christmas party.  I use to have corporate Christmas parties at my house and this was about 2004, 2003 perhaps.  You wanna do one of the profiles from the King family.
Speaker 1: Discussion cause this goes up underneath your bio and your picture.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.
