Story_ID: 616143
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and Myrtis Dightman, Jr. is observing.  Can you please tell me your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Myrtis Dightman, D-I-G-H-T-M-A-N, D-I-G-H-T-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and spell Myrtis for me.
Speaker 2: M-Y-R-T-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May the 7th, 1935.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Crockett, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?  Where are we now?
Speaker 2: Home.  Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: The 10th, May the 10th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand ten [2010].
Story_ID: 616144
Speaker 1: Let's start with you telling me a couple of personal things about you.  What do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pinto beans and rice.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the summertime.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown, black.
Speaker 1: Brown and black?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite place you like to go to?
Speaker 2: Yea, I like to go up in East Texas, up and visit my mother [Ada Polk] and stay around Crockett [Texas] with my mother.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: No.  Like what?
Speaker 1: If you don't have a favorite phrase that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 616145
Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your mother and father [Odie Dightman].  Let's start with your mother.  Tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Ada Lee Polk [Ada Polk].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Crockett, Texas.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes just how good her mother used to be to her and things like that.
Speaker 1: Well, what did she tell you?  Tell me some of the things?
Speaker 2: How good her mother was you know and make sure eat and everything like that.
Speaker 1: Did she go to--did she talk about going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah but she most likely went to church all the time.  They go to church.
Speaker 1: Did she live on a farm or a ranch or they live in the city?
Speaker 2: Nah we lived out in the rural, out on a ranch in Crockett.
Speaker 1: All right and what would you say was a characteristic that you got from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother she try to teach me the right way to do you know.  She said, "Okay we gonna serve dinner like at six o'clock."  That means if I wanna eat I got to be there at six o'clock you know for then I won't be able to eat 'til the next day.  It wasn't no going in the icebox and nothing like that 'cause she said, "I told you what time we gonna eat," and I love her for that.
Speaker 1: Are you that same way?
Speaker 2: Yes 'em.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother, her mother?  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Lizzie Neal [Lizzie Rhodes Neal].
Speaker 1: And did you have a relationship with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  My grandmother was real good to me.  She used to work at a hotel, Crockett hotel, and I used to love and go and eat egg custards.  She cook me egg custard and I go down sit eat all day that egg custard while she at work.
Speaker 1: Did your mother work away from home?
Speaker 2: No, she kind of worked around on the ranch there where we was raised up on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what else do you remember about your grandmother, Lizzie, besides the custard?
Speaker 2: Well she liked to go to church and all the time and make us go too and stay.  We'd have to go stay all day at church.
Speaker 1: What church did you belong to?
Speaker 2: Pine Grove.
Speaker 1: Was it a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, Pine Grove Baptist Church [Pine Grove Missionary Baptist Church] in Crockett, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: He was okay.  I didn't go around him too often much.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Will Neal.
Speaker 1: You didn't go around him too much?
Speaker 2: No ma'am.
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: Well I used to always be busy doing something, playing with the kids or something like that.
Speaker 1: And did he work or did he--was he a rancher?
Speaker 2: No, he, he was a farmer.  He farmed cotton and stuff like that that's one reason I didn't go around him I had to pick cotton (laughter), corn stuff like that, beans, greens, stuff like that yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So your grandparents they lived in Crockett as well?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And they lived on a farm?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  They had their own place.
Speaker 1: They had--did they own--do you know whether they owned the property (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they had owned the place, yes ma'am yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And can you go any further back in your--on your mother's side?  As far as Lizzie or Will O'Neal [sic.] who their parents were?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 616146
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your father.  Tell me your father's name?
Speaker 2: Odie Dightman.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell Odie?
Speaker 2: O-D-I-G [sic.].
Speaker 1: I-E?
Speaker 2: E.
Speaker 1: Okay O-D-I-E?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And where was your father born?
Speaker 2: I guess he was born in Crockett [Texas] too as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year he was born?
Speaker 2: No ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked around a ranch.  He worked on a ranch running cattle and help fix fence and stuff on the ranch.
Speaker 1: Okay and did he own a ranch?
Speaker 2: No ma'am.  The same ranch I--same ranch the white guy's ranch.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: White guy's ranch.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: White guy's ranch, Carl (unclear) ranch.  We were raised on a ranch.
Speaker 1: I understand.  What was the name of the person who owned the ranch?
Speaker 2: Carl Leeger [ph.].
Speaker 1: Lager [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Leeder, Leeder.
Speaker 1: Carl Leeder [ph.].
Speaker 2: Carl Litiker [ph.], Litiker.
Speaker 1: Litiker.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You wouldn't know how to spell that?
Speaker 2: No ma'am (laughter).
Speaker 1: And okay so you all worked on his ranch and that's where your family lived?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your dad?  What type of man was he?
Speaker 2: He was a good dad you know.  He do everything he could for me you know and he made me go to school and everything like that and I didn't like that, but he was my dad.  I loved him.
Speaker 1: Who was the disciplinarian in the family?
Speaker 2: Listen to what my mother [Ada Polk] and daddy say that's the main thing.
Speaker 1: But who punished you if you--did you ever have to be punished?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: --my [maternal] grandmother [Lizzie Rhodes Neal].
Speaker 1: Your grandmother was the disciplinarian?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.  And she, she'd whoop me and make me pull off my shoe and stand on the syrup bucket, bottom side up with one foot on it and one foot off and that rim be cutting your foot and you go down you better pick up and she--you have to stand up there until she tell you to get down.  Now try that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your relationship with your dad, did you have a really good relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Oh yes ma'am.  He showed me how to do on the ranch and know how to work on the ranch and stuff like that coming up.
Speaker 1: What type of things did you do on the ranch that he showed you how to do that y'all did together?
Speaker 2: We rope cast and cut cast and brand cattle and stuff like that, fed cattle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And brand cattle?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time that you branded cattle?
Speaker 2: No ma'am it's so long, I branded so many of them. I was about fourteen or fifteen working on a ranch, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616147
Speaker 1: Well tell me what is, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well (unclear) my earliest childhood memory I used to like to go to town and it be about fifteen of us and get together and walk, walk to Crockett [Texas].  I lived--we lived about two miles out of town.  We'd get together a bunch of boys and we walked to Crockett and stay there and come back, down the track walking.
Speaker 1: What would you do in Crockett?
Speaker 2: What would I do?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what would you do when you got there?  When y'all went to town?
Speaker 2: Well we go up to the store get us a red soda water and things stand up on the street and talk and come back home.
Speaker 1: So you said red soda?
Speaker 2: Red soda.
Speaker 1: Red soda.
Speaker 2: RC soda [RC Cola] or strawberry soda, Baby Ruth (laughter), peanut loaf.
Speaker 1: And you said you walked up the tracks?  So y'all followed the railroad tracks into town?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. We didn't live too far from the track.
Speaker 1: Now you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, one of my sisters is deceased.  I have two sisters left and--
Speaker 1: Okay well tell me your brothers and sisters and list them in order that how they were born if you can remember?  You can't remember?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine, well just list their names. Tell me their names.
Speaker 2: Earlie Mae--Earlie Mae [Earlie Dightman Martin], Georgia Lee [Georgia Dightman York], Lillian Bell [Lillian Dightman Freeman] and Johnnie B. [Johnnie B. Dightman].
Story_ID: 616148
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about the surrounding community [of Crockett, Texas].  You lived on a ranch on, on a ranch and tell me about the other people who lived on the nearby properties?  Were they all, were all your friends living on other people's ranches or did they own their own ranches or?  Tell me what the community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had they own--
Speaker 1: --that you lived in.
Speaker 2: --they had the own place
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  They had they own place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about some of your friends and the people and their parents that lived in the community that you lived in where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well Wes Shapeman [ph.] he lived right across the, right across road there.  A.J. Jackson, Jack McCullough [ph.] oh just on and on.  Charles Bean [ph.] you know just like that yes ma'am.  We all get together on a Saturday night and walk to town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Pine Grove [Pine Grove School].  Had a school called Pine, it was out of Pine Grove.
Speaker 1: That was the same name as the church [Pine Grove Baptist Church; Pine Grove Missionary Baptist Church, Crockett, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  And then I went to Center Grove [Center Grove School, Houston County, Texas].  Pine Grove when I--it just went so far and I went across to Center Grove, a country, little country churches, schools I mean.
Speaker 1: Now what do you remember about your elementary school at Pine Grove?  Do you remember any of your teachers or anybody who was influential or encouraged you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No ma'am.
Speaker 1: You can't remember?
Speaker 2: I was glad to get out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you went to junior high school.  What about junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: Sorry, middle school?
Speaker 2: Oh I so I like to go out 'cause I like to play.  I get out there with the kids and things and play and go home.  That was my, that was a good (unclear).
Speaker 1: What type of games did y'all play?
Speaker 2: Shoot marbles, played a little baseball, little baseball and stuff like that, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Now you talked about spending a lot of time in church.  What was your religious experience like at a young age?
Speaker 2: Well I liked to listen to the preacher you know and my mother [Ada Polk] and them would make me sit on the front row and I sat there 'til church was over.
Story_ID: 616149
Speaker 1: What about holidays at your house?  You had brothers and sisters, was there any special tradition that your family had for say Christmas?
Speaker 2: Yes, I like the food, good food and stuff they cooked for Christmas, them cakes and pies and stuff like.  Me and my friend, some of my friends just have a good time you know and big family get together and I thought it was real nice.  I love my mother [Ada Polk] and [maternal] grandmother [Lizzie Rhodes Neal] for that and my sister still for the same thing, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: What type of things did you receive for Christmas?  Did y'all exchange gifts?
Speaker 2: Yes, my gifts a shirt or pair of blue jeans, something like that, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Now I, I want you to think about that time and I want you to think about a sound, a smell or a sight that you remember that would take you if you, if you think about it, it'll take you back to that time.  Well let's start with a smell.
Speaker 2: Pinto beans.
Speaker 1: Pinto.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pinto beans.
Speaker 1: What about a sound?  What do you hear that takes you back to that time on the ranch?
Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King used to sang the things I used to do.
Speaker 1: What about something that you would see and it would give you maybe a flashback of, of that time on the ranch [outside of Crockett, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well I guess when we used to go and catch them cows, you know cut them cows you know brand cow and things like that, that was the best time of year.
Speaker 1: Tell me why?
Speaker 2: Well because it'll be a bunch of cattle and you have to run 'em in and then you just take a little iron and you just put a little brand on them and turn them out.
Speaker 1: And how did you catch the cow?  Tell me more about did you have to ride a horse?  Did you learn to ride a horse?
Speaker 2: Yes and what we do is we ride the horse and put them in a pen and then they put them in a great big old pen and round them up, then just let 'em out the gate, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616150
Speaker 1: When you went to--after you said Cedar Grove [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Center Grove [Center Grove School, Houston County, Texas].
Speaker 1: Center Grove?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers at Center Grove?
Speaker 2: No that's been so long ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: So after Center Grove, where did you--what did you do?
Speaker 2: I went to Crockett High [Crockett High School, Crockett, Texas].  Professor Batts [ph.], Ms. Hopkins and Mr. Hopkins [ph.].  He was the--wanted me to play football.  Them the teachers.
Speaker 1: How many students were at Crockett High?
Speaker 2: There was about seventy-five, eighty maybe a hundred.
Speaker 1: What was your, what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked to play baseball and run.  I liked to run.
Speaker 1: But did you have a favorite subject like math or science or English or reading?
Speaker 2: Science I guess.
Speaker 1: So were you a good student?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 616151
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did in high school [Crockett High School, Crockett, Texas] with your friends?  I mean did you listen to music?  What type of music did you listen to?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't nothing on but the 'Randy Record Shop' ['Randy's Record Shop Show'] and that's all you listened to.  You just had battery radios at that time.  Wasn't no electricity so just listen to them battery radios and listen to 'Randy Record Show.'
Speaker 1: Okay so there was no electricity so how did you listen to the--?
Speaker 2: We had battery, they had, used to have battery radios.
Speaker 1: Oh battery radios?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just had to put the radio in the window and, and drive your or start down the ground and grab the radio with.
Speaker 1: Now since you said there was no electricity, describe to me the house that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well we had coal oil lamps.  That's how we, that's how we had a, had a coal oil lamp in each room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am it had a wick on it. You strike a match and light it and glowed down there and get a big light in the house.
Speaker 1: And how did you cook?
Speaker 2: Woodstove, had woodstove.
Speaker 1: So was that part of your chores to cut wood?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am 'cause we had to eat.  And when I did I had to make sure wood was in so we could cook.
Speaker 1: And what about water?
Speaker 2: We had a well that you draw water, you had a bucket on a rope and let it down in the well and then draw it out of the well and pour it in a bucket and take it in the house.
Speaker 1: Who's responsible for washing clothes?
Speaker 2: Well, when we get the water, my mother [Ada Polk] and them would wash. We just make sure we got the water there and we wash, we washed and have one of them old big wash pots and put a bale of fire up under it and then they had a stick they punch the clothes down in there get 'em clean.
Speaker 1: And what about bathing?
Speaker 2: We had a number three bathtub, round bathtub and about two of us bathe in the same water.
Speaker 1: How often did y'all take baths?
Speaker 2: Well Mama could bathe every night before we go to bed.
Speaker 1: And what about clothes?  Did y'all buy clothes from the store, did someone make clothes?
Speaker 2: Well my mother and them they bought clothes from a store.  Our pants and stuff like that, you know, but like undershorts, well you know at that time you could buy flour in those sacks and they could and my mother could cut shorts out of them and make you a pair of shorts.
Speaker 1: This, the time that you were growing up, your very early years I know that we went on to, to high school, but in your early years was part of the time of the Depression [Great Depression]. Did you as a young person realize that there was a depression?
Speaker 2: No ma'am I don't.
Story_ID: 616152
Speaker 1: So now let's, let's go back to high school [Crockett High School, Crockett, Texas].  What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't graduate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't graduate?  Okay.  So what year did you leave school?
Speaker 2: I don't, I can't remember that either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened that you left school when you did?
Speaker 2: Well I really wanted, all I really wanted to be a cowboy and that's what I did. I just kind of left school went to work on a ranch and, and I worked on the ranch and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So you worked on the same ranch that you lived on or did you work at another ranch?
Speaker 2: I worked on the same ranch I lived in and would help a guy on another ranch on my off time.
Speaker 1: So when a person or a family your, your father [Odie Dightman] and mother [Ada Polk] worked on a ranch that you lived on, was it similar to sharecropping where you, you live there and work there and you got paid a certain amount or you got goods for the work that you did?
Speaker 2: Well my mother and them got paid for, they got paid you know for working.  They give me, at that time I didn't need much money, they give two or three dollars, five dollars, I was happy.
Speaker 1: So you began working on different ranches and what made you decide you wanted to be a cowboy?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what. I could, I just, by working on a ranch I figure I could do things for myself you know.  One reason that made me want to be a cowboy, when I was coming up I always wanted to be like the white man.  What I mean by that I know I would never have as much money as the white man, but I wanna be able to have me some cows of my own, I could call my cow and they belong to me.  I don't owe nobody for them.  That's what really made me wanna get out and hustle to be a cowboy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so how long did you work at this ranch?  Do you remember the first ranch that you worked at?
Speaker 2: The same ranch that I raised, that I worked 'til I left.  See I come Houston [Texas], I come Houston about '52 [1952] or '3 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.  How old were you when you left Crockett [Texas]?
Speaker 2: I was about eighteen or nineteen.
Story_ID: 616153
Speaker 1: You came to Houston [Texas] and what did you do when you got to Houston?
Speaker 2: Well I got to Houston I was trying to find me a job and I went out and talked to a guy had a filling station and he looked and he said and I asked him I said, "Man I sure need a job."  He said, "What can you do?"  I said, "I don't know 'til you let me try."  So he said, "Okay be to work in the morning at seven o'clock in the morning," and I was there and he had me pumping gas and wiping car windshield.  I did that for about two years and then another fella had a Ford [Ford Motor Company] dealer named (unclear) Ford and that guy let me come up there and I was, if you come up to bring--to get your car fixed went out and I could drive the courtesy car and take you back home and then for a while and then had a three wheel motorcycle and if you had a car you wanted work on and he get the address, then he let me take the motorcycle and go out and bring the car back, hook the motorcycle on back of the car and bring it back there get it worked on and then I deliver it back.  So then I left there I went to driving a truck for a while.
Speaker 1: Long distance or, or local?
Speaker 2: Long distance, like Dallas [Texas], Dallas, Fort Worth [Texas], San Antonio [Texas], while like that.
Speaker 1: Did you have to go to take any kind of special training to drive trucks at that time?
Speaker 2: Well no ma'am you just as long as you get your CDL [commercial driver's license], get your CDL driver license, that's all you had to have.  You had to pass the test to get it.
Speaker 1: Now World War II [WWII]--well we talked about the Depression [Great Depression] and--so how long did you drive trucks?
Speaker 2: I drove trucks about four, about three or four years.
Story_ID: 616154
Speaker 1: And then what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, then I wanted you know I wanted to be a cowboy.  That's mostly what I like.  I liked those cowboy pictures and me and a guy named James Francis [James Francis, Jr.] I was driving one Sunday morning, right there on Shepherd [Shepherd Drive, Houston, Texas] and I seen this guy standing on the side of the road at the bus stop with a suitcase and I stop by there, "Did you need a ride?"  And he said, "Yeah," he said, "I need a ride."  I said, "Where you going?"  He said, "I'm going to Acres Home [Acres Home Equestrian Center, Houston, Texas]," which is out here.  I said, "Okay I'm not doing anything so I give you a ride to Acres Home."  So I give him a ride to Acres Home and they was and they was going to a rodeo which was down in Cheek, Texas (unclear).  He said, "Man what you doing?"  I said, "Nothing."  He said, "Don't you wanna ride with me?"  I said, "Well," I said, "okay."  So I rode down to the rodeo with him and so then when I rode down to the rodeo with him, they didn't have no bullfighters which is the guy who keeps the bulls off the cowboys.  So I said, "I can do that."  He said, "Yeah?" I said, "I can do that."  So then when I started to fighting bulls and each time they had a rodeo they call me to come help him.  So I started, that's how we started, started to fool with cows just like that.
Speaker 1: Well explain to me more about fighting bulls?  You said that helps to keep the bulls off the cowboys?  Tell me what that means?  What did you have to physically do as a bullfighter?
Speaker 2: Well see what I do if a bull throw a cowboy off, I run and get the bull attention so the bull look at me and, and the cowboy have a chance to get up and get away.
Speaker 1: And there's a difference between a clown and a, a bullfighter?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  See a clown is a guy that, that make the crowd laugh and go on you know a bullfighter he gets out there protects the cowboys, so protection I guess ma'am.
Speaker 1: So you were a bullfighter and not a cowboy at all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: I mean not a clown.
Speaker 2: Not a clown, no ma'am
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And how long did you bullfight?
Speaker 2: Oh I did that for two or three years because I went everywhere fighting bulls.  I went like Canada, Cheyenne, Wyoming, everywhere.  When guys, the white guys found out I could fight bulls, well they would call me and ask me to come these different places to fight bulls for 'em keep 'em off the cowboys.
Speaker 1: Right so a bullfighter has a very important job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Job, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: --to make sure that the cowboy stays safe--
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: --you know once they get thrown off.
Speaker 2: And I remember a lot of times I used to put a hundred dollar bill on the bull's horn, tie it to his horn and they let me get it off.  But you see the thing about a bull, people don't know a bull can't turn as fast as you can so if you ever get a bull on his side, you can take a bull and take his tail up by his leg and behind him, he can't get it out.  Because the bull have to have four feet to get up.  A cow--a bull have four to--as long as you keep one foot up, all they can do is kick, lay there and kick.
Speaker 1: So who would put the hundred dollar bill on them?
Speaker 2: The people at the rodeo put it on.  When the bull come in the chute, they would put it take a, a rubber band and put it on him and if you can, if you can take it off, you can have it.
Speaker 1: So that was entertaining to them as well?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am and to fans yes ma'am (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The crowd wanted to see you--
Speaker 2: Take it off--
Speaker 1: --as you try to get the--
Speaker 2: --had another guy but his name was Duck Stuart [ph.].  He, he died not too long ago, about four years ago and he was a real good rodeo clown too.  And me and him teamed up to do it together and we went everywhere doing that man all over the world just fighting bulls and they put this money on the bull's horn and we take it off.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite story about something that happened during the time you were fighting bulls?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I seen a guy get thrown--I seen a guy got a bull hooked him like that just throw him up in the air and turn around and turn him over two or three times you know.  But when he fell down we was right there to keep, to get the bull's attention so he wouldn't, the bull wouldn't hurt him.
Speaker 1: Have you ever gotten hurt fighting bulls?
Speaker 2: I never got hurt so I can get on the bull the next year--the next day.
Speaker 1: Did you I mean did you ever have any type of accident?  Did you run head in, head on?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I run head on to them. They hook me and knock me, knock me over and stuff like that.  But I, I get up and shake it off and go right back.
Speaker 1: You never had to get any stitches did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No ma'am.
Story_ID: 616155
Speaker 1: You fought bulls for a number of years and usually when you start riding usually it's at a young age, right?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: You're about twenty-one, twenty-two now.
Speaker 2: Yeah when I started.
Speaker 1: And tell me what made you decide to start riding bulls?
Speaker 2: Wait let me go to the trail ride first 'cause that's how I started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was what really made me start like I said I picked up James Francis [James Francis, Jr.] and so one time we was riding down the road and I seen trail ride and I said, "Man that's, that's good."  I said, "Man what gotta do to get a trail ride?"  So but I never seen a black guy in a trail ride.
Speaker 1: What is a trail ride?
Speaker 2: You know like you see a bunch of guys leave a town.  See we like, we like Prairie View [Prairie View Trail Ride Association], Burnham, Texas.  They left Burnham see it don't be--it used to be one trail ride coming, used they call it, call it Salt Grass [Salt Grass Trail Ride Association, Houston, Texas], wasn't it son [Dightman's son, Myrtis Dightman, Jr.], called it Salt Grass Trail Ride and, and it, so we watch it coming to town but it wasn't no black nothing but white on it.  So I told Mr. Francis, "Mr. Francis there's something wrong with that."  I said, "I wonder can we run a trail ride."  He was a cowboy too.  He said, "I don't know so let's see."  So this guy [Reese Lockett], I know this guy real good so I went to him I asked, I said, "Man," I said, "I sure like to drive in your trail ride."  He said, "Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]," he said, "I'd really like you to be in my trail ride, but you wouldn't like it."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "Because at night when you go to bed where those guys would pee in your boot or throw some foil in your boot you wouldn't like it.  The next morning I wouldn't either.  But it wasn't nothing I could do about it."
Story_ID: 616156
Speaker 1: --The trail ride and you were saying that he told you that you wouldn't like it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You can elaborate a little more, but I just need you to go back and explain to me what a trail ride is.
Speaker 2: Well a trail ride is a group of guys and a group of ladies that wanna ride horses.  So then they would start in Burnham, Texas, and ride into Houston, Texas, you know and so me and Mr. Francis [James Francis, Jr.] one day we just sat down, we never seen no black on the trail ride so we said, "Mr. Reese Lockett what about letting us ride on the trail ride?"  And he said, "Well," he said, "I'd be more than glad to let y'all ride but y'all wouldn't like it."  He said, "Because at night y'all go to bed, those white guys would pee in your boot, put foil in your boot in the morning then you (unclear) you wouldn't like it and I wouldn't either."  So he said, "What you do," he said, "why don't see if y'all can form y'all trail ride of your own and then I'd be more than glad to help you."  So that's what me and Mr. Francis turned back to Prairie View Trail Ride [Prairie View Trail Ride Association].  You got to have somewhere to start from so we went up and talked to dean a couple times at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  He said, "Yeah," he said, "let me think about it a while."  So we called him back about a week or two, he said, "Y'all come up we'll talk about it."  So on the way up there, we met, it was a white lady had run off in a ditch, it was a real lot of snow and stuff out on the road, she run off in a ditch, so we stopped to help her out and so she asked us, "Well young man, where y'all going?"  We said, "Oh we going up to Prairie View to see about getting a trail ride started."  She said, "Well if you do," said, "I got a ranch around the back side of Prairie View," which is Mr. (Unclear).  He said, "If y'all get it done, y'all call me and let me know."  He said, "I have a place for y'all to start from."  I said, "Okay."  So once we got it started, we called him and he had us wood and everything there for us to start a trail ride.  So we rode from Prairie View, we had stops up and down the road you know, it was so cold man the next, the next morning you get up to get on your horse, you had to lead your house about an hour or a mile or two before you can get on them they be so cold.  You be going down the road you hear them limp pow, pow.  The eyes be falling, limbs be falling on the ground.  So at that time as far we could go into was Acres Home [Acres Home Equestrian Center, Houston, Texas].  They wouldn't let you go into Memorial Park [Houston, Texas] because the Memorial Park was the segregated park.  But that's where all them white trail riders was going in.  So in '75 [sic.], they wouldn't let us go, they wouldn't let us go into Memorial Park, we, we had stopped here in Acres Home and they met us out there on Ella Boulevard and Shepherd [Drive] and took us straight down Shepherd to, to the David [Street] and Shepherd to, to the park to go in and we had to so we went in on the back of the white trail ride so we went on made it good that year, nothing happened.  So the next year they come so the white--the law and thing come out and met us on Ella Boulevard and Paramount [Lane] and took us out post into Memorial Park.  We was the first black that went to Memorial Park.  They didn't allow black in Memorial Park.  So they set--took us across a little creek and set us on a little hill over there and so the National Guard set up here, the sheriff department, the police department set you know around.  So they asked us, "Can y'all handle y'all's people?"  I said, "What you mean handle people? We ain't got but ten."  We had ten people one wagon.  So they got thousands out there so that's how Prairie View Trail Ride got started and Prairie View been going on for what fifty-seven, fifty-eight years right now, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616157
Speaker 1: So the, the trail ride is a prelude to you then beginning to, to ride bulls?
Speaker 2: To ride bulls.  Mr. Francis [James Francis, Jr.] he--the one with me started Prairie View ride [Prairie View Trail Ride Association] well in 1961 he said, "Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]," I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Would you like to ride a bull?"  I said, "Man I don't know."  He said, well he gonna buy my card for me.  So he bought my card for me.  So I went back to '61 [1961], '62 [1962] then I quit and went back driving a truck because I wasn't making that much money but he would always see that my family had money enough to you know he buy groceries and stuff.  He took care of that.  So I quit, I quit went back to driving trucks in '64 [1964] I started back to riding bulls.  Then I rode to--I rode on then, I rode every year up 'til I quit in '89 [1989].  I quit bull riding in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay you said he bought you a card?  What does that mean?
Speaker 2: That's a pro royal card.  It was an association.  You had to buy--
Speaker 1: What association?
Speaker 2: --a pro, it was a pro association.  You had to buy a membership card to ride in the rodeo and that's I got, that's how I got started.  He bought my pro card for me.
Speaker 1: How much were the pro card (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About fifty dollars.
Speaker 1: How much are they now, today?
Speaker 2: About five hundred dollars, five hundred dollars and I still ain't paid him his fifty dollars back yet (laughter). I still owe him (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, now you have your card and you start fighting bulls, I want you to tell me what it's like from the time you step into the rodeo what you have to do as a, a bull rider?
Speaker 2: Well you have to go and be, be prepared to ride bulls and things because when that, when that buzzer buzz and then you got to get out ain't nothing out there but you and the bull and the clown and you got to try to stay comfortable around this bull and when the whistle blow you got to try to find you a good place to get off.  If you don't, he gonna throw you somewhere and I, and this--bull riding is good.  I love bull riding but I just got too old to get on them (laughter).  Well now it's plenty money out there and I can't get none, I can't get none (laughter).  When I was, when I was riding bulls, you get top money about like four or five hundred dollars and now it's like five, six thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: How did you prepare for a bull ride?
Speaker 2: Well I get my rest and just, just, just normal you know.  It's just, it's just something I wanted to do.  And, and they told me well a lot of guys told me that I couldn't make the national finals [National Finals Rodeo] because they never seen a black guy riding at the finals.  Me either.  So I wanna know why I couldn't do it.  They say, "Well the white guy would mark you so low and things you know you wouldn't be able to make enough money to get there," so I said, "Well I'm a try.  One day I'm a get there," and I was lucky and in '61 [1961], nah '64 [1964] I was the first black guy went to nationals riding bulls and I went so when I went every year up until '50 [1950]. Sixty-five [1965] I didn't go, I went back to driving the truck.  Then in '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968] I went and I went and kept I went in to '72 [1972] then every year.
Story_ID: 616158
Speaker 1: Now tell me about I mean there of course there was racism in every field and of course in this field as well, talk to me about the people who are in charge of the rodeos, see when I say tell me step by step what happened, is there a story about you going to a rodeo and the gateman, tell me who the gatemen is and what his responsibilities are and tell me that story about the gateman?
Speaker 2: Well the first thing about it you know I make a lot of rodeos and if I ride this rodeo tonight, well I might be three hundred miles tomorrow after another rodeo and I would drive to the rodeo and when I get there I couldn't get a room so what I would do I'd go up to catch some of the polices and I would ask them I asked them I tell them, "I'm on my way to the rodeo such and such a place."  I said, "Would you mind if I sleep in my car here for a while and wake me up in another couple, two, three hours and I'll get on down the road?"  And they said, they don't mind it.  So they do it, they wait and so I slept in my car a lot of times and they wake me up and I go on down the road a little further.  So I yeah I had--I, I was at a rodeo one time and a lot of times at a rodeo so the cowboys were different.  The cowboy like a big family.  They the only ones I know would pull up would help you beat them but it's peoples at the rodeo that didn't want you to you know that didn't want you to ride.  And, and I really didn't know it because I was brought up after the rodeo a lot of nights, a lot of rodeos but I didn't know--he was never born--never dawned on me that that was the way that they drawed me up.  I thought you know they just--I just guess that was the way I was drawed up to be after the rodeo.
Speaker 1: What do you mean drawed up?
Speaker 2: Well see the drawings they would put you--well pull your numbers for you wouldn't be there.  You be--but I might be in Houston [Texas] and then I'm in a rodeo at San Anton, when I get to San Anton, they tell me, "Well you be you up in San Anton," said, "All right, are you at San Anton Wednesday at such and such a time."  Well I go to some more rodeos, I wouldn't worry about San Anton until I get there.  So when you get there, when you get to San Antonio [Texas] well then you go and see the secretary well then they give you a number and thing.  Well see some peoples at the rodeo, if the rodeo had been going on for four or five days, they figure a black man ain't got to be riding no bulls, he ought to be working or, or something.  He ain't got no business at the rodeo, if he did he ought to he'd have his number and thing.  But I had never seen the secretary.  You see you gotta see the secretary to get your number so I went to the rodeo so a guy named Mr. Woodie Cones at Little Rock, Arkansas, one day he say, "Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]." I said, "Yeah," he said, "The bull ride is going on."  I said, "They won't let me in."  He said, "What you mean?"  I said, "Just won't let me in," because I didn't have my number and things.  So they kept me out there about thirty minutes so he finally let me on down through there which the the guard did, the policeman whatever you know, so I said, "Okay."  So I went on down through the chute gate and so when I went into the secretary, I paid him and they said, "Myrtis they just turn your bull out."  I said, "Yes 'em." I said, "I been here."  I said, "They wouldn't let me in."  So Mr. Woodie Cones he come down through there and he said, "Myrtis been here a long time," said, "but the guard the guard and thing won't let him in the gate there."  So they had to get my bull back to me because it wasn't my fault.  So I rode the bull and win a second on him.
Speaker 1: Oh you won second place?
Speaker 2: Second place yes ma'am.   See a lot of times the peoples they wanna see you ride but the stock tractor didn't wanna see you ride--didn't wanna see on they bulls.  See the stock tractor would a lot of times would draw you up last because they didn't wanna see you on they bull.  They figure that a black man ain't got no business riding no bull, he suppose to be working.
Speaker 1: So you say he's the stock?
Speaker 2: Stock man that furnish the stock for the rodeo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he--I'm a black man he didn't want me on his bull so he figured that I ought to--if a black man got to be riding bulls now he ought to be working you know so they draw you up last or whatever you know 'cause I only--
Story_ID: 616159
Speaker 1: And I didn't know this until I went to a rodeo down at McAllen, Texas, and I had, the white guy was winning the rodeo down there and so when I went down there, I had a bull had never been ridden so they, they kept it out the rodeo, just missed the rodeo and everything.  Then the peoples left and so a few of the people stayed so when they put--brought the bull in well I rode the bull and win the bull riding.  So that went on for about a week so one, one of the main men in the office at the rodeo office in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], he called me he say, "Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]." I said, "Yes?" He said, "You having any problems?"  I said, "No sir, I ain't have no problem."  You sure you ain't have no problem?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Did you go to the rodeo in McAllen?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, "Did you win the bull riding?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, "How many people, how many people ridden with you when you when you rode him?"  I said, "One."  He said, "One?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, "Okay," and every--to that day just every time they held me back they had to hold three white guys.  So they quit that.  They went and let me ride right along with the white guys then 'cause they didn't wanna hold them back.  But until then I didn't know they was holding me 'cause then I ain't never, it never dawned on me that I was just because that was the way I was drawed up I was the last one drawed up so I never thought about it.
Speaker 2: So they actually had a way to manipulate who went first, second, third and last?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.  'Cause they got, they got--see they drawed bulls and by numbers, every bull got a number and you got a number 'cause you got a number on your back so if they want you to go last, they just hold your bull back and then they dismissed the rodeo then they run your bull in and you gotta get on him.
Speaker 2: But you were still able to win (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: --even though there weren't any spectators. They waited until the spectators were gone--
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: --so they couldn't see you?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.  And one of the spec- one of the spectators called the rodeo office and they asked them if they had a black guy riding?  And they said, "Yes say we got one," said, "it's Mr. Myrtis Dightman."  He said, "Well I don't think it's fair so he one of the best riders, we didn't see him ride?"  Then the rodeo office called me.
Speaker 2: Did any of the stock owners give you a bull that you thought was you know like give you one of the meanest bulls to ride or do any other devious type things to hinder you?
Speaker 1: Well listen here.  This, this, this went down to (unclear) Road and he hadn't been ridden.  He was one of the meanest bulls there was then I had one in Crockett [Texas] that hadn't been ridden and I rode him.  You know so I can ride them bad bulls you know.  Just, just the idea what I had to ride.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So are there any other stories about times on, on the road?
Speaker 1: Yeah you know I, I went, a lot of times I travel on the road and, and I, and I couldn't get, I couldn't have nowhere to sleep and, and like I said the, the guys that you riding with they some good guys man, they just like, they just like a family.
Speaker 2: Even the white--
Speaker 1: Yeah I mean the white guys 'cause I was the only black going and they would like I remember a couple of rodeos went to they wouldn't rent me a room but you rent these white guys a room and, and they, so they rent the room like on the second floor and these white guys would take two pillow sheets and tie 'em together and put them down, put them down, hang 'em down and one night they pulled me up through, through the back in the bed.  Then that morning I get up and they let me back down.
Speaker 2: So you didn't have problems with the white cowboys it was more so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The peoples in the town.
Speaker 2: --the officials.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: And even the spectators wanted to see you ride?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. They wanna see me ride but the guys own the stock the ones didn't want you to ride.
Story_ID: 616160
Speaker 1: So what did you have to do to, to qualify for nationals [National Finals Rodeo]?
Speaker 2: Well you have to, you have to win points, you have to--you get, they give a point for every dollar you win.  So you one, two, that's  how, that's how the number they go to the final, one win the most money, won everything that's how you go to the finals.
Speaker 1: And the most money at all the different rodeos--
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: --throughout the year or?
Speaker 2: The year, yes ma'am.  And I remember one time Freckles Brown [Warren G. Brown] he was a white guy out of Oklahoma, he was a good guy.
Speaker 1: You say his name is what?
Speaker 2: Freckles Brown.
Speaker 1: Freckus Brown [sic.].
Speaker 2: Freckles Brown and I was riding bulls as good as anybody and so I was in third place so I was riding these bulls you know so one day I said, "Freckles," he say, "Yeah, what's the matter Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]?" I said, "Look I just wanna ask you a question."  "You can ask me anything."  I said, "What does I got to do to win the world?"  He says, "You really wanna know?"  I said, "Yes, I really wanna know." "'Cause you ask me."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "If you wanna win the world, you gotta keep riding like you riding and turn white."  And we just laughed about it 'cause I know that wasn't gonna never happen.  You know but he just told the truth about it.
Speaker 1: So you talking about the world--
Speaker 2: World champion (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) championship?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And did you get close to winning?
Speaker 2: Third.  I got close, I win in the third.  I got third place.  So and that and I remember every time I go to California used to be this little guy be on the back of my shoes all the times, little black guy, so I went in my mind, I said now this year he told me that only way to win the world I got to keep riding like I'm doing and turn white 'cause that never happen so what I thought about now this guy he's younger than me and he might come up and win the world.  So he say, "Mr. Dightman," I said, "Yes?"  He said, "Man I sure wanna ride bull."  I said, "I tell you what Charlie [Charles Sampson], if you go to school and finish school and show me your paper," I said, "I'll help you ride bulls."  He said, "Okay."  So 'bout three or four years later, I met him in California again.  He said, "I got it, I got it."  I said, "Show me your paper?"  He showed his paper so we rode rodeo for a while you know together and things and then he got so he could ride bulls real good.  I say, "Okay but I'm a turn you on your own."  And so I turned him out there and he, he got with some more white guys and like I say the bull everybody in the rodeo is just like a family.  The only people wasn't in your family is the ones the town you go to.  He's the first black to win the world in '82 [1982] and he called me and and they called me up there and told us said, "Man come up here and pull Charlie's rope, he win the world."  I went there and pulled the rope for him.
Speaker 1: And when you say pull the rope, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: I mean you put a deal around a bull and it's got a, got a knot like that and then you pull it up and you just ride him one hand and hold it with the other hand.
Speaker 1: So because you didn't win, you mentored somebody else to win (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Now you were the first black to qualify for the nationals and that you only missed qualifying one time?
Speaker 2: One time yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and what kept you from qualifying that one time?
Speaker 2: Well I just didn't make as many rodeos.  I just didn't make as many rodeos.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so the world standing you won third--
Speaker 2: In the world, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: --for two, two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah I went on, I won--I went last, the first year the last year I didn't go to finals, I went in '64 [1964] then I didn't go in '65 [1965].  Then I went every year up to '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: And then is that Calgary Stampede [Calgary, Canada]?
Speaker 2: Calgary.  I won all the big ones.  Calgary, Cheyenne [Wyoming].
Speaker 1: Okay tell me about what are the names of the big rodeos or contests?
Speaker 2: Cheyenne, Calgary, Houston [Texas], Los--Calgary, Alberta, Canada, and you got one in California, Los Angeles that one, that was the two biggest ones.  The biggest rodeo in the world.  I like to go to Canada.
Speaker 1: Canada?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, I love to go to Canada.  Everybody was real nice to you in Canada.
Story_ID: 616161
Speaker 1: Now tell me about other things that were going on.  You were doing rodeos but you also were paid to do some movies, right?  You became a movie star cowboy?
Speaker 2: Well that's what I said about the white guys rodeo with you.  They, they mostly friends you know and one year I was at the rodeo so a guy named Walt Garrison he was from--he play with Dallas Cowboys and he used to bull dog in the rodeo and he called, "Myrtis [HistoryMaker Myrtis Dightman]," he said, "man how would you like to make Marlboro commercials?"  I said, "Yeah," I said, "okay sound pretty good."  So he got me and said, "Now you got to go--we got to find a place for you to do this 'cause it got to be in a rodeo place."  I said, "Okay."  So then I go back to Crockett [Texas], and I talk to a guy that I know that had a rodeo pen and like I said things was still prejudice too back then you know so I, I asked him, I said, I asked him about--'cause I'm a need a place to make some Marlboro commercials.  He said, "Myrtis," he said, "Okay."  He said, "Why don't you come to my place?"  I said, "Okay."  I said, "Look," I said, "I need a place that some black people can go."  He said, "I don't care."  He said, "I'm renting--I'm letting you have it."  Said, "You do what you want who you wanna bring there."  And that's, that's how I got the Marlboro commercials.  I went to his place there in Crockett and shot there.  So oh a couple months later the same guy come back to me and ask me, "Say man you wanna do some movies?"  I'm, I'm flattered now, I'm the big wheel now I'm doing some movies.  I said, "Yeah."  So a guy called and tell me his name is Cliff Robertson but they call him on the movie his name J.W. Coop.  So he said man he say, "I heard about you."  Said, "Would you like to shoot a movie with me?"  I said, "Sure I go shoot a movie with you."  So he said, "Okay."  So he said, "I'll get back in touch in about a week or two."  I said, "Okay."  So he got back in touch with me I had to go to Hollywood, Los Angeles [California].  And he was telling me how to--had to go in and he gonna show you how these movies and things go you know, you know 'cause you don't know if you ain't never been you don't know how to make 'em you know.  He take me down there and he showed me said you gotta do this you gotta do this.  I said, "Okay, okay, okay."  So then the movie turn out pretty good, turned out good you know so we went through all the details and detail this you know and riding these bulls you know and I showed him how to ride a couple of bulls and things so it went real good.
Speaker 1: You showed him how to ride, did he ride a bull?
Speaker 2: Well he was a stunt man. He had a stunt man riding the bull for him you know so and everything was cool then.
Speaker 1: So you rode a bull in the movie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had rode two bulls in the movie.  And then what happened and so in the movie we--after the movie he want--he thought--he thanked me for using his--he didn't have no equipment so I lend him use my bull rope.  So he thought--he thank me for using his bull rope so he said, "Myrtis, after a while we going to have us a drank at the bar."  So we go to a place and have a drink and I looked up to it and it's a white bar.  Back in them days they didn't allow black people--
Speaker 1: What year was the movie ['J.W. Coop'] in?  This was in 1971?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] so I, so I said, "Okay."  So we go to the bar and I looked up, I said, "Nah J.W. this ain't no WCBA [ph.] bull bar. I ain't going this bar."  He said, "Awe bullshit Myrtis come on in."  We goes in, in the bar, sit down at the table and the she lady come over and she said, "Can I help you?"  I said, "Yes, I wanna beer."  He said, "What you about you Myrtis?"  I said, "I'll drink a beer with you."  So he--they bought us a beer you know and we was sitting down and four white guys behind us over there they was plotting on us, they didn't like us no how you know so so he called the lady's name was Jermaine [ph.], Jermaine or something so he said told her said, "Yeah bring us another drink."  "So excuse me J.W. I'm going the bathroom."  So I get up go in the bathroom these four white guys come in there and jump on me.  So so about that time he hear the noise.  So he had ordered drinks, but the bartender in cahoots.  He said, "Clear the table off."  He said, "No friend this is, I'm a order us another beer."  He said, "Nah you and your friend's on the way out of here."  So under the window he heard a noise and they come jump in the bathroom. We was in there fighting so we whopped those guys so after a while the laws come in and asked what's going on.  We had brought one guy up to the toilet stool and he was washing his face in the toilet stool and two more guys sitting up in the corner knocked all out and so one of the guys so when the laws come in, he asked us what's going on.  They said, "Oh just a few guys come in to washing up. That's all," and we walked on out (laughter).
Speaker 1: That should have been in the movie.
Speaker 2: Maybe a movie.
Speaker 1: So that was your first movie?
Speaker 2: Yeah and then I rode on a bull on 'Junior Bonner' movie.  I rode a big bull.  I used to rode some bulls on the hill that's all, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616162
Speaker 1: What are some of the special techniques as far as ropes and things that, like that that you have to know how to do to, to ride a bull?
Speaker 2: Well see you get, you have to buy your ropes.  It takes special guys that make these ropes, these special made ropes.
Speaker 1: Where do you get them made?
Speaker 2: Well you can find like some guy be around the rodeo, see some guys they have ropes now be plaited and they're plaited and then they put a plait of hair hold in it.
Speaker 1: Put a what?
Speaker 2: Handhold like your suitcase like you got a suitcase the way they build, they do it and you stick your hand in there and then you put--you get you two guys to pull your rope up like that and wrap around your hand like that and then wrap it like that and hold it and pull the rope but you can't touch the bull with the one--just one hand only, that's all you can touch it with.  If you touch it with your other hand you're disqualified.
Speaker 1: So was that the only rule that you describe to ride with one hand and not touch the bull with the other?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  That's, that's the rule.  And stay on.  That's the main rule is stay on (laughter).  Just stay on.
Speaker 1: And how long was the longest time--
Speaker 2: Eight seconds.
Speaker 1: Eight seconds--
Speaker 2: You gotta stay, that's a long time to be on the back of a bull bucking.
Speaker 1: So you have to stay on eight seconds (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight seconds yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: So that's how you win?
Speaker 2: Yep.  And, and you got a judge on each side and he marking from one to twenty-five.
Speaker 1: They do what?
Speaker 2: They mark each man from one to twenty-five.  They mark you one to twenty-five and mark the animal from one to twenty-five.  And see that's how you get--that's how they get--if they don't want you to win, they just, they might mark you ten and fifteen and mark the other guy thirty-five and twenty-five.  He already ahead of you.
Speaker 1: Okay I'm still not understanding the mark. What do you mean mark?
Speaker 2: You got a judge on each side of you.  One on one side, one on the other side.  Okay this judge here will mark you like fifteen and twenty.
Speaker 1: What do you mean fifteen and twenty?  What do you mean?
Speaker 2: They might mark, see they might mark the bull twenty and mark you twenty-five.  This man here might mark the bull thirty-five and mark the man forty.  But see this going, this rule, this, this figure over here be higher than the figure here so that make this guy over here beat you.  That's how it go.
Speaker 1: And it was really just nothing you can do about it?
Speaker 2: No ma'am.  'Cause you don't know--there's nothing you can do about it.
Speaker 1: But you, you were able to win most of your contest because you were just really, I mean there was just no way that they could get away with it without blatantly cheating, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes ma'am, 'cause I--you know I thought I was good as anyone you know and like I said I got along with everybody you know and I never had no problem that much but like I said only time you really have a problem is towns you know and a lot of places you at, go there and they might not want you to eat in there you know so but the cowboy they go and man you, nah they go in and bring you something, you know, we gets a hamburger, say I'm going down the street a little further, go down a little further you know and stuff like that yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616163
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about movies and your Hollywood years and you talked about 'J.W. Coop' the movie with Cliff Robertson and then the movie with Steve McQueen.  What was the name of that movie again?
Speaker 2: 'Junior Bonner.' I mean--
Speaker 1: 'Junior Bonner.'
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're also on television 'To Tell the Truth'?
Speaker 2: 'To Tell the Truth' yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that episode?
Speaker 2: It was fun you know.  They, they tell you what to do you know.  You go there and they talk about this and that and they ask, they ask the people who was the real Myr- who is the real [HistoryMaker] Myrtis Dightman, bull rider.  And then everybody would stand up you know and then, then they--when I stand up they like, (makes sound), thank you applause like it really was, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And, and I just wanted to clear up the dates for the Prairie View Trail Ride [Prairie View Trail Ride Association].  You started that when?
Speaker 2: In '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: In 1957.
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957] yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: But you also started an organization the trail ride association with, with James Francis [James Francis, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, that's the one.
Speaker 1: Tell me why you started that organization.  That was back in the time that you started the trail ride?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].  Well, well we started 'cause I never seen like I said we been friends we never seen black riding horses downtown on the trail ride.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Tell me why you started the trail ride association?
Speaker 1: Because we never seen any black riding in the Memorial Park [Houston, Texas] and downtown in the trail ride and we figure it was something wrong with that so then we said, we searched around see what we can do about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I understand so the trail ride and the association started at the same time?  It was the same purpose?
Speaker 1: Yea, it was same, it was--
Speaker 2: Was there a membership?
Speaker 1: No ma'am.  It's a membership you got to get the trail ride to started, we all had to pay.  You don't get the trail ride started necessarily 'cause everybody at the trail ride have to pay, have to pay a fee to get your wagon and everything in the trail ride but they sponsor itself.  You know they got to feed they own horses, they got to groom they own horses, put shoes on own horses, you know make the trail ride so we be out there that whole week.
Speaker 2: And you just--I mean the purpose of the trail ride once again is just to be able to ride from one place to the another, you spend the night (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: --and it's just--
Speaker 1: It's really coming into Houston [Texas], to the Houston Livestock Rodeo [Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo].  That's the prudence of it.  They always coming to the big rodeo in Houston.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Livestock rodeo, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616164
Speaker 1: You were inducted into the hall of fame?
Speaker 2: The Cowboy Hall of Fame [National Cowboy Hall of Fame and Western Heritage Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: In 1997?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And tell me what that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First black to win.
Speaker 1: Tell me what was that like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't tell you it was so man I thought, I thought I was way up there then.  Boy it was good.  I had my mother [Ada Polk] and my sis, my father [sic.], had a whole, had a whole busload of peoples there went to Houston [Texas] (unclear) 'cause I was the first black that was there with--were entered.
Speaker 1: And tell me about were there any other awards?
Speaker 2: Yeah I win trophies and I win the medallion.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: His medallion, that gold medallion.  He wanted to see that.  Okay we'll take a look at that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what about rings?
Speaker 1: Rings, first black to get one of those.
Speaker 2: And tell me what this ring is about?
Speaker 1: It's about honor.
Speaker 2: For?
Speaker 1: Bull riding.  More on bull riding.
Speaker 2: So how many people get that?
Speaker 1: They give--I think they give two a year, they only give two and this one I got in '57 [1957].  This one I got in (displays medal)--
Speaker 2: In '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 616165
Speaker 1: Because you started late, you actually stopped riding later.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide to, to stop riding bulls?
Speaker 2: Well I never been hurt real, I never been hurt bad so I could get on next day but I know the the bulls is getting, what it--the bulls is--see now this youth group these bulls is just like a man.  He take peoples go in there accolades, you know take train and stuff like that. They do bulls the same way.  They eat certain kind of foods, they swim them in the lake for so long, they just as strong as you.  They just as smart as you is.  When I was riding all the bulls all I got was hay and bull feed but now they got all kind of vitamin stuff for 'em and all kind of just like these young guys play football, just like the bull do the same thing.  So they, so you know I know my time was gonna be short.  So I said, well I had my fun for a long--so ain't no need me taking a chance to get killed or get hurt.  So I just decide to quit.  See some folks don't know when to quit 'til they get hurt or something then they can't do it.  I still walk around pretty good and stuff like that you know.
Speaker 1: You, you mention some of the, the other bullfighters or the other cowboys that you work with but tell me more about the other people who you were competing about--competing with?
Speaker 2: They all the people was mostly white but they was good.  I had George Paul and he had his own airplane and Bobby Berger, he had his own airplane.  It was two of them had they own airplane.  They, they, they ask me, "Where you going today?"  I said, "Man, I don't know."  "You wanna go with me?"  And they fly me with them.  I can fly in the plane with them.  What they do, they get you up there and they I didn't know how to fly an airplane but, inside the airplane there's another little plane on the, on the dashboard and if you cock one way or the other that wing would do this you know and he said man he said, "You wanna fly one?"  I said, "I don't know nothing about flying no planes."  He said, "Watch, all you got to do is watch this airplane here and if it, if it got go this way that mean you going that way too far so you got to straighten it up like you're driving in a car.  If you wanna turn right, you gotta turn right.  Wanna turn left, if you don't just hold straight ahead."  So they let me fly the plane a little bit.  Another guy named George Paul he was a good joker.  He loved to fight.  I know when we went to some rodeos and went to some rodeos and, and these guys at the rodeo pen they wasn't, they was just spectators, they was uptown now.  We call them uptown dudes.  So after the rodeo, me and him went uptown and so it was about four white guys up there they say, "Man look at them old cowboys, where they going."  And so George Paul told them, "Y'all won't come back here and say that."  So George Paul told us said, "Don't let them gang me don't worry about it.  Just don't let them gang me."  Boy every time one running, he knock him out.  He, he love to fight (laughter).  I was just, I was just down there to make sure the other wasn't going over the gate over there I didn't have to fight none because he loved to fight.  I had some pretty good guys on my side I guarantee you.
Story_ID: 616166
Speaker 1: So after you retired from the bull riding, what did you do then?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a guy got a bus company, Texas Bus Sales [Houston, Texas], and I'm real good with 'em.  I mean my sister worked for him before she passed so after she passed he asked, "Man you gonna keep on working for me?"  I said, "Well, I guess I will you know."  And so now what I do, they just called me a while ago I got a bus going to San Antonio [Texas].  I deliver UBuses [ph.].  Wherever you sell UBuses, I deliver to them and they're either fly me back or I got an S-10 [Chevrolet S-10] pickup.  I put the S-10 pickup on back of the bus and when I get there I just unhook it and drive back in the pickup.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you did that after you--after you stop riding bulls until now?  Is that what you do now?
Speaker 2: That's what I do now, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And but you stopped running bulls in 1989?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. So I started and I started giving my own rodeos.  So I can have a rodeo in Crockett [Texas] every Labor Day weekend.
Speaker 1: Oh, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: It's real good you know.  I got one my family and my son [Myrtis Dightman, Jr.] one pushed it, want to give the rodeo so I told him all the time I said rodeoing is a lot of work.  See y'all don't know about work.  Y'all go to the rodeo, y'all see it, they gone but now he see rodeo it's, it's from one year to other one you got to prepare for these rodeos.
Speaker 1: Well tell me some of the things you have to do to prepare for a rodeo?
Speaker 2: Well you got to worry about getting your stock.  You have to worry about having to put it on.  See we put up like fifteen thousand--fifteen hundred dollars.  You got to worry about where this money coming from.  The stock cost like thirty-five hundred so when that man unload he want his money.  So you got to worry about all of that.  Think about all that where you gonna get this money from.  So.
Speaker 1: Where do you hold the rodeo?
Speaker 2: In Crockett, Texas, at the Lions Club [Crockett Lions Club], in Crockett.  That's where I was born at and first they didn't want us to give this rodeo there.  You know so I guess after a bunch of the guys know me real good, they say well they--what fooled them they really thought we was gonna give maybe have it one or two years, we wasn't gonna have it no more, but last year was twenty-first year, twenty-one years been giving it and we ain't never asked them for a dime.  So now they in there helping us, they ready for us to come you know and I'm the only black that they let take a bunch of horses down through town.  I have about one hundred fifty horses go right down to the main street downtown have all the laws support me and everything.  So it come out busy.  It's like I said this year here will be the twenty-second year we been having it.  Called the Myrtis Dightman Rodeo [Myrtis Dightman Annual Labor Day Rodeo].
Story_ID: 616167
Speaker 1: You talked about your son but we never talked about your personal life.  So tell me when you got married and how many children you have?
Speaker 2: I got married early and I have five beautiful kids.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names?
Speaker 2: My son, well my girl name Pam [Pamela Dightman Craft], Vanessa [Vanessa Dightman Brown], then my oldest boy named Myrtis Junior [Myrtis Dightman, Jr.] and then I have one, one son's a preacher, Gregory [Gregory Dightman], then I have Darryl [Darryl Dightman] is the baby boy.  They all support me and they real good and they help me a lot.
Speaker 1: And what was your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Fannie [Fannie Criswell].
Speaker 1: What year did you get married?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: No.  But she was a good wife, it was a good marriage.  You know like I said we--I just rodeo.  When I got--I notice that being married you needed to be around home our business back home you know.  A lot and I know that wasn't for me because after I, after I got to rodeoing like well I liked, I liked to stay out there.  And it might be weeks or months or something before I come back home you know and so but like she took care of the kids and everything real good and we just--we still get along real good now.  It still feel like we married.  We get along like sisters and brothers right now.  We have no regrets.
Speaker 1: Now you have a, a new project with your hats.  I see you wearing them--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --wearing one of them, tell me about that and how that got started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know I talked to my son one time about let's get when I was working, I used to work for American Hat Company [American Hat Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Say that again?
Speaker 2: American--
Speaker 1: American.
Speaker 2: --Hat Company for a while and they come, they come out with some hats with my hats and so Mr. Bill George, he got old and sick and he went in the old folks home and then his wife [Billie George] she finally passed and then his daughters they sold out to a guy in Dallas [Texas], so I didn't have no more hats for a while.  So my son, "Daddy, you ought to put hats out."  I said yeah so he the one that pushed me to put these hats out.  So we finally had them made and they, they doing good you know, they doing pretty good.  We don't have no sponsor or nothing yet, we have to do it on our own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a scholarship in your name?  Or you had a concert to raise funds?
Speaker 2: Yeah we raised funds for a scholarship.
Speaker 1: For a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, raised funds for scholarships, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you do you have any grandchildren?  We talked about your kids, I'm sorry I meant to go into that one when I asked you about your children.  But do you have any grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  I don't know they names.  (Laughter) I ask my son he can tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I stay gone all the time.
Speaker 1: Do you know how many there are?
Speaker 2: He don't know.
Speaker 1: Well that's okay.
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: (MYRTIS DIGHTMAN, JR.): Thirteen so far. Thirteen.
Speaker 2: Thirteen grandchildren (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirteen grandkids, yes ma'am.
Story_ID: 616168
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you because this interview is going to be available for your great-great-grandchildren to see because it'll be in the archives--
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: --is there a message that you would want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: Well, yea you know I'd like to see kids--you know well things has changed now.  But maybe by the time it get out it'll be back like it used to be.  I mean kids don't have no respect now and that's what they need, they need to respect older people more.  You know you used, you see a kid today all right old school.  Yeah but I ain't never been in trouble you know.  So you take back the old like these cowboys now they wanna ride a horse all kind of ways. That's no way to do it.  If you gonna be a cowboy go like a cowboy you know.  That's how I got my start because I always was a representative of a cowboy because if you revved up a cowboy and you ride down the road you don't know who looking for somebody to do some advertising or something for them so if you riding your horse down the road and like the cowboy and everything on that man said I can use that guy there.  But now if you riding a horse down the road, your t-shirt all half backwards and your cap turned around backwards, they can't use you.  You know so alls I can tell the young generation say man pull your pants up.  Don't nobody wanna see that but the police and only why the police wanna see you because you can't outrun 'em you know.  I mean act like, act like somebody.  That's what I got for the young kids man.
Speaker 1: Now because you said that when you were riding bulls you didn't get paid much, but now today it's more of a sport where they're really getting paid.  What advice do you have for someone who really is serious about bull riding?
Speaker 2: Well I tell them if they really serious about bull riding go talk to somebody, get with somebody and, and they'll help you, they'll help you ride bulls.  But you gotta have a good attitude to ride bulls you know.  You know 'cause you gotta get along with everybody.  You know so it's money out there now.  You can get rich out there now.  You can ride three or four bulls and be a millionaire and all the years I rode I didn't, I didn't even come close to being that.  But it's so much money out there now man. It's so much money out there it's sickness.  Make me, make me know I was born too late--too early.
Speaker 1: Do you still advocate that a child should go to school first, because you did that with--you mentored (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charlie Sampson [Charles Sampson].
Speaker 1: --Charlie Sampson.  You told him to go--
Speaker 2: Finish school.
Speaker 1: --school, so--
Speaker 2: And, and the simple reason I told him, I told him only simple reason I told him like this because if you, if you got an education and you go out there, get your leg broke or your arm broke, you can go up to your job in a wheelchair you know but if you ain't got no education, ain't nothing you can do.  So that was one of the reasons I had try so hard because I didn't have no education.  I got grown and wanted to quit, when I should have went on to school.
Speaker 1: Is that something that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: You know I really can't say because the Lord and everything, the good Lord got everything planned out for certain every individual.  It's up to--you know to me that might not be what he wanted me to do you know.  And I'll never know this.  A lot of times I think about it.  I say I wonder if I had got the things I did and got the place I went if I had a good education.  But I might, I might not have done that.  I might done something different.
Story_ID: 616169
Speaker 1: Was there anything else that you might have thought you would have wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, no, this is what--I always wanted to be a cowboy.  And I always wanna try to be the first black cowboy that did this you know. That's what I, that's what I really took to beat me down because it didn't make no difference you know.  I never got mad at nobody.  Hey they cheated me I know they cheated me I didn't get mad, I just go to another rodeo you know.  I know I was supposed to win this rodeo, I didn't win and I might win third or fourth, I didn't get mad, I just take it and go to another one you know.  Because you can't make nobody do nothing.  You ain't got, you ain't got the pencil and paper.  So you have to take what they give you and go.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't think of anything.  I'm just happy like I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that we haven't talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Tell him.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to talk about that we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: What you say?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Let's talk about the Prairie View Trail Ride [Prairie View Trail Ride Association], you're on the board of directors, talk about that?
Speaker 1: Yeah well my son [Myrtis Dightman, Jr.] and my buddy over there Paul, Paul Mitchell [sic.], they got--
Speaker 2: What's Paul's last name?
Speaker 1: --Jackson [Paul Jackson].  They--I was just kind of wanted to be the light, the light you know just get back and let them handle it you know.  But now they saw that and now they put me on the board of director now.  They didn't wanna let me stay, won't let me alone (laughter).  So they told me they said you done started something now you gotta finish it.  But I thought I had finished it.  But they good guys though, you know they you know like I tell them anything I can jump in and help 'em do I'll do it.  But you know just call me and I, and I don't argue with them and people on the Prairie View Trail Ride they respect me and you know if they do something wrong on the trail ride and they see me, they gonna tell, they gonna come to me before I get to them and tell me man I done this, I done this 'cause they know I'm coming.
Story_ID: 616170
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: As a good guy.  I want everybody to know me as a good guy.  I tried and try to help everybody.  That's what I wanna try help everybody.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you very much for taking the time to tell your story and it's going to be useful to so many young people in the years to come so thank you for taking the time and letting us come and meet you and your family.
Speaker 2: I sure appreciate you coming anytime I can do anything for you just call on me.  Thank you ma'am.
Story_ID: 616171
Speaker 1: That there's at the national finals [National Finals Rodeo] in 1966, NFR Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  I win the third on him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was, that there was 1968 there, that was at the national final in Oklahoma City.  I won fourth on him.
Speaker 2: That there was at the national final in Tulsa [Oklahoma] in 1967.  I won eighth on that--nah I won sixth on him.
Speaker 1: That's V61 in 1970 in Cheyenne, Wyoming, Frontier Days [Cheyenne Frontier Days Rodeo].  I won that rodeo.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Right there that's the NFR in '72 [1972] in Oklahoma City.  I win first on him.
Speaker 2: That was a bull that was the top fifteen mens that go to national finals in bull riding.
Speaker 1: That was '97 [1997] that was when I was inducted to the Cowboy Hall Fame [National Cowboy Hall of Fame and Western Heritage Center] in Oklahoma City.
Speaker 2: That there, that there is me and Cliff [Cliff Robertson] right there is me and, and for Marlboro commercial.  That was the first time I made Marlboro commercials picture right there.  That's in Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a rodeo, that's a rodeo I had in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  That was a good bull there too.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's one of my endorsement hats there and that medallion is the one I won in '97 [1997], went to the Cowboy Hall of Fame. That Winchester and I got a Winchester in a saddle--I win in '97 [1997] in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That there is when I went to Oklahoma, no I went to Las Vegas and Ty Murray he give me the ring of honor and this the ring he give me the ring of honor in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 1: What was the ring for?
Speaker 2: The award of honor, yes. I was the first black guy to get one of these.
