Story_ID: 410299
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure, and I'm the interviewer today, Matthew Hickey is the veo- videographer, and sir could you please state your name and spell your first, middle and last name for us?
Speaker 2: Robert Michael DeBlanc, R-O-B-E-R-T, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, D-E-B-L-A-N-C [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc].
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, twenty-one, fifty-four [September 21, 1954], Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: The all-important question, today's date?  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 1st of November.
Speaker 1: Two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: And where c- where are we currently?  The location of our interview today (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Las Vegas, Nevada, actually in Henderson, Nevada, right outside Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation sir?
Speaker 2: Entertainer.
Story_ID: 410300
Speaker 1: Now we have a few questions we ask that we call the People magazine questions, tabloidal [ph.] kind of questions we like to ask.  Number one is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Thai.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Now.
Speaker 1: So we'll say the fall?
Speaker 2: The fall, yes, yeah, yeah the fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cancun [Mexico].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: A bought lesson is a taught lesson.
Speaker 1: One more time on that one?
Speaker 2: A bought lesson is a taught lesson.  If you pay for it, you won't forget it (laughter) it costs me money.
Story_ID: 410301
Speaker 1: Thank you.  We're gonna go into a little background of your family life, and I'd like to go into, first of all could you tell me about your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Louise, my mother's no longer here.
Speaker 1: Her last name, her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Deville [Louise Deville], just like the Cadillac.
Speaker 1: And where was Ms. Deville born?
Speaker 2: Lake Charles, Louisiana, 1923.
Speaker 1: Is that where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background growing up as a child in Lake Charles?
Speaker 2: My mother was born on a farm, one of nine kids, five girls, four boys, she's a middle child, she was born there with a midwife.  And from the things I can remember that she told me, she had a wonderful childhood, they had animals on the farm and, you know, they grew their own stuff to eat and they, when they wanted the, you know, meat, you know, they killed the animals and, yeah, I think it was a nice childhood, a healthy childhood growing up.
Speaker 1: Could you name the other siblings, her other siblings by chance?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, they're all gone too.  But, I have an Aunt Rina [Arine Deville], Aunt Annelia [Annelia Deville], Aunt Elsie [Elsie Deville], Uncle Bud [ph.] and Uncle Wilford [ph.], whom I never met, that's six, there would be Delores [ph.] We- Aunt Welia [ph.] and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the ones I can remember.
Speaker 1: How would you personally describe your mother from your childhood perspective when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother had an eighth grade education, typical back then of--and, my mother was self-taught, you know?  And, when her and my dad [Albert DeBlanc (ph.)] broke up, it was up to her to raise the kids, six of us and my mo- my mom got a trade working with wiring and stuff and worked at McDonnell Douglas Aircraft [McDonnell Douglas] for like twenty-eight years in Long Beach, California.  She was a great mother.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the stories of the farm life, did she share any other stories with you that might be appropriate or that you can remember that stood out, anything in particular?
Speaker 2: Well I'm Creole and my family is of all colors and hues, you know, we have light ones, dark ones, brown ones, tan ones, green eyes, and brown eyes and, the one thing that stands out in my mind is, is, is I think my grandfather [Archile Deville] was a little prejudice (laughter) because we actually had people in my family passing for white, you know, high yellow.  And my aunties would bring home the dark, you know, the servicemen in the, you know, during World War II [WWII], and my grandpa would run them off, that stands out in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That stands out.
Story_ID: 410302
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Albert DeBlanc [ph.] and he was a barber by trade, he owned a barbershop.
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Iberia, Louisiana, yeah, New Iberia, and he had a barbershop on Western Avenue [Los Angeles, California] next to Fatburgers.
Speaker 1: Is that where he grew up in, in New Iberia?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his childhood background growing up?
Speaker 2: That he had a lot of brothers, they were all light skinned, very handsome and they had to leave New Iberia because of the racism.  You know the white girls liked them, so they had to get out.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe your father as a man?
Speaker 2: He was a good man.  He was a good man, self-made, self-taught.
Speaker 1: Did he get any--outside of the stories of the racism in New Iberia, did he share any other stories with you--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) regarding his--
Speaker 2: --no, no my dad and my mom [Louise Deville] divorced when I was a little boy so I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I don't have a lot of memory of him.
Story_ID: 410303
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned being Creole, how far back, and you mentioned your [maternal] grandfather [Archile Deville], how back in your ancestry can you go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We can go all the way back to France, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How far can you personally go back?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, knowing, did you know your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, I never knew my great-grandparents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I knew where they were from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were from, they went from France to Montreal [Canada], from Montreal to Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My older brother did a trace, and the, the names were DeBlancs and Devilles and also the Fontanoffs [ph.] and they all came fr- from France you know down into Canada.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Louise Deville] side?
Speaker 2: No.  I knew my, I knew my mother's parents, that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not my father's [Albert DeBlanc (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Well you know, oh, yeah okay, so, so your mother's parents you did know her, so you did know your maternal grandmother and grandfather?
Speaker 2: Not the grandfather, he died before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the grandmother?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about her, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Camellia [Camille Deville].  Wow, it's great, memories of my grandmother is food cooking, walking in the door smelling baking pies, and cooking gumbo and, and listening to the Zydeco music, you know, Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did they play, in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No.  Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Los Angeles--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: She was here--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah they all moved out to, to California in, I think around 1944.
Speaker 1: Are you aware, aware of why this move happened besides the racism, was there job opportunity, what was the reason?
Speaker 2: Just opportunity.  A lot of families moved west, you know, like when you go to places like, you know, like Detroit [Michigan], and you ask everybody where they're from, well they're all from the South. They all came there to get jobs at the, in, in the auto industry, you know and that's why they moved north.
Speaker 1: So your paternal grandparents, your mot- your father's mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know my father's mother, no--
Speaker 1: You didn't know them.
Speaker 2: Never met 'em.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any stories that your grandmother told you in particular?  Your, your, your mom's mother, did she tell you anything in particular?  Do you recall anything that she told Robert [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc] in particular?
Speaker 2: Oh, nothing negative, it was all, growing up in Louisiana and how wonderful it was back then for them and, and the--some of the earliest things I can remember about my grandmother is her introducing me to Zydeco music, you know, which I'm, I- I'm not into now, but I remember very, very well.  And she would make a gumbo and put the Zydeco music on and everybody would do this little creole dance thing that they did, I don't, I don't remember how it goes, but--.
Story_ID: 410304
Speaker 1: So what would you say your earliest memory growing up is?  Your earliest memory, how old were you and what is that memory that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Of--?
Speaker 1: Of things in general as a child.
Speaker 2: Well I had a wonderful childhood 'cause I was the last of six, so anything happened, they got blamed, so every memory of my childhood is wonderful.  But I, I, I just remember being protected, I have a couple of older brothers, you know, and I always felt protected and safe.
Speaker 1: What was your family life like with those, with those family members, your brothers and si- your brothers and sisters, the holidays, what was life like in your home?
Speaker 2: Well, after my dad [Albert DeBlanc (ph.)] left, there wasn't a lot of money, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old would you say you were when he left--
Speaker 2: I was five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's not like we went camping or anything like that, or to Disneyland [Anaheim, California], there wasn't any money for that.  You know, I just remember a lot of love in the house, I have my sisters watched out after me, my older brother is ten years older than me and then I have another brother five years older than me.  So the, the age gap was there and I was treated like, you know, the real little brother, protected, sheltered, but I remember music in the house, you know, the doo wop of the '50s [1950s] because he's older that's what he played in the house.  Now, of course, when I was five years old, I wasn't into music, but he was fifteen, you understand?  So he was playing, you know, all the old stuff in the house.  I re- I re- I remember the music, that's about, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Now tell us the name of your siblings and their birth order, and then you said you were the last one?  So give us the birth order of your siblings.
Speaker 2: It's Albert [ph.], Sandra [ph.], Shirley [ph.], and Audrey [ph.], Ralph [Ralph DeBlanc] and then myself, I'm the baby.
Story_ID: 410305
Speaker 1: Now what street did you live on in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Vineyard [Avenue] off of Adams [Boulevard] and Crenshaw [Boulevard] (laughter) you know it?
Speaker 1: Can you describe your block and how that block--and how the street was, your neighbors in your community?
Speaker 2: The block back then was, was cool 'cause all the neighbors had the right to spank each child, it took a village, you understand, to raise a child?  My neighbor next door was Mrs. Knight [ph.] and I remember, even if my mom [Louise Deville] was at work, I had to be a good boy because Mrs. Knight, the neighbor is watching us.  So, you know what's weird about, about the street I grew up on, I'm kind of a, what's the word I'm looking for?  I, I'm a big sap, I, I went back there about ten years ago to look at the street, it's tiny, man, so small, so tight, and I couldn't understand why it looked so tight?  It's because, when I was a little boy, I was little, and it was so large, so I remember going back there and thinking, gee this street is really little, but back then it was my whole world and it was a great time to grow up in the '50s [1950s], great time.  Now because I grew up in L.A., I didn't experience what my parents did in the South, you know?  So I can only tell you the good things that happened to me in L.A.
Story_ID: 410306
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and the smells around Vineyard [Avenue] and Adams [Boulevard] and Crenshaw [Boulevard] that you can recall, things in particular from your perspective, that you can bring to our, to our, to our mind today?
Speaker 2: The air was fresher back then (laughter).  Sights and sounds and smells, no smells and the sights, p- pretty much remain the same, but around the corner, no at the corner was a liquor store owned by the Pinckney [ph.] twins, Mr. Pinckney had a brother and they were identical twins and I could go there--because it was such a small community [in Los Angeles, California], you could go there and put things on credit, you know, back in the day, my mom [Louise Deville] would send me down to the store to get some milk, and Mr. Pinckney would hand it and say, "You want this, son?"  "Yeah, Mr. Pinckney, just write it down," so yeah, things like that.  And my mom would have m- have me pick up her cigarettes, you know, and other things.  But, we were protected, I felt safe.
Speaker 1: Were there any other memory that you have of, of that, and Mr. Pinckney or anything else that just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went back there when I was a grown man because I'm very sentimental and I remember Mr. Pinckney's brother was dead, there was only one Pinckney there. And also, there was a, there was a lawyer, Mr. Blevins [ph.], who had an office and he was a, it's an early memory I have of a black professional, you know?  Of a guy in a suit, you understand what I'm saying? 'Cause I didn't see a lot of that when I was growing up.  And Mr. Blevins, he had an office right there, around the corner from Mr. Pinckney, and because it was such a little community at that time, everybody knew everybody and then, and you just felt safe and protected.
Story_ID: 410307
Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup of the neighborhood at that point?
Speaker 2: Japanese and black.
Speaker 1: And how was that interaction with Japanese--
Speaker 2: Just fine.  You remember Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] and all that?  And years ago it was mostly Japanese around there, so yeah.
Speaker 1: And the interaction, was it the same interaction that one might say, of a racial tension or anything between the Japanese (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was no racial tension between the Japanese and the black, that I can remember, and I went to a school called Virginia Road Street School [Virginia Road Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], now Virginia--
Speaker 1: Now (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Now Virginia Road.
Speaker 1: Now was that your, was that your, your elementary school?
Speaker 2: My elementary school, yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was called what now?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: It was called what again?
Speaker 2: Virginia Road Street School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's, I think it's still there, it should be there.  But, I looked at my class photo not long ago and it's like, and I'm a little boy and it's all these little Japanese kids in there and I was wondering, where they were and what they look like now?
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at that school at the Virginia Roads School that influenced you?
Speaker 2: No.  'Cause I didn't stay there very long.  We moved quite a lot after that.
Speaker 1: How long were you there at that school?
Speaker 2: Maybe one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then where did you go?
Speaker 2: We moved off of Arlington [Van Ness Avenue] and Manchester [Boulevard], Manchester and Arlington on a, I can't remember the street, 62nd Street [sic.], 62nd Street--
Speaker 1: Sounds about right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's about right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what school did you go to there?
Speaker 2: Alta Loma [Alta Loma Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] I think it's called.  You're asking me to go way back, man (laughter) think of from my elementary school.
Speaker 1: Alta Loma Elementary?
Speaker 2: Alta Loma, yeah.
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers there that you can recall?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think I got influenced by a school teacher until junior high school [Audubon Junior High School; Audubon Middle School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you as an elementary student?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, I liked reading, I loved reading, I didn't like math but I loved history and everything else.
Speaker 1: And aside from your studies what kind of child were you, were you well-mannered--
Speaker 2: I was good kid, yeah.  Yeah, my mother [Louise Deville] told me that I was a good child, I never got in trouble really.
Speaker 1: And in elementary school did you have any dreams or aspirations and things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Baseball.  Absolutely baseball.
Speaker 1: You were into baseball?  Explain that a little bit.
Speaker 2: I still play baseball.  I'm on a softball team up here in Anthem [Henderson, Nevada].  You were at Lamonte's [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] house?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's up there.  I play Tuesdays and Fridays (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who was a big star then, who, who was your role model then?
Speaker 2: Willie Mays, Willie McCovey, Juan Marichal--
Speaker 1: And what was your position?
Speaker 2: --Pete, Pete Rose.  I pitched and I played outfield.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: My mother did, not the family, not, no, not much, I'm Catholic.
Speaker 1: And she was Catholic?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 410308
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Audubon Junior High School [Audubon Middle School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Audubon Junior High.
Speaker 2: You know Audubon, off of Cre- yeah.  Off of Crenshaw [Boulevard]?
Speaker 1: Now who were your friends there?  Anybody of note that we might know that went to school with you there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Marques Johnson, remember the basketball player Marques Johnson?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He went to school with me, he was on the Milwaukee Bucks and Ellis Valentine, you remember Ellis Valentine?  Montreal--he played baseball, Montreal Expos for the years, him too.
Speaker 1: Was anybody in, in the entertainment business you can think of at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that you had some influence at junior high, in junior high.
Speaker 2: That would have been my choir teacher, yeah, yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who was he or her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mrs. Badran, B-A-D-R-A-N, Mrs. Badran, I tried her for eighth, eighth grade glee class, which is like a minor choir class.  She was the first person who told me, "You have a nice voice," and I said, "Really?"  I thought I had something, I wasn't sure but I needed, you know, reassurance I guess, and she said, "You have a good voice."  So, after that I started listening more when I would sing, I guess influenced me--
Speaker 1: And what was the overall repertoire of the school, what kind of music did you sing in this glee class?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh my, we did standards, a lot of musicals, you know, the big--
Speaker 1: Show tunes?
Speaker 2: --production show tunes, we would do Simon and Garfunkel, like, you know, 'Bridge over Troubled Water,' that, that type, hokey stuff.
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in school, your buddies at this point?
Speaker 2: You know I--really--well I have a couple of friends who I still hang out with, but most of them are dead, yeah.  Yeah most of them are gone.
Speaker 1: Now this eighth, this expansion, was this about the eighth grade or so when you, when you were into the glee class, was it earlier?
Speaker 2: Yeah, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So we'll say that would have been about 19- what?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is the year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was assassinated.  What was going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember the day I c- (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I was walking home from school.  I remember it clearly, man, school had just let out or they let us out, I'm not sure, I think maybe they let us out because he was shot, and I was walking home and I didn't know who Dr. King was at the time, I wasn't (gesture) worldly.  And I remember a car coming to a stop, I was at an intersection about to cross the street and it was an old black gentleman in the car and he rolled down the window and he sa- he leaned out and he said, "Tell your mother and father Dr. King just got shot, Dr. King just got shot."  I said, "Okay, I'll tell 'em."  I didn't realize, you know, the impact of the statement, what he told me, I just knew that I'd gotten out of school early, I didn't know why and I wasn't sure of who, who King was, I mean I was twelve or thirteen years old, you know, and I remember being glad that we had a day off, that was--
Speaker 1: Now between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the impact.
Speaker 1: Between, you were born in '54 [1954], that was I think Brown versus--
Speaker 2: Wade [sic.]--
Speaker 1: --of course, Wade, you know, around the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were a child, you, you were a baby when this went down, so do you feel that you were somewhat sheltered from the racial thing being, being in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Especially being in L.A.  I mean, the way I travel now, I talk to people, I see that I was absolutely sheltered.  Now there was racism in California, but it's not, it was not the kind, you know, that was in your face, no you can't, stop, no, you can't do this.  It was there, but I never saw it, never really saw it till I got older.
Speaker 1: So that day, Dr. King, you, you recall walking home and did you go home and tell your mother [Louise Deville] what, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I did.
Speaker 1: And what was her reaction?
Speaker 2: My mother already knew.
Speaker 1: She already knew?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 410309
Speaker 1: What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Dorsey High [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers there that, that really influenced you?
Speaker 2: None that I can think of.
Speaker 1: Now as a young man in high school now, are your aspirations going toward any particular direction--
Speaker 2: Baseball still.
Speaker 1: Still baseball.  And what are you doing about baseball now?  Are you seeing a career?
Speaker 2: At that time I saw, yeah.  I was practicing every day and I was quite good, I was quite good, I had speed, and my hands were good, and I kept trying.
Speaker 1: So besides your school activities and, of course, your baseball activities, what were some of your other activities?  How else did you spend your spare time?
Speaker 2: Girls, girls, girls, girls and hanging out with my buddies who are now gone, most of those guys are gone, you know.  Trying to not, trying to not get in trouble 'cause at that time I was at a crossroads, you know, so my activities, when you asked me about my activities were (laughter) sometimes good, sometimes not, not so good, you know.
Speaker 1: So now, you're in high school now at, at Dorsey, this would be about the early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for--I graduated '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: So, between '69 [1969], and about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --seventy-two [1972], you're in, at Dorsey?
Speaker 2: I was in high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is a very important part of history now because during that time a lot of freedoms and things are occurring now, the world is changing.
Speaker 2: Opening up, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  You started to see the concerts at Woodstock [Woodstock Festival; Woodstock Music and Art Fair], you started to see these mega people like Jimi Hendrix and--tell us about these experiences.
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, because I grew up in California, I didn't experience all the things (unclear) a lot of the negative, you know, that other people did.  And so the changes, I don't remember the effect of the changes.
Speaker 1: Not even the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not even the so called generation gap?  Did you start seeing the thing that people were starting to do more, more, free love, openness and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, well that c- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the drug culture?
Speaker 2: --came with the hippie movement, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That came with the hippie movement to me, you know, the late '60s [1960s] and, and all the concerts I went to, you know, back in the day were--. Well years ago, I was heavy into rock music, you know, and I wouldn't tell my black friends what I was listening to, 'cause I was listening to Led Zeppelin and Hendrix and Blind Faith and The Beatles and Steppenwolf and the Stones [Rolling Stones] and everything else so, you know, and, and, I might get off mark here a little bit.
Speaker 1: That's okay but now, that's, that's that time period.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why did you not tell your black friends during that time period?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause you know, they were into Motown and, and, and you know, basically black music, but because I didn't know how musical I was, I was liking everything, I liked country, I liked everything, I think all music had something to offer you if you listen to it.  But, a lot of people are close minded, man what you listening to that stuff for?  You, you, what's wrong with you, you freak. You ain't listening to that st- that's white music, but it's not white music, it's music to me.  But to another culture or group it might be taboo. That's white music, you don't listen to that, you only listen to this.  Well no, I was listening to everything, you know, and it expanded me, you know, lyrically, when you listen to lyrics of, of the Stones and The Beatles and stuff like that, it (gesture) it expands your horizons I think.
Story_ID: 410310
Speaker 1: Who did you actually see of note--concerts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Hendrix, seeing him.  Where did you see him?
Speaker 2: At the Forum [Inglewood, California] in 1970, right before he died, in a 'Band of Gypsys,' that's when he had the black band and me and my buddies snuck in (laughter), we'd snuck in and we got in and I remember, like I told you, marveling at how short he was, I couldn't believe all that sound and all this, this, this huge monster of a guitar player, was that short, you know?  I was amazed, but I was also enthralled, enthralled at how his soul was being played in every note.
Speaker 1: What, what was the racial makeup of the audience?
Speaker 2: It was mostly white, mostly white with a sprinkling of blacks and Hispanics, you know.  We weren't supposed to like Hendrix, we weren't supposed to like, you know the Stones [Rolling Stones], we weren't supposed to like Joe Cocker, you know?  You were supposed to like the Temps [The Temptations] and the Four Tops, and The Isley Brothers and that, and yeah.
Story_ID: 407863
Speaker 1: So you were listening to music that was considered possibly white music.
Speaker 2: Taboo.
Speaker 1: Taboo music.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you attribute that to somewhat, the close-minded nature of certain people and it's still that way today possibly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, man, it's, it's like your tribe, you know, and you're not supposed to listen to music that's not in your tribe.  Well, I'm sorry I liked it, you know?  When I heard it, it's like it's saying to me, it's like, I like this.  Now, a lot of the things I listened to, I wouldn't tell my friends because you know, it's like, well I'm stepping outside and not supposed to, I'm supposed to only listen to this, you know?  Because I'm black, oh no, I like everything.
Speaker 1: It's funny, because some of the black music also, that was supposed to be black music was taboo like Coltrane [John Coltrane], and people like that, that they also weren't listening to because of the of how powerful it may have been--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or outside of their basic listening.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were the radio stations doing during, during that time?  Was it, was, were the stations playing a variety of music, what that you were listening too?  Or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I listened--
Speaker 1: --ping pong--?
Speaker 2: --to the local Los Angeles [California] radio station.  When I was growing up it was AM and that was KGFJ [KGFJ Radio; KYPA Radio, Los Angeles, California], with the Magnificent Montague, I remember his, "This Magnificent Montague."  And I would also listen to KJLH [KJLH Radio, Compton, California], you know, the smooth sounds of jazz so, then I started surfing on the, on my radio station and I listened to KHJ [KHJ Radio, Los Angeles, California] and whatever struck my fancy.  But like I, I said because I only hung out with black guys at that time, I'd have been the laughing stock if I told 'em that I was listening to, you know, Joe Cocker and The Beatles and the Stones [Rolling Stones] and Blind Faith and, you know, just--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) a rock band (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even Jimi Hendrix because he's black, he was not black, you understand, he did white music, so he's white, you know, you're still listening to Hendrix? He's white.  But Hendrix's background is, is, is cold blues.  A lot of people don't know that he's a blues player, and if you listen to his stuff, he's playing the blues, really, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the first guitarist for The Isley Brothers also (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: I mean long before Ernie [Ernie Isley]--
Speaker 2: He played it upside down.
Speaker 1: And left-handed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 407864
Speaker 1: You're in high school, you're getting ready to graduate Susan Dorsey [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] about '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Were you, what were you thinking about for your future, college, or career, what were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to, I went to college for two years and I was a marketing major.
Speaker 1: What school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Cal State LA [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I did that 'til '74 [1974], '75 [1975], I think the beginning of '75 [1975], and then I got a job at McDonnell Douglas Aircraft [McDonnell Douglas], you know, my mom [Louise Deville] worked there I told you.  And my mom got me a job out there and I, I let go of baseball at that time, I didn't get any larger, so I thought, this is not gonna work.  So I went to work out there, not exactly knowing what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: About '75 [1975], or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was just a, it was a great job for you at that point?
Speaker 2: It was a great job with--
Speaker 1: Tell us about it--
Speaker 2: --with health insurance and, and all this stuff.
Speaker 1: What did you actually do?
Speaker 2: I painted, you know, the jumbo jets, the, you know, the DC 10s [McDonnell Douglas DC-10]?  And the MD-80s [McDonnell Douglas MD-80], I would paint them.  It took a crew of sixty people, twenty-four hours a day, it took 'em two weeks to paint an entire jet, because it had to be perfect.  When the--you have a customer that's paying between $50 and 60 million for a jet, it's gotta be perfect, no drips or anything.  So I had the--they would hoist me up in this, I, I forgot the name of the, it's like a basket with wheels and you hit a button and it goes up, (makes sound), and then you can move s- and I had a respirator on, and a back pack with the, you know, with the spray paint and I'd have a hose and I would just go all the way down the side of it, and I did that for like a year or so.
Story_ID: 407865
Speaker 1: While this is going on, even in your early, or your late high school years [at Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you were, I'm sure, doing what most young adults do, like hanging out in places.  What were some of the places you were frequenting, frequenting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God, Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Maverick's Flat is a, it's like the Motown of the West, Maverick's Flat is a nightclub.
Speaker 1: Where was it located?
Speaker 2: It was f- 4225 South Crenshaw Boulevard, on the corner of Crenshaw and Stocker [Street] in Los Angeles [California].  It was co-owned by John, let's see John Daniels and Jim Brown, the football player, for the Cleveland Browns, he co-owned it with John, they opened it up at, I think '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: No what was John Daniels' background?
Speaker 2: John Daniels' background?  He was from Gary, Indiana and he was an ex-cop and he owned a magazine in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] called, what's the name of it, Elegant magazine?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, [HistoryMaker] Lamonte McLemore, was the photographer for Elegant magazine, right and--
Speaker 1: Lamonte McLemore of The 5th Dimension?
Speaker 2: Of The 5th Dimension and of course of, you know, the Jet magazine fame.  He does all the centerfolds--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Page forty-three.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I didn't know what page it was--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but I'll take your word for it.  He's been doing that for years.  What was the question?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So he, he, what was his background of John Daniels, you told me that he was a--
Speaker 2: Ex-cop, ex-magazine owner and then he wanted to go in the club business and he knew Jim Brown well.  And so Jim had a little money, he had a little money, and they bought Maverick's Flat and they opened it up and it became the place to be, the place to play and the place to be seen in Los Angeles in, I would say, the early '70s [1970s] into maybe the middle '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --that was the place.
Speaker 1: Give us the, the climate around Maverick's Flat, what was going on in there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God, creative, creative.  And, I mean the beautiful people, the beautiful girls, the beautiful people and the creativeness, I mean, if there's a dance out still, called the Campbell Lock that was created by Don Campbell right there on the dance floor at Maverick's Flat.  All of the 'Soul Train' dancers came from Maverick's Flat, Don Cornelius knew my manager, John Daniels well and he would come down there, he'd look at the dance floor and say, you, you, you, you and you, you're on 'Soul Train' next week, so most of his dancers came from there.  People like Howard Hewett, Jody Watley, Earth, Wind and Fire, Chaka Khan, et cetera, et cetera, all came from there, all honed their craft right there.
Speaker 1: So you would see these people in their raw essence--
Speaker 2: Every week.
Speaker 1: --performing.
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor, Paul Mooney, Sinbad [David Adkins], I have a list of names over there.
Speaker 1: So what was your role when you were, just an observer?  Did you go in, did you get involved in the--
Speaker 2: I was, okay my older brother was in a group, not only did John own the club, he also produced acts, what he did was he looked at the talent he had there and he'd say, you ought to be in a group so he'd put 'em together.  He'd also have a lot of musicians, he'd, and he'd put 'em together in a group.  So he created a group in 1969, called the Master's Children [ph.], now my brother Ralph [Ralph DeBlanc] was put in that group because of his look and he could dance, he had a huge afro, light skin, pretty boy, so he, he put him in the group.  In that group was Ralph Johnson of Earth, Wind and Fire, "Butch" Robert Sam [Robert "Butch" Sam], who later played with Larry Graham and Graham Central Station, the organ player, there was another brother in the group who went on to do great things, and he also created a whole lot of other groups and out of these groups came like, The Brothers Johnson, you know George [George Johnson] and Louis [Louis Johnson], Chaka Khan was in, in the group Rufus at that time, Chaka Khan was nineteen, and hanging out at Maverick's, they were just hanging there with the big afro, looking real cute and wanting a break.  So what my manager did was, if you had a group in L.A., he would put you on, you know?  Lakeside, and L.T.D. and, what's the name of the group that did 'Natural High' [Bloodstone]?  (Singing) "Take to the sky with a natural high."
Speaker 1: I don't know the name but--
Speaker 2: Well they played down there, they all honed their craft at Maverick's.  The Motown, Maverick's was like a Motown of the West, it was creative and I hung out with everybody that's anybody, the Commodores, Lionel Richie, all of them, all of them (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So besides being just a venue, it was, it was more of a, almost a clearinghouse
Speaker 2: A clearinghouse--
Speaker 1: Or, or a clinic?
Speaker 2: --a production company and also, he would book you at, all over the world.
Story_ID: 407866
Speaker 1: I was in a group with Howard Hewett and, Beverly Hills is the name of that group and I went to forty-two countries with Howard.
Speaker 2: Well we'll come up to that in a moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we still want to get that that, get that feeling and sense of what was going on--
Speaker 1: It was magical.
Speaker 2: So here's Chaka Khan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was magical, man--
Speaker 2: --the Commodores, none of these people are really, they're all just struggling musicians?
Speaker 1: Didn't have two nickels, you know to rub together. You'd, you had no sense of the history that you were surrounded by.  Now, it's incredible when I look back and the people I hung out with.
Speaker 2: How about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Incredible.
Speaker 2: --the audiences in the, and the people that, that weren't necessarily in music, were they very receptive?  Were they supportive?
Speaker 1: Receptive, supportive, but critical at the same time, like the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], you know, the Apollo, if you do well, okay, but at Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California], if you didn't like Earth, Wind and Fire, they used to get, every week they would get booed off the stage.  You know, they were into--when Earth, Wind and Fire first formed in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they were into this African jazz, you know, they wore dashikis and they had a girl in the group, with this, with huge afros and every weekend when they were booked down there, they'd get a little better, you, you, you, you'd say okay, they're getting a little better but sometimes, I mean they'd get booed off the stage.
Speaker 2: I also heard you mention Richard Pryor was there?
Speaker 1: Richard Pryor, same, same thing.  If he wasn't funny, we let him know it.
Speaker 2: So there was a criteria?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you better be good.
Speaker 2: Do you think that--
Speaker 1: You'd better be.
Speaker 2: --that has, that has diminished in talent nowadays?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Absolutely because you can steal everything you need now, you can just copy it, you can download it, you can, you know, there's, there's no originality anymore.
Story_ID: 407867
Speaker 1: So you hang out at Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California], you're graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also the Whiskey a Go Go [West Hollywood, California]
Speaker 1: The Whiskey a Go Go, now--
Speaker 2: The Troubadour [West Hollywood, California].
Speaker 1: Those in Hollywood--
Speaker 2: The Roxy [The Roxy Theatre, West Hollywood, California], the Rainbow [Rainbow Bar and Grill, West Hollywood, California], yeah.
Speaker 1: You, so you going to everything?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah, Hollywood, man.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're doing it all.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was gone (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So now you're hanging out at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I saw Elton John at the Troubadour when he was in the lounge.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Elton John.
Speaker 1: Playing piano?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At the Troubadour on mel- Beverly Boulevard [sic. Santa Monica Boulevard] I think that is, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're just now experiencing this, this musical, musical phenomenon we'll call it, your brother's [Ralph DeBlanc] in a group [Master's Children (ph.)], you working at, you work at the, at the airplane, painting airplanes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're--at the company [McDonnell Douglas].  What's going on now, are you starting to feel any sense of, well maybe I wanna do something different with my life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I knew I could sing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I never tried.  I knew I was much better than my brother vocally, but I never told anyone--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I could sing, and I got a job at Maverick's after, at night cleaning up, one night I was on the dance floor, and they had some music on and I was sweeping and I was singing to it, and my manager who, well--
Speaker 1: John Daniels?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually John Daniels, who later became my manager, came down and he stood behind the door while I was sweeping and he listened until I was done and then he said, "Drop the broom, you don't need that anymore."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "I'm, I'm gonna create a group around you."  I said, "What are you talking about?  I don't sing."  He said, "Yes you do, I just heard you," and--
Speaker 1: So you're sweeping the floor, just singing along with the music?
Speaker 2: Yep, truth man.  That is the truth.
Speaker 1: And, and he hears you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And let, let's go a little bit more into Mr. Daniels.  So, wa- was he a very gracious man?  Obviously, that he really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he really had a, had a heart for young people and their careers.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  But here's the thing, I didn't join that group, I didn't join that group, I had another opportunity before that, which I took.
Speaker 1: And what's that opportunity?  Tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about how this came about.  It's about 1976, or so?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I told you, I didn't let a lot of people know I sing, so, what I would do is if, if I was at a party, I had a couple of friends who knew I could sing and they'd always say, "Robert [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc], sing a song.  Robert sing something."  And so I would at parties, I would sing, you know, 'Everything Must Change' or some (background noise) Stevie Wonder song or--and I got a call one day that Marvin Gaye was holding auditions for background singers and I thought, why you guys calling me?  They said, "You, you should tryout."  I said, that's stupid, I'm not professional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know who called you?
Speaker 2: That would have been, yeah, Darryl Brown [ph.].  Yeah, Darryl Brown called me, one of my buddies who knew I could sing a little bit, who at the parties would always ask me to sing, and so I'd sing.  And so he found out about these auditions and I told him, I said, "You're crazy."  He said, "You should tryout."
Story_ID: 407868
Speaker 1: I said, "Okay," so I go up and I tryout.  Marvin [Marvin Gaye] was holding auditions in Los Angeles [California] on Wilshire Boulevard at a production company called Right On [Right On Productions], it was in a building, this huge high-rise, and so I go in, I have no music with me, I have no lyrics, none of that, I don't know what I'm gonna do, I've never been to an audition before in my life, I just go.  And I walk in and there's all these people, all these guys and all these girls with music and sheet music and keyboard players and stuff like that and so, I wait.
Speaker 2: Anybody that we would know possibly?
Speaker 1: No, not at this--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no.  And so I tried out, took me all day to tryout, I tried out and they said, "Okay, Mr. DeBlanc [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc], we'll call you," I thought sure, yeah.  Sure, you'll call.  The next day I get a call, "We'd like you to come back and re-audition," I come back and there's probably sixty people there that--now.
Speaker 2: It's been narrowed down slightly?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There must have been probably over two hundred the first day.  He needed four guys and four girls who could dance and sing, but the main guys were the men, I, I mean that's who he was looking for, four spots and so I thought, well this is interesting, I'm, it's not as many people.  I tried out again, he said, "Okay, Mr. DeBlanc we'll call you."  Ah yeah, sure, a week goes by and I, I'm not even thinking about it now, I get a call, "We'd like you to come back and re-audition."  Whoa, this is crazy.  So, I got back in, it's just ten guys, I'm thinking now I want it, whereas before, I didn't want it, now--
Speaker 2: Now you want it.
Speaker 1: --now I want it.  And I go in a room to audition and there's Marvin, now he wasn't there before, at all the other auditions, now he's there, yeah because it's, it's getting real close, I'm like nervous as hell, so I was Jesus Christ, Marvin Gaye is there.
Speaker 2: So, so what was your feeling?  You walk in the room, there sits Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I could barely speak.  So he, he kind of glanced up and said, "Well, what do you know?"  And I said, "I don't have any music," and he said, "Well, a cappella," so I said, "Well I can sing 'You Are the Sunshine of My Life.'"  He said, "Go ahead."  And so I sing the song, and they s- and they led me out the room and the guy said, "Okay, we'll call you."  I'm like, oh Jesus Christ, not that again.  The next day they called me back and offered me the gig.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And I'd never sang professionally in my life.
Speaker 2: So you sung the first line of 'You Are the Sunshine of My, of My Life'?
Speaker 1: I sang I think--
Speaker 2: The whole two?
Speaker 1: --two verses--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they stopped me, they don't need a lot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they just need to know that you can sing, and it was a look as well, they wanted a look, you know, my height and everything was important, and, and the look and I got it.
Speaker 2: So they called you back?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) Offered me the gig and the first time I ever performed live, was at Radio City Music Hall in New York [New York], with Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 2: What year would that have been?
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Story_ID: 407869
Speaker 1: So, 1976, here you are, recently out of high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] the last three years, working at a, at a aircraft company [McDonnell Douglas], hanging out, doing what young people do.  You, you have a good job so to speak.
Speaker 2: I had a good job.
Speaker 1: A good job so to speak, and, and you, now all of a sudden, the tables have turned, now you have an opportunity to sing with Marvin Gaye?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you quit your job?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Did you just go in immediately and just quit?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I think I, I needed a couple of more days of work to get a week's check, I, I think I stayed and got my week's check and quit (laughter), I mean really, what would you do (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well you know sometimes in, in in the (unclear) of the stability versus is this real?  Sometimes we have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: --a tendency to, to ping pong--
Speaker 2: Yeah but, you know, the gold ring only comes around once in life and if you grab, if you miss it?  So I took a chance.
Speaker 1: So you took the chance--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And tell us about the, the, the, the auditions, well not the audition, but the rehearsal phase, before you actually did your first--
Speaker 2: Well the weird thing is too, you know they wanted me to know how to dance, well I, I can dance, but you're talking about choreography, one, two, step, turn and all that, I'd never done that before.  And like I told you, they hired four girls to sing and also dance, but mostly what the girls did was dance around us and I had to interact with them, you know.  So I had to basically learn how to jazz dance and they taught me and I asked him, I said, "Why did you pick me, if, if you knew I couldn't dance?"  He said, "Because, you know, vocally you had what we needed and also the look," so I was in the right place at the right time, with the right height and the right hair do, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But I had to learn how to dance.
Speaker 1: So was does your--
Speaker 2: And that was a challenge.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your siblings, so your siblings and your mom [Louise Deville], what, what are they saying now?  You're doing what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well first of all, most of them couldn't believe it because, here again, they didn't know I could sing, I only sing in the bathroom, you know?  I would put on Johnny Mathis, and try to copy him and one day my mother caught me, and said, "Was that you?  You sound like Johnny Mathis."  I said "Yeah, that was me, Mom," and she started crying, she said, "You can sing."  And I said, "Well, a little bit I guess so, yeah."  And so, when I got the gig with Marvin, they were like, "Marvin Gaye, you?  H- how--?" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did your brother [Ralph DeBlanc] say that's in the business?
Speaker 2: He was very proud of me, he was ver- well he knew I could sing a little bit, but they were, they were blown away like I was.  I mean, hell, it's Marvin Gaye, we grew up listening to Marvin Gaye, you don't ever think you'll be working with the man, you know, so it was very exciting time.  And it, it changed the course of my life, absolutely did.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're in the, you're in the band now so to speak, and you're learning new, new skills, like dancing, jazz, ballroom interaction choreography.  You're learning probably to sing harmony--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for the first time.
Speaker 1: So all of these things are being taught to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And really having to know lyrics and, and just form (unclear) tune and all these different things.
Speaker 2: And I loved every minute of it.
Story_ID: 407870
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your interaction personally with Marvin, one on one, what kind of person was Marvin Gaye from your experience?
Speaker 2: Tortured soul, tortured.  I didn't know Marvin well, I worked for him, but I would see him at sound check, I would see him on stage, we didn't have a lot of off stage interaction with Marvin.  Marvin was a tortured genius, Marvin didn't wanna be on stage.  Marvin had to be on stage, he didn't wanna be, he was a songwriter, and a musician first, the only reason he was on stage is because the public demanded him to be on stage, he hated it.  He would go on stage and he wouldn't know lyrics, you know, the songs he wrote, we would be doing a sound check and he'd ask, you know, does anybody know the lyrics to such and such song and I'd look up and say, "You wrote it."  "Yeah, but I can't remember the lyrics right now," just tortured, tortured.  I remember thinking, he has everything I want and yet he seems so unhappy, so unhappy, so tragic.  I never saw him high, I know that, I heard about the drug use, I never saw it, never saw it.  His eyes would be red every now and then but hell, living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], whose eyes weren't (laughter), weren't red from the smog, but he's a tortured genius, you know.  Marvin was athletic, Marvin wanted to be an athlete I hear, you know, from all the things I heard about him he wanted to be a football player for the Detroit Lions.  That was his major aspirations.  But, it was interesting working with him, it, it was quite an honor, and I told him that, I thanked him, you know.
Story_ID: 407871
Speaker 1: So here you are in '76 [1976], you left, left the aircraft company [McDonnell Douglas] and you're at Radio City [Radio City Music Hall] in New York City [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Unbelievable, dude.
Speaker 1: --getting ready to open up and perform with Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 2: You know what I remember most about that night?  First of all, I was petrified out my mind, but I walked on this large stage, the largest stage I'd ever seen, and I remember looking out now, you gotta remember, we're riding on the heels of the number one album in the country, 'Let's Get It On,' so it was, it was just thousands of people.  I remember not being able to see because of the flashes, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, and then I remember the screams, the deafening screams, I'm trying to remember my harmony, I'm trying to focus on that, but I can't hear my harmony because of the screams.  We would go into a, you remember the bass line to, you know, 'Distant Lover'?  (Makes sounds) And all you'd hear is (makes sound).  So, I'm trying to focus on everything I need to do, but I'm also in amazement at where I'm at (laughter) it's like what is happening, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of that's been documented.  Isn't there a live recording?  Are you on the one where he was, wait, wait, I think, 'Distant Lover' was recorded live--
Speaker 2: It's possible.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it may have been somewhere--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like that.
Speaker 2: And I remember--
Speaker 1: And I'm sure you were there--
Speaker 2: --the screaming was so loud.  But if you listen to the documentaries of The Beatles, they'll tell you the same thing, they never heard themselves live, they never heard themselves live because of the screaming.  And that's the one thing that stands out in my mind, are this roar of the audience (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because I guess technology as far as monitors and things were--
Speaker 2: Weren't as good.
Speaker 1: So you just had to kind of roll--
Speaker 2: And I remember watching him, I'd watch him a lot, I used to watch him, watch his every move, watch him wipe his sweat, and take off his ja- how he would take off his jacket, and how he'd reach out to a girl and just--I'd just watch them melt.
Speaker 1: So you had a teacher?  You were learning show business?
Speaker 2: And I didn't even know it.
Speaker 1: Just through osmosis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're just watching him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was watching everything he did 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, and besides being a tortured soul, you said, you think, he was also the consummate professional?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Marvin was good, Marvin was good, but he didn't know how good he was, see that's the tragedy too.  He didn't know how good he, he didn't know the power he had.  He would pull back a lot, I'd watch him.  I mean, he'd have the audience in his hand and if he said, "Boo," you know, they would have all ju- but he would sometimes pull back, he.  But, he was a professional, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 407872
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Consummate professional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during this time period, you were with him about four years?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: I was on the road with Marvin [Marvin Gaye] two years.
Speaker 1: Tell us about life on the road.  Holly- now, now you're now in the light.  Now, now you've been a good boy all this time--
Speaker 2: You don't wanna know my life on the road man, please.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You been a good boy?
Speaker 2: Don't ask me.  I'm single, I'm twenty-one, twenty-two, I had more hair, I was handsomer than I am and that I ever was in my life, I'm, I'm not now. And boy, let's just say a smorgasbord. But also, the people I met, Muhammad Ali, Don King, all the great people who, who he knew, wanted to hang out with Marvin, I'd meet 'em, man.  When you go back stage and it was like, wow.
Speaker 1: Give us a few people, like Muhammad Ali, when you met him.
Speaker 2: Whew, god, Muhammad Ali, Sugar Ray Robinson, Cab Calloway, just, just--
Speaker 1: That's interesting right there.  Let's stop, Cab Calloway, coming to see Marvin Gaye?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So there was a re- and I'm sure, what was Marvin's reaction when he saw the great Cab Calloway?
Speaker 2: Honored that Cab would be there to see him, he was honored.
Speaker 1: So, so there was a respect?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Elizabeth Taylor, god I could--if I had time to think of all the greats I met backstage, through Marvin, it's incredible, absolutely incredible.  And then all the groups who would come and see us, The Temptations, the Four Tops, you'd have, you know, Gladys Knight and the Pips would come and see us and all the Motown acts, if they happened to be in town, they would come and see us, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Having a little experience with that, I guess, you're, you're backstage, people walk up to you, telling you, sound great--
Speaker 2: Great show--
Speaker 1: --man, I heard you--
Speaker 2: Man--
Speaker 1: And you're sitting here--
Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. who just patted me on the sho- you know, it's like and Oscar Brown Jr., you remember him?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: He had a penthouse in Manhattan [New York], he'd ask me over to his place and he'd have parties after the show, it was incredible and I'm thinking, I'm here because of who I'm with, and I'm honored.  It was important to me, you know, but I'm hanging out with people who I was in awe of, it was incredible.  Incredible (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you, you doing this for two years now?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: So now you're becoming known, as a, as a singer, dancer and you were there for two years?  Why, did you leave, what happened?
Speaker 2: Marvin had a little problems with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], that's when the, the IRS seized his recording studio [Right On Productions], his homes, his twenty-eight cars, and then Marvin moved to, to Belgium, I think a year later, but he stopped touring at the time, he had a lot of personal problems.  He had a, he was, he, he had a divorce, I think he, he had during the time I joined him to Berry Gordy's sister [Anna Gordy Gaye].
Story_ID: 410311
Speaker 1: So Marvin Gaye has now gone on a, we'll say a hiatus--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to, to Belgium--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --due to various situations, so now your career has come to a screeching start, and now a screeching halt?
Speaker 2: Screeching halt.
Speaker 1: So, what's the next move for you now?
Speaker 2: Well, if you remember I told you my manager wanted to do a, a group around me?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Beverly Hills, that's the name of the group and it was me and I have a picture here with the group, me and three girls and a young man from Akron, Ohio, Howard Hewett.  He'd just got to town a month earlier and he was looking for something to do.  We heard Howard and immediately and we asked him to join our group.
Speaker 1: This be around 1978 [1978], or so?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us about this group, Beverly Hills.
Speaker 2: Yeah with Gwen Brisco and me and Howard and a girl (unclear) by the name of Dianna [ph.], I can't think of her last name, and the other young lady was Roberta [ph.].  Now, I told you before, my manager of the club produced these acts but he also would put you out on the road, he had agents all over the world.  Any group from Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California] went typically to no less than forty to fifty countries, he was amazing, I've been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain, how was he able to do this?  Because back then we didn't have the Internet--
Speaker 2: Booking agent.
Speaker 1: --we didn't really have--
Speaker 2: Booking agents.  He would--here's the thing, we would go to Europe, we'd land in London [England], we would go from London to France, from France to Italy, from Italy to Belgium, from Belgium to Germany, Germany, Switzerland 'cause they're all next door.  Then we'd go to Asia, we'd go from Japan to Indonesia, from Indonesia to Malaysia, from Malaysia to Taiwan and, and et cetera.  We would go to Scandinavia; we'd go to Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland.  So he'd keep us, for some reason he had agents in, in every country who were able to move you to the next country nearby.  I would typically go on the road for eight and nine months, I wouldn't come back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for half a year or, or longer, you know.  How he was able to do that.  And he would book off, off a poster, just a poster, but he was a salesman, he used the phone, he would hop on the phone to agents all over the world and he would sell the act sight unseen; he was that good.
Speaker 1: The industries changed somewhat now, do you think that the industry was more open, people were open?  'Cause nowadays there's a lot of hassle that you have to go through in order to get booked at certain venues.  What was it like?  How was the market different you think, or was there--?
Speaker 2: Well to get booked these days, you almost have to complete the project yourself and have a video all--completed already. And you pay for it, you know?  Back then, you could stand outside and sing a cappella for the man in the black suit and you might get hired, you know.  How is it different now?  People were, the talent was much better, and if you had a reputation, and John Daniels had a reputation for handling good acts so if he would pick up the phone and he, and he would call a club owner or an agent anywhere in the world, they know that whoever they bought was gonna be a top act, maybe not a name, maybe not a record, but it was gonna be a good show and he did that for twenty-something years, I've been to eighty-eight countries for John.
Story_ID: 410312
Speaker 1: Now you're an open minded person obviously now because of your musical choices you listen to, mayb- maybe even more open than some of your frien- bandmates.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you go into these countries, is there any difference between your acceptance and where you are and what's going on with you and your viewpoint versus the viewpoint of your fellow bandmates that might not just be experiencing something different so to speak outside of the African American experience, was it--
Speaker 2: A lot of them had never left L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so, you know it was, it, it was a wide eyed experience for, for a lot of 'em especially the girls and some of them after a month or two, would want to go back home, you know, although we'd be in Paris [France] one day, Rome [Italy] the next, you know, we'd go to Geneva [Switzerland], we used to, to play the Cote d'Azur in France.  The, the Cote d'Azur is Nice [France], Cannes [France], Saint-Tropez [France], Monte Carlo, Monaco.
Speaker 1: The South of France?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the South of France, we used to play that all the time and we would go there and if we'd go to Saint-Tropez, and in the cove, you'd see yachts that look like small cruise ships, you know and after the show we'd be invited on these yachts and you would meet, you know, the heir to Benson and Hedges or (laughter) or, you know, the heir to this and that or a lot of Arab money, a lot of Arabs owned yachts, so it was, you got to see the differences real quick, you know?  You know the differences 'cause we'd leave L.A., and we would go into places that, like I said were, were old money multi- multimillionaires, we would play clubs that were extremely private, and exclusive, you know, so w- there's a club in the South of France in Saint-Tropez called the Byblos [Hotel Byblos Saint-Tropez], and in the audience you'd see Jackie Onassis [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis], you'd see Jack Nicholson over there, you know, it was nuts man, Vogue models and, you know, it's, it's, it was quite incredible.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that money, the old money or the, we, we'll say the affluence that you saw--
Speaker 2: Mm.
Speaker 1: --the affluence.  Did you notice a tendency to be more respected from the old money in Europe and on those tours then you may have been from, we'll say the old money here in America?
Speaker 2: What I thought about the old money over there is, they didn't try to flaunt it in your face, they knew they were rich, and they could show you, you know, by virtue of stuff that I'm extremely wealthy.  Whereas in America, with the ultra-rich, it's in your face, you know, they're constantly reminding you of it, whereas, whereas over there it's very low key, you know.  You might meet a couple over there and not realize who you're talking to, you know, these people have four or five hundred million dollars and they've had it in the family for centuries, you know?  And I learned, I learned a lot over there, you know?
Speaker 1: What's some of the lessons you learned there?
Speaker 2: How to dress, how to, you know, the Italian men, I'd watch how they would put their outfits together, how they would treat their women, class, you know.  I learned a whole 'nother way of life, a whole 'nother way of life, how to dress, how to eat, how to speak, you know.
Speaker 1: And you learned those things just because of your, your travels through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 410313
Speaker 1: Now you know, stardom is an elusive thing for some people, we feel that, you know, or they feel youn- all young people want to be a star.  Now, now you weren't necessarily a household word, but how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) Never wanted to be.
Speaker 1: --but how was the money being--how, how was your income at this time?  What was the basic income for a group on that level, at that time, if you don't mind sharing that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't mind, I would--when I was on the road in the late '70s [1970s], and the early '80s [1980s], I made about a grand [$1000] a week.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Quite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was great money then?
Speaker 2: That was really good money 'cause, I mean back then, a Cadillac was what?  Eight grand [$8,000]? (Laughter) A brand new car, so yeah, I was making about a, yeah about four grand [$4,000] a month--
Speaker 1: Nowhere near the money that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which was very good.
Speaker 1: --being made now by these artists?
Speaker 2: No.  Oh my god, no, no.
Speaker 1: And this [Beverly Hills] wasn't necessarily a major, top forty group that was recording?  You all were just--
Speaker 2: It was not a recording group, it was not a name group, it was just a touring show.  Now the girl that I worked with, Gwen Brisco, at that time was like a Lola Falana type of, Tina Turner-ish, you know, she had a good show, so.
Speaker 1: So you're touring, people in, you're in Asia, you're in Europe--
Speaker 2: Africa.
Speaker 1: Did you see more of an acceptance of your music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and just more openness to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) More--
Speaker 1: --to whatever you all had?
Speaker 2: More of an appreciation, yeah.  Americans tend to, tend to gravitate towards the flavor of the month and if you haven't had a record out, you're quickly forgotten over here.  You go to places like London [England], and they want to hear the old R&B stuff, they remember The Platters, they remember the Temps [The Temptations], and the Four Tops and The Isleys [The Isley Brothers], and they have an appreciation.  Like now, when I go on tour to, to Europe, it's, it's appreciated more, it's, mo- y- y- what's the word I'm looking for?  You're more revered there, you know, more of a reverence because Americans have so much talent, we quickly forget.  If you haven't had a record out, well next, you know, but--
Speaker 1: And did you notice, do you notice that there's more of a study of what's going on?  I mean, my experience is that I notice people know more about your discographies, who you've been with, they have a tendency to know and, and you'll say, wow I just did a little thing, and it's a big thing to them.
Speaker 2: It's a big thing to them, yeah.
Story_ID: 410314
Speaker 1: So you stayed with Gwen [Gwen Brisco] and that group for how long?
Speaker 2: Well, Beverly Hills was a group for two years.  And then Howard [Howard Hewett] left and he joined Shalamar--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --around 1980, I guess that was--
Speaker 1: Was John Daniels instrumental (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seventy-nine [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: --in putting them together?
Speaker 2: No.  But here's the connection.  You've heard of Dick Griffey?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He owned SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records], he was also the manager of The Whispers.  Now The Whispers used to always play Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California], okay?  Because it was the place to play and John and Dick were good friends so Dick was creating a record company, and he remembered Howard's voice, so he auditioned Howard and he offered him the gig and also he got Jody [Jody Watley] and Jeffrey [Jeffrey Daniel] right off the dance floor at Maverick's Flat, you know.  And also with 'Soul Train,' you know, they used to dance at 'Soul Train.'
Speaker 1: There was another 'Soul Train' dancer [Jermaine Stewart] that went on to be pretty big, I think he's passed now, was it a Jeffrey--what was his major hit?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he's dead.  He had a hit, 'You Don't Have to Take Our Clothes Off' [sic. 'We Don't Have to Take Our Clothes Off'].
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: I knew him, he's dead, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He came out of Maverick's Flat, I know, yeah I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that, that whole crew.
Speaker 2: I can't think of his name, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you were here when 'Soul Train' actually moved from Chicago [Illinois] to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Were you here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during that transition?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was in L.A., yeah.
Speaker 1: Also the Motown [Motown Records Company] transition?
Speaker 2: I was in L.A.
Speaker 1: Do you recall when that happened?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you--let's go back a minute, can you explain how that, when, when all of a sudden Motown is now here in Los Angeles [California].  Do you recall--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Sunset [Boulevard], yeah.  What it did was, it gave a lot of people in music in Los Angeles an opportunity to start writing and to try to get the music out, you know, because we felt that Motown was ours and that if you had an opportunity, it would probably be at Motown, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause prior to that, L.A. wasn't necessarily a black music mecca was it?
Speaker 2: There was Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Records], Columbia [Columbia Records], Capitol [Capitol Records], was all there, RCA [RCA Records] was all there but it, not for us.
Speaker 1: A lot of the black music was coming out of Detroit [Michigan] and also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Detroit--
Speaker 1: --and also Memphis [Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: --T-Neck [T-Neck Records], Memphis--
Speaker 1: --Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So now Motown here, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy has moved and much, much to the chagrin, I remember many--
Speaker 2: Musicians--
Speaker 1: --Detroiters and musicians--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the musicians were just dropped and left behind.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and a lot of 'em came out, James Jamerson and people came, do you recall anything?  Now, now were you in the business when this happened?  Because Motown--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I was out of the business then--
Speaker 1: They moved about '70 [1970], 19-?
Speaker 2: 'Round about, I was in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] when they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now Motown's here.  So now, you've gone on for a few years now, now you're, we'll say, you're becoming a seasoned performer now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, you've got about, because you, you were with Gwen Brisco for about how long?
Speaker 2: Well I was in Beverly Hills--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --with her for two years and then after that she got her own show ['Gwen Brisco Show'] and--
Speaker 1: So you had four years of experience now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had Marvin's [Marvin Gaye] for two--
Speaker 2: There you go, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had Marvin for two and you had--
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: --had Beverly Hills for two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah at that point.
Speaker 1: And Howard Hewett's going off with the Shalamar with Jody Watley now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 410315
Speaker 1: Now how was that, well what did he say when he came to you all and said I'm getting ready to leave the group [Beverly Hills]?
Speaker 2: I told him great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Great because Howard [Howard Hewett] wanted to write.  But see at Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California], our manager [John Daniels] wasn't interested in recording, he was only interested in the quick money, touring, touring, touring, touring.  So, I was happy for Howard because Howard would always show me these songs he wrote, but he was frustrated because he didn't have an outlet, and then when he got with SOLAR [SOLAR Records; Sound of Los Angeles Records] and Dick Griffey, a year later he had a re- a huge hit he, he wrote, 'For the Lover in You,' ['This is For the Lover in You'] (singing) "This is for the lover in you," so I was very happy for him.
Speaker 1: So he'd be--he had been on the road with you in Europe also (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For two years.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now do you have any, any particular--
Speaker 2: He was my roommate.
Speaker 1: --any particular stories about, anything you can share with us--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about Europe or your travels?
Speaker 2: Howard, Howard was a perfectionist, who would sit on the edge of the bed and he'd practice runs, you know, you know the vocal runs?  And I'd look at him like, ah man I'm going--
Speaker 1: Out (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I'm going here, yeah.  I'm going to chase this girl.  "Now watch this, DeBlanc [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc]," and, and he'd do a run, I'd say, "Yeah that's nice, Howard, stop showing off," but he wasn't really showing off, he was practicing and trying to show me that, if you wanna get better, you've really gotta hone your craft and I remember--oh, he was also into the Bible, although I would look at Howard and think, well you ain't, you know, you got the Bible in one hand and the devil in the other sometimes (laughter) you know?  But, the road with Howard was extremely interesting 'cause I was watching him and grow at the same time too, you know?  And I remember just listening to his vocals and I remember thinking, I've never heard anybody move from their natural voice into a fall so easily and that he'd just soar into it.  And, on the road with Howard was interesting, we competed for girls and, you know, we were young men, on the road (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Money, money in your pocket.
Speaker 2: Money in our pockets and Americans--at that time, America was revered.  You have to understand, we'd go on the road and as musicians, even if you didn't have a song out, you were an American show, you're an American act so people put you up on a pedestal anyway.  So, we had all that and yeah.
Speaker 1: So Howard--
Speaker 2: Quite an interesting time.
Story_ID: 410316
Speaker 1: Howard [Howard Hewett] leaves the group [Beverly Hills], so was there a revamping of the show now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So what happened was, Gwen [Gwen Brisco] became the star, it's called the 'Gwen Brisco Show,' co-starring [HistoryMaker] Robert DeBlanc, so I became the co-star and that's when we, I mean the travel was amazing we started, we started going out on the road, man, for eight, nine months, one time I didn't come home for thirteen months.  We had our own band, five pieces, so eleven people traveled all the time, it was eleven of us on the road at all times.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that.  That's a lot of people--
Speaker 2: That's a lot of people.
Speaker 1: --that's almost a family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where there any problems or, or do you get sick of each other or just give us some, some insight on how that operate because people see the finished product on stage, they're not really aware of what goes on to make that happen, and the interaction even nowadays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  You had your, your squabbles from time to time, I mean but, but like you said, we were family and when you're traveling the countries where there is no English and you're looking on signs and they're completely foreign, all you have is each other.  So, in that sense, we were a very close, tight-knit group, but also, like close tight-knit people, you fight like siblings, so, you know, we had our, our squabbles, but they were always rectified and fixed and--
Speaker 1: Were there any creative battles?  I'm the lead singer or I should be doing this or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  We all knew our, our spot, we all knew our, our strengths and we all had a leader we respected, you know?
Speaker 1: And that was John Daniels?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) strong.  Yeah, yeah.  Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So he actually went on the road with you all a lot of times?
Speaker 2: From time to time, yeah, because he got involved with Gwen--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and they later married.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And they're, yeah, they're married today--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: So they were one of the first, I mean, they're a lot of what we call agency bands nowadays--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He was one of the first people to really--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have that together?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you traveled--
Speaker 2: He was amazing.
Speaker 1: --you're traveling with Gwen, for how long were you with her total?
Speaker 2: From 1980 to 1990.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ten years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what's going back with your family here, in, in town [Los Angeles, California] now, as far as your, your mom [Louise Deville] and your siblings, what's going on?  What is your interaction, 'cause you're gone a lot?  Now, you got--
Speaker 2: I'm gone a lot.
Speaker 1: --you're not around--
Speaker 2: I'm gone--
Speaker 1: --as much--
Speaker 2: --a lot, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us when you come back--
Speaker 2: Well, on average, I, I'd say the first four years with Gwen, we would go out for no less than six months, then we got known all over the world, because of the show, we were a good show, I mean we would kick butt everywhere we went, I mean the bass player was incredible, the guitar- the musicianship was incredible.  And then we started going out for longer periods of time, eight months, ten months, a year, you know, I came home once, my dog didn't know me, you know, so that went on for quite a long time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and you're coming home, and your family now, you're home now, how do you feel?
Speaker 2: My family was supportive, my family is the type of family that won't pressure you into doing anything you don't wanna do, as long as you're happy.  And not causing problems, then it must be good.  You know, so.
Speaker 1: And your mom was still alive at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mom is, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so she, and she was like, oh, hi son, you're home.  I'm sure you communicated with her a lot--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you were on the road?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would write and I would call, of course, like you said there was no Internet so I couldn't email, I wish there was, you know.  And, it was a different time.
Speaker 1: So that was about--
Speaker 2: I wish I'd had an iPod too back then.  God, I wish I'd had an iPod.  I used to travel with a suitcase of cassettes, man (laughter).  A suitcase with nothing but cassettes.  So I'm think- then I got an iPod, and there were eight thousand songs that would've been so great.
Speaker 1: So you carried your cassettes around, and your tape recorder with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a big boom box and I used to--
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: Big thing man, but, but you had to have music, so I'd have my suitcases plus my cassette suitcase, and my boom box.
Speaker 1: Moving around.
Speaker 2: Moving around.
Speaker 1: And, and, and it, it was mostly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From country to country.
Speaker 1: --and was most of the travel air, the majority of it?
Speaker 2: Mostly the travel was by air, but once we got to Europe, it was usually by train, you'd go by train.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, because it's--
Speaker 1: Quick and easy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's cheaper and it's connected by country and if we were in England, we would usually use the, we'd have to go across the channel [English Channel] by ship, you know, to, to Ireland or Scotland or otherwise, or either to France, you know, from England, but yeah, yeah mostly by train.  But, most, yeah mostly plane, yeah mostly the plane.
Story_ID: 410317
Speaker 1: So now you've been with Gwen [Gwen Brisco] now for ten years, ten or, you know, eleven years altogether, maybe something like that I believe.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, Australia becomes important now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Australia for a moment.
Speaker 2: Australia had always been important because, like I said, we traveled quite a lot, so I had, I knew Australia, I knew Australia very well.  I was, I was going there two, three times a year, and I told my mother [Louise Deville] once, quite a prophecy at the time, I didn't know that, but I said, "You know what, Mom?"  I said, "If there's any other country I ever wanna live in, it'd be Australia."  And, now I had no plans on moving there and no aspirations or hopes, I just, tossed it out there.
Speaker 1: Do you know why you said that possibly?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I loved Australia, man, the people, and the ladies were, were quite healthy and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --agreeable and nice and, you know, they, it was nice and--
Speaker 1: Was there something else about the spirit of the place, something inside of you that made you just like, that you felt something about Australia?
Speaker 2: You know what I found, I wasn't judged over there much, we were more accepted and even with the black, white thing, it, it was never frowned upon, you know, that, that I could see openly.  So I felt more at home there, comfy, at ease, yeah.
Story_ID: 410318
Speaker 1: Before we go back to Australia, was there any country where you did feel any tension or some problem (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Africa.
Speaker 1: South Africa, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I went there twice, I went the first time was in 1983, the second time was in '85 [1985], now this is the height of apartheid, this is way before they let out Mandela [Nelson Mandela], and because our group had no records, we were able to travel over there.  Now, if you were a named group during that time, and you went to South Africa, you were blackballed, you were not allowed to play in the states.
Speaker 1: If I recall, the Commodores didn't go.
Speaker 2: The Commodores didn't go, Gladys Knight and the Pips were asked, they were offered crazy money, but they wouldn't go, you were blackballed if you went.  Now because we had no records, we went and I think my manager [John Daniels] was offered some crazy money, some in- in- incredible amount of money so we went and I went to Johannesburg [South Africa] the first time and I had a guitar player with me by the name of Pete [ph.], and Pete was white, he was also an ex-Golden Gloves champion (laughter). Now there as Americans, if you're hungry and you have cash in your pocket you just go and eat.  So I looked at Pete, I said, "Hey man, you hungry?  Let's go eat."  We're not thinking, we walk into a restaurant, the maitre d' opens the door, he looks at me, he looks at Pete, and he says okay, I said, "I'd like a table for two," he looks at me really, really hard, and he says, "Well your friend can eat here, but you have to take yours out."  So Pete, who's white, and my good friend, loves me like a brother, is offended, "Hey," you know, he wants to, I said, "Hold it, Pete, hold it."  I said, "Man, we're in Jo-burg, this Johannesburg," so I pu- pulled my passport out and I said, "How about now?" Because if--a lot of people didn't know that apartheid is a local South African law that only affects South Africans, you can be black as the ace of spades, if you come from someplace else, you're legally white, which means you can do everything the whites do, as long as you have your passport.  So, and also, at that time it's not a place where black people would come for a vacation, so he's looking at me thinking I'm a local, you know, the maitre d' is looking at me thinking I must be a local South African because in South Africa, you have coloureds, you have the Asians, who are from India, but they're called Asians, you have the Africans and the whites.  Now the coloureds are, are a mixture, they look Creole, they can either be Indian and black, black and white, or (gesture)--
Speaker 1: A mix (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or all of the above.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he's looking at me thinking, well I must be a local, so I pulled out my passport, I said, "How about now?"  He said, "Oh sir, I'm so sorry."  He said, "Yeah, you can come in."  I said, "You know what?  Nah."  I said, "Legally you have to let me in here, but you don't really want me in here.  You or, or any of the people looking at me right now want me to eat in here, so no."  And I immediately harkened back to what my father [Albert DeBlanc (ph.)] would tell me about when he grew up--
Speaker 1: In New Iberia [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, how if he was walking down the street and there was a white lady walking on the same side, he either had to step in the street, or p- put his head down, not make eye contact, no eye contact 'cause if you made eye contact, she could claim anything and they'd (makes sound)--you know.  And when he's telling me this a child, yeah well, oh wow that must have been bad, but you don't feel it the way I felt it that day.  And the first thing I thought was, oh my god, I'm being judged for the color of my skin, not for who I am.
Speaker 1: Because you weren't raised this way?  You hadn't--
Speaker 2: I wasn't raised--I'd never seen racism.  I was raised in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], for Christ sakes.  And if there was racism, I never saw it until I went to Johannesburg.  I was never called a nigger, you know, my whole life and it hit me, my god, he doesn't wanna let me in because of this, not for who I am, not for anything I've done, but because of this.  And I wanted, I felt like crying, be- not because he didn't let me in but because of all the hurt and pain I felt in my father.  It's like, my god, now I know what you're talking about, now I feel the, I feel the emptiness, the, the, there's so many feelings that wash over you, you wanna strike out at him, you wanna cuss him out, you wanna hit him, and you can't understand for the life of me why anybody would do that to another human being because of that.  Especially when people are going to tanning salons and getting lip injections, you know (laughter), so you think what, what?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What is this about?
Speaker 2: What is this about?  And so, I realized it was a legal thing and I told him, "No, I'm not gonna give you guys any money, I'm not going in there," but it hit me like a ton of bricks.
Story_ID: 410319
Speaker 1: Did you experience anything else while you were in South Africa?  Any more of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I experienced, yeah, I would, and I have the pictures here to prove it, I'd have to find those.  But, yeah in South Africa, during that time if you wanted to go to the beach you had to go to you had to go to the white beach, the African beach, the Asian beach or the coloured beach (laughter).  If you were standing on the street corner waiting on a bus, even if the bus is stopped, was going in your direction, if you weren't assigned to that bus, you know, by color, you couldn't get on it.  So it was, it was like amazing to me to feel this, here I am in the '80s [1980s], and I'm going through all this racism, legalized racism, legalized.  And I remember too, I got extremely andy--angry at a comment, a South African man asked me a question.
Story_ID: 410320
Speaker 1: It was a South African man, I was at my hotel bar, I was having a drink and he, he heard my accent, he said, "Oh, you're American?"  You know, they had a Boer, you know the Dutch accent. You know, the Boers. And he said, "Now let me ask you a question my friend, how do you think we treat our blacks?"  I said, "Could you rephrase?"  He said, "How do you think we treat our blacks?" "Your blacks?" I said. I said, "First of all you're in Africa, you come from Holland [the Netherlands], you're the Dutchmen who came here, you know, during the Boer War with England and all that and you claimed South Africa.  You, you are in the heart of darkness."  I said, "And you're asking me how I think you treat your blacks?  First of all, they're not your blacks," and I said, "This apartheid thing?"  Now this is back in '84 [1984], I said, "This is gonna fall."  He said, "Why do you think about it that it will fall, it, this is keeps everybody in line."  I said, "Because it's evil, it's gonna fall, I don't know when, but it's gonna fall," three years later, 1987, it fell [sic.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's over.
Speaker 1: --with Mandela [Nelson Mandela], but it pissed me off, your blacks?  First of all, you're in Africa, they're not you--
Speaker 2: Your--
Speaker 1: --you don't own them, you know, it, it, it, it ruffled my feathers, I wanted to really get stuck into him, you know, but I didn't, but I just said, "Your system is evil, these are not your blacks, you're in Africa, you come from Europe, you're the Dutchmen," you know?  And pretty soon this evil system will fall, it's got to, the world will not stand for it, you know, and I'll, I left it at that.
Speaker 2: Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I never forgot the question.
Speaker 2: Did you find that--
Speaker 1: It chilled my bones.
Speaker 2: Did you find it kind of strange that having been to Holland, I'm sure to Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and places--
Speaker 1: I've been to Holland a few times--
Speaker 2: --you know that, that you, that when you're there, in Holland there's none of that?
Speaker 1: No.  In fact, Holland is wide open, I mean it's, it's, it's a melting pot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You've been to Amsterdam?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean it's like whoa, you look, look around, but it's something about when they came there a hundred, hundred years ago or so and, you know, they had an army and the Africans did not and they had the gold and the diamonds, that's why they--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's why they took it, they took it because of the gold and the diamonds and they had to control the African people because they wanted to take all the gold and all the diamonds outta there.
Speaker 2: So I'd be safe to say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is what they did.
Speaker 2: It'd be safe to say that--
Speaker 1: You've heard of De Beers, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Dutch company, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: It'd be safe to say that your first meeting of, of racism happened on--
Speaker 1: (Nods head) In Jo--
Speaker 2: --African soil?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's pretty prolific (unclear).
Speaker 1: I had the--yeah, yeah, that's absolutely.
Story_ID: 410321
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about Australia, so you, you, you, you, you're with Gwen [Gwen Brisco], do you leave her group?  Or does the group disband?  What happens?
Speaker 2: In 1990, we get a contract in Australia for eighteen weeks in order to do a show called 'Harlem Rhythm,' produced by Lester Wilson, Lester Wilson is the choreographer that, he did the choreography for, you know, Travolta [John Travolta] in 'Saturday Night' ['Saturday Night Fever'] (gesture)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When he does all that in the white suit?  That's Lester Wilson's move.  We were contracted in a show called 'Harlem Rhythm,' also with Johnny Brown of 'Good Times'--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I think that is, yeah.  He had a role in it and so we had eighteen weeks there, and I, I loved Australia, so I, I jumped at the chance to go back, you know.  And during the eighteen weeks I met a young lady--
Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) not my present wife, but my first wife, I met her.  I had eight weeks left and she asked me to marry her, which I found, I, I cared a lot about her, and she asked me to marry her.  Now, at that time I didn't wanna go back to California, I was having some problems and I didn't wanna go back, and I loved Australia.
Speaker 1: Are you able to talk about those problems as far as, as far as L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is concerned?  Or why you didn't wanna go back?
Speaker 2: Well, they're very personal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're very personal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but I didn't wanna go back and I, I saw it more as an opportunity and I felt, I cared a lot about the lady, you know, I didn't wanna marry her though, but I'd agreed to stay with her, she had a home there and it was, it was not a hard transition, you know, the move--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --wa- was easy.
Speaker 1: You're already there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I thought okay, I'll stay but I had to go back to, I had an apartment in L.A. and I had to--I had to move some things out and I had some cars I had to let go of, so I thought okay, I'll do this, move, move back, we got married, a year later, we got divorced, I knew that would happen.  But during that time I, I met my present wife.
Speaker 1: Her name is?
Speaker 2: Well, Cheryl Ann [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I call her Billie [Billie Cole].  Everybody calls her Billie and I met her and I was separated at the time and I didn't wanna get involved with her but there was something so special about her, that she ju- she just kept growing on me and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How'd you meet her?
Speaker 2: I was, after I separated from my first wife, I needed to work of course, I needed gigs and so I had a, I had a, an interview at a hotel to do a gig at, at the nightclub in the hotel and I was at this hotel to meet, you know, with the manager and as I walked in, there was a lounge on my left, and I heard a, I heard a vocalist and a grand piano and I walked in and I saw the prettiest woman I'd ever seen in my life lying across the grand piano with eyes like a cat.  And so I ordered a drink, I got a drink, I drank it, I looked over at her and I didn't say anything and then later on that week, I, I got the gig and, and I was on stage and I looked out in the crowd and I saw her again and after my last number, our eyes met and locked, and I walked to her and we haven't been apart in seventeen years.
Speaker 1: That's a beautiful story.
Speaker 2: Yeah it is.
Speaker 1: It's really beautiful because she's also a musician?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a vocal coach and singer, jazz singer, really good.
Story_ID: 410322
Speaker 1: So, now you're in Au- what year, it's about ninety--what now would you say this is?
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: So you're in Australia, so now you're definitely probably not gonna come back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you're there for s while (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I made up my mind.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so I'm sure you took care of everything with your first wife--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and then what happened?
Speaker 2: And then we move in together, we didn't get married right away, and w- w- her and I got a little trio together, we got a keyboard player and we called it L.A. Style, L.A. Style, you know?  And we worked all the venues on the Gold Coast and that's near Brisbane [Australia], we worked hotels, nightclubs, pubs--
Speaker 1: Everything?
Speaker 2: --wherever they--yeah.  We did TV, we did 'Good Morning Australia,' all the local shows and here again because I was American, we worked a lot, worked a lot.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that, working together.  'Cause now you've, now you're actually in--you're involved with a musician now, so--
Speaker 2: That's hard.
Speaker 1: --so sometimes, a lot of times, there's one that's in a different industry and, you know, they kind of balance the creative person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Talk about that for a moment, how that is?  To this day even, how is that?
Speaker 2: Well, working with my wife [Billie Cole] is easy because she does the same thing I do, so there's no misunderstandings I mean it's all, it's all there, she knows--now my first wife was a jeweler, so that was like--
Speaker 1: Another industry.
Speaker 2: --totally different, yeah, from what I did.  Working with my wife was quite a treat plus you get twice as much money, it's all, it's, it's all the house money, you know, it's not like I, I'm doing a gig and I'm the only one getting paid, we're both getting paid so it's for the house.  And, it was quite a treat, and I also found that, her and I have natural harmony together and, you know, it was quite a treat working with her.
Speaker 1: So L.A. Style became a known group in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --on, on the Gold Coast?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, man.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Working four, five nights a week (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We worked every week.  More than that sometimes and also we would get lured away by places.  We had a contract to--there's a casino on the Gold Coast called Conrad Jupiters [Conrad Jupiters Casino; The Star Gold Coast, Broadbeach, Australia], it's owned by the Hilton, that's why it's called Conrad after Conrad Hilton, he owned it, we worked there a year and then, let's see the entertainment director from another hotel came and offered us another contract and lured us away.  So it was quite good.  I enjoyed working on the Gold Coast, yeah.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in, in Australia?
Speaker 2: Seven years actually, seven years.  And then we moved here to Las Vegas [Nevada].
Story_ID: 410323
Speaker 1: So, you moved back to Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how, how was that transition when you came back in '97 [1997]?  And now, now you, you've been over, you've been away--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the reason I moved back is because in '95 [1995], me and my wife moved to Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We moved there for two years, and during that time I brought my mother [Louise Deville] over.
Speaker 1: To Australia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how did she like that?
Speaker 2: Now my mother had never left Los Angeles [California], my mother had never left, you know, the states, so she was blown away, I mean to bring my mother up, but here's what I saw, my mother was aging, my mother was sickly, my mother could hardly walk a whole block and she'd have to sit down.  That's when I realized that my mother was dying, I didn't think my mother had a long time left and I'd be damned if I, I was gonna stay in Australia while my mother got--
Speaker 1: Progressively worse.
Speaker 2: --slowly sicker and sicker and died.  And I knew that if I had to, if my mom had an emergency I'm gonna have to f- hop on an eighteen-hour flight and then come back and then hop on another when if, she has another emergency.  So I looked at my wife and I told her, "Billie [Billie Cole], I can't live here anymore," and she said, "Why?"  I said, "Because I think my mother doesn't have long." And she looked at me and said, "Well, I'm your wife, I'll move with you wherever you want to go."  Now, I didn't wanna move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because my wife had been watching a lot of the show 'Cops' in Australia, you know 'Cops' so--
Speaker 1: And they got a good version--
Speaker 2: She was scared of L.A., she was (laughter) she was scared of L.A., she's like, "I'm not moving there."  So, I thought okay, I need to be close, how about San Francisco [California]?  And I thought, no, cold, hills, (shivers) you know, nah, I gotta walk up all them hills and so I thought well, I sing, you sing, Vegas, it's the likely, you know, the most logical place is Las Vegas, you know?  I don't gamble, I don't drink, so that's cool, I didn't have to worry about that so we moved here and we didn't know a soul, didn't know a soul, it was scary.  We put all of our, we had to sell a lot of our like appliances because they were on a different power thing--220 [volts], so I had to sell my TVs and my fridges and my stove and all that stuff and, we loaded everything onto a, a ship, you know the container ship?  And we flew here, we had nothing with us except our suitcases, everything else was on the container ship which took eight, eight, oh no, sixteen weeks, I think sixteen weeks to get here.  So, when we got here we rented a house and we bought a mattress and a TV set and a fridge, that's all we needed, you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the house's already pretty much--
Speaker 2: The house was there, yeah.  So, and then we got, we had money, we, we brought quite a lot of money with us, you know, to help us and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause of the exchange over there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And because also I had a Jag [Jaguar] over there and she had a Benz [Mercedes-Benz], and we had to let them go because, as you know, the, the stirring wheel's on the other side--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --I can't--
Speaker 1: And the emissions are different?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You have to make a lot of changes on the car so I just let 'em go, so we had a lot of money, not a lot of money, but enough, you know, to last us, maybe a year or so.  But it was quite scary.
Story_ID: 410324
Speaker 1: So you came here and you hit the ground running?  Because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even with a, with a stock pool of money, we know in the music business living--
Speaker 2: It's all going out--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and nothing coming in, you know.
Speaker 1: So what happened with you working here when you got here--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: I got, I did something I'd never done before, I got a retail job--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --management.  I just made up some stuff, told 'em I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I knew how to manage, I mean if you can think, you can manage, I mean, gee whiz, and you can count.  So I, I, I managed a men's clothing store--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --while I looked for musical work.  And, we would make up tapes and CDs and pictures and I would knock on every entertainment directors door at every casino, 'til I got in at Luxor [Luxor Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], the guy down there is Mike Hartsell, Circus Circus Group [Circus Circus Enterprises; Mandalay Resort Group], and he hired us and he gave us a two-month contract, and then he extended it, and then he'd extend it a little longer and--
Speaker 1: So you came, now was it just a duo, you and her?  Or was it a--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a trio, yeah, yeah, with a keyboard player.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we worked on tracks and--
Speaker 1: And you came and you just put it together?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you started making it happen, so to speak?
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you had no management at this point?  It was you actually on the phone--
Speaker 2: Me, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was you doing it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I watched my manager [John Daniels] do it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's a sales job, and I'm a product, that's all it is and I watched him move product all around the world.  The only difference is, is he believed in the product.  Well, I believe in me.  So, if I pick up a phone and I try to sell myself, who, who better to sell me than me?
Speaker 1: It's funny--
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: It's product.
Speaker 1: I think it was [HistoryMaker] Mannie Jackson of the, who, who, who owns the Harlem Globetrotters.
Speaker 2: Okay yeah, Mannie Jackson, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he, and he said that the whole business is painting pictures and telling stories--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He said that's what sales is.  And I guess in the music in- you, and plus you had a true track record that you could show them?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: For, for what about a twenty-year span, correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Of, of working with Marvin Gaye and those things I'm sure were helpful for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but like Mannie said, it's, it's, its, it's, it's also how you paint that picture.  It's how you paint the picture, and my ex-manager was brilliant at it, I mean he would convince people that you're a fool if you don't hire this act, this is the greatest thing since sliced br- what are you crazy?  Look at this poster, I mean a poster, nothing live, no video, no nothing, just a poster of the whole show and he was able to sell that sight unseen for eleven plane tickets, hotel rooms, per diems, all that was sent to us before--
Speaker 1: You even got there.
Speaker 2: --we even got there.
Speaker 1: Deposits, the whole thing.
Speaker 2: Dude was good.  And I learned off of him.  It's just, if you believe in the product, you can sale it.  You have to believe in something.
Speaker 1: So, you worked in the, the circuit here for a minute, from '97 [1997], through what?
Speaker 2: Actually '98 [1998], through, gee, I went, I was at Luxor for four years and then we went to the Westward Ho [Westward Ho Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], the Mandalay Bay [Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], and, and I, I move around, I just moved around and I stopped doing the casinos a couple of years back now, I haven't done one, yeah--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --in a couple of years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, and did, did your wife [Billie Cole] continue to do it or did she--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --do something different?
Speaker 2: No, she focused on teaching vocals.  And now my wife is the number one vocal coach out here in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Number one.  You've heard of Danny Gans?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We have his daughter [Amy Gans]. Do you remember a movie called 'Rudy'?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Rudy Ruettiger?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We got his daughter here.  We have everybody in town here, everybody.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So, she's doing more of teaching and instructing--
Speaker 2: More teaching, yeah.
Speaker 1: --private (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's got a lot of students.  She had so many that sometimes, I have to go and do classes for her, yeah.
Speaker 1: Does she still perform?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She's in a trio.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah working with Ray Glover.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, from time to time.
Story_ID: 410325
Speaker 1: And right now, currently, what are you doing in your, in your--
Speaker 2: I'm with The Platters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now explain this, for those that don't know who The Platters are, you can--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sonny Turner's Platters, okay? What, they were bo- formed in 1953, with such hits as 'Only You,' 'Smoke Gets In Your Eyes,' 'Red Sails in the Sunset,' 'Harbor Lights,' and, of course, you have a lot of Platter groups right now, but there's only two Platters left, Herb Reed, Sonny Turner, that's it.  And I work f- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they're originals?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I work for Sonny.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everybody else, you know, like down here at the Sahara [Sahara Hotel and Casino; SLS Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], unh-uh--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nobody ever worked with an original.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: It's licensing only, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: It's licensing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so they're licensed through Sonny in order to do that--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  He, he, he, never owned the Platter name, it was bought and sold and now it's owned by a guy in New York, it's a Jewish guy by the name of Marshak [Larry Marshak].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He owns the name and he licenses groups out.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he gets all this money back.
Speaker 1: So, so that's why we see a lot of groups now that are--
Speaker 2: Platters this--
Speaker 1: Not just Platters, the, the, the--
Speaker 2: Sounds of--
Speaker 1: --Temptations [The Temptations], or we'll see the signs that'll say, so-and-so group, then you'll see a small sign that says, review--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which means it's really not the actual--
Speaker 2: It's not really the actual group.
Speaker 1: So, so you're fortunate to, to play with actual--
Speaker 2: I work with the original, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how is that right now, doing that?  I mean, at, at this point in your career?  How is that?
Speaker 2: It's great.  I'd go out, but like I said I used to go off for months at a time, now I go for two or three days.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know.  And the money is good, and the--
Speaker 1: How about the music?  Do you really enjoy the music?
Speaker 2: I enjoy the music, I actually enjoy the music, it, you know, it's pretty much, you know the same because we always have to do those hits, but we also have a Motown medley, that we do in the show, so it's interesting.  It's a good show in fact.
Speaker 1: And you're still traveling through countries all around the world (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  I was in Guam last month.
Speaker 1: So it's a full circle then?
Speaker 2: I went to Tokyo [Japan], yeah, yeah.  But here again, I always know, I'm coming home.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I'll be home soon, you know?  Which is good.  If not, I don't think at this age I could do it like that anymore.  I couldn't go off eight, nine months.
Story_ID: 410326
Speaker 1: So you came back, when you came back from Australia, how long, long did your mom [Louise Deville] hang on?  How long did she--
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One year.
Speaker 1: So you kind of had--
Speaker 2: I knew--
Speaker 1: You've kind of had a know- a knowingness about yourself--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --even through--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as you said, when you saw the ten people in the room, you knew that it was time for you to go for the Marvin Gaye gig.
Speaker 2: Yeah, man.
Speaker 1: You had a knowingness--
Speaker 2: I, I knew--
Speaker 1: --too about the apartheid thing coming down.
Speaker 2: I, I've been guided I think all my life, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you kind of know things--
Speaker 2: But I knew, yeah.  You know, your mother.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, you, you know how she feels when you hold her, you know how her voice, the cadence is supposed to run, you know how--when I left in 1990, my mother was in the garden, you know, doing yard work, when I saw her in ninety--'95 [1995], my mother couldn't wa- she couldn't even walk half a block, that's when I knew, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were home, and it was a beautiful time to be home during her transition.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You, you were here.  So you knew you did the right thing.
Speaker 2: I did the right thing.  I've always known that.
Speaker 1: Now has this brought your family, you and your siblings closer?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Well, well I'm home now.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, and also they have a place that they can come to in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] when they (laughter)--you know, when you live in Vegas man, you get more friends.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: If you've got more than one bedroom, forget about it boy, you're gonna get company.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I got--
Speaker 1: I guess it's (unclear) to the shows possibly--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got guest rooms and, I got a guest room there and a guest room there so they yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there anything else (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're all real close.
Speaker 1: --anything else that you'd like to add about your career or anything else that you'd like to add that we didn't add?
Speaker 2: I've had fun and I'm still having fun and that's all I need to add.
Story_ID: 410327
Speaker 1: Why did you wanna tell your story?  I mean, I know you said that you didn't have a lot to tell.  But do you think it's important that people have done things, or share information?
Speaker 2: It's, it's always important to share information, it's all we have is history.  That's all we have.  It's who came before us in the books, that's it.  And these, in the tales, it's like you're hearing me now, but in the other group I'm in, I listen intently to Little Anthony [HistoryMaker Jerome "Little Anthony" Gourdine], when he opens up his mouth and about the road in the South, I mean, I'm like, I'm, I'm right there because it's important for me to know this, it's important for me to share his story with another person and vice versa.  They should always continue always, it should never end.
Story_ID: 410328
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  How do you feel about the way that your life is gone, how you lived your life and what's really important to you now as you look back in, in your life currently?
Speaker 2: The fact that I'm happy.  I'm happy.  I mean, I'm not over the moon, you know, but a lot of people say, Robert [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc] you could've had hit records, you could've done this, you could've done this.  No, I wasn't supposed to, I'm doing what I'm supposed to do.  I'm at where I'm supposed to be at.
Story_ID: 410329
Speaker 1: For those people that are going into the, the entertainment field, be it singing, whatever they're, do you have any advice for them or what suggestions?
Speaker 2: Get your education first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Always get your education at first and then know, if you're gonna be a s- a musician, learn everything about your instrument, if you're gonna sing, learn everything about it.  Don't just steal and copy, you know?  Learn everything you can, hone your craft and practice, practice, practice.
Story_ID: 410330
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you haven't done that you still wanna do?  Anything that you, still remaining on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Skydive (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You wanna skydive?
Speaker 2: I'm scared to death though.  I think I will do it though, one day yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done that you regret, that you would change in your life, anything differently?
Speaker 2: I have no regrets.
Speaker 1: When it comes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's unhealthy.
Speaker 1: No, that's good, you know, that means you're happy, it coincides.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Story_ID: 410331
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community in the future?
Speaker 2: Same as Bill Cosby's, Cosby's right, to lift up our level of education, to focus on family, especially the black male.  If you're gonna go out and, and impregnate women, marry them, or don't do that.  You know, and I wish we could go back to a time when respect was number one.  When I go down south still, to this day, and I speak with young, you know, black kids, it's yes sir, and no sir with them.  Out here, out--when I go into L.A. [Los Angeles, California], yo, what's up my man, yo dude, hey dog. I'm fifty-three years old, why are you calling me dog, you know (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I understand I may look hip and young, but I'm not, and you ought to be able to see that, you know.  So I, I wish we could get back to that, you know.
Speaker 1: When you look back--
Speaker 2: We have to respect ourselves.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That is so important.
Speaker 1: Respect.
Speaker 2: Respect is so important, it's everything.
Story_ID: 410332
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: The love I've got around me.  The people around me in my life who've been pulling for me, it's incredible.  'Cause I could have gone a whole another way, I should've gone a whole another way, use your imagination on that, I could have gone a whole another way.  I got a lot of buddies in jail or dead, okay?  But it was like every time I was about to do something that could put me there, something told me no, no don't do that.
Speaker 1: That guidance you spoke of.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Don't, don't, no, no, no.  Go home, turn around.
Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you when you're no longer on this earthly planet?
Speaker 2: He was, how many times have I heard that question asked?  What do I--how do I wanna be remembered?
Speaker 1: Your legacy.
Speaker 2: He was a good man.  'Cause it's not how much money you have, or how much you leave behind, it's how good you were to people, that's your legacy, you know.  Like my buddy Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore], this, he's seventy-three years old, but nobody, I never heard anybody say a bad word about him and I've known him for forty-four years, never a bad word.  That's how I wanna be remembered, as a good person.
Speaker 1: What message do you have for the children of tomorrow, you know the--
Speaker 2: Respect yourself.  If you respect yourself you can do anything.
Speaker 1: Anything else you wanna say to, to our listening audience?
Speaker 2: Keep listening and keep learning.
Story_ID: 410027
Speaker 1: Okay this picture was taken at a, at the Barbary Coast, right?  I remember the video for Gladys Knight, she has a jazz album out and in the video they wanted us to look like we're in the 1940s.  So we all came there.  That's her brother, Bubba [HistoryMaker Merald "Bubba" Knight, Jr.], on the left, me right here in the glasses, got [HistoryMaker] Lamonte McLemore, you got Gladys in the front, [HistoryMaker] Harry Elston, S- [HistoryMaker] Sonny Turner, he, he's in The Platters and he's in The Friends of Distinction and he's a 5th Dimension and he was a Pip [Gladys Knight and the Pips]. Quite a group, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Quite a group.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Me and Billie [Billie Cole], my wife.
Speaker 2: And was this for a specific show or (unclear)--?
Speaker 1: It's just a promo shot for the entertainment directors here in Las Vegas [Nevada].  When you wanna get a job you have to have a good promo shot, you know that.
Speaker 2: This one is in the recording studio at, we're at Gladys Knight's house, over here near Wayne Newton, yeah where Wayne Newton lives.  And that's Little Anthony [HistoryMaker Jerome "Little Anthony" Gourdine] in the middle, I'm on the right, Clarence Collins, he's an Imperial [Little Anthony and the Imperials], he, he's in the back and Mr. Merald Knight, he was a Pip, we also call him Bubba.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's the handsomest guy on the planet.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's me right after surgery, that's me.  That's a promo shot as well.
Speaker 1: Right after surgery?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh man, that's a, oh, '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Round about '91 [1991], yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I'm gray and--
Speaker 1: Unfortunate.
Speaker 2: That's the great [HistoryMaker] Mary Wilson of the Supremes and myself.  We were at a barbeque, this is a guy that lives in town, he's a Greek guy, he owns, he owns a lot of ships and he has these, he has a lot of barbeques and he always likes to have celebrities there, so we'd go and eat his food.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Nice.
Speaker 2: He lays it out, he lays it out, man.  He lays it out.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Beverly Hills, that's a group I was in from '76 [1976] to, no, no from '78 [1978] to 1980, and Howard Hewett is on your right.  Howard Hewett was later in the group Shalamar and he's had quite a career himself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's just me in a white suit at Lamonte McLemore's house in his entrance.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Johnny Brown of 'Good Times.'  In 1990, we were in a show called 'Harlem Rhythm' and he had a major role in the show and I worked with him for eighteen weeks, the great Johnny Brown.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's me and, that's me and Larry Holmes at his restaurant [Ringside Restaurant and Lounge] in Easton, Pennsylvania and this was this year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: Late great Marvin Gaye in Washington, D.C.  We were on tour and one of the ladies in the picture came to one of our shows and told (laughter) and told him that she wanted to cook him a home cooked meal, hence that picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That was in '76 [1976], I guess, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay, the old home cooked meal trick (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's me and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's me and Dionne Warwick.  That's on the Gold Coast in Australia, and that's backstage.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me in Milan, Italy, probably doing a Lou Rawls tune it looks like.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 2: The Platters.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Could you name everybody from left to right?
Speaker 2: Keith [ph.], Sonny, Wendy [Wendy Edmead], Robert [HistoryMaker Robert DeBlanc], from left to right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a special picture here.  As I told you Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California] had quite of a, quite a number of people who called it home and the people that called it home were there for years and one of our crew had died and we came back like a reunion and yo- you have a guy in the back, he's in Earth, Wind and Fire, that's Ralph Johnson, right there in the yellow--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Oh, okay in the yellow?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And over here is Howard Hewett of course in the back and here, if you remember 'The Price is Right,' one of the beautiful girls who would, yes he does with, yeah, with Bob Barker, that's Kathleen Bradley a former Miss Black California as well.
