Story_ID: 599079
Speaker 1: Yeah, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Mrs. Duncan [Lauraine Duncan]. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: That's Edgar, E-D-G-A-R, middle initial N as in Newton, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N [HistoryMaker Edgar Duncan].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 1st, 1932.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Born in Monessen, M-O-N-E-S-S-E-N, Pennsylvania, it's southwest of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: All right and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently working as a pharmacist, part time.
Speaker 1: Okay and you at one time you were assistant surgeon general for the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And been a professor and administrator in the health field, right?
Speaker 2: And earlier days a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, what is today's date (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did a short stint in the steel mill, worked in pharmacies.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes sir, what it today's date?
Speaker 2: August 13, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at my home 5405 Bartlett, B-A-R-T-L-E-T-T Street, Pittsburgh, PA.
Story_ID: 599080
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer, the first one is--
Speaker 2: You might get a lightweight answer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Pancakes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right now the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Yes: right place, right time, right person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 599081
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: --father's [William Duncan, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I'll start with your mother's side first okay?  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Willie Wert, W-E-R-T, Duncan, D--maiden name is McMillan, M-C-M-I-L-L-A-N [Willie McMillan Duncan].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 10th, 1895.
Speaker 1: And she was born in Tuskegee, Alabama?
Speaker 2: She was born in Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  I mean how far back can you trace your mother's lineage?
Speaker 2: I can only go back as far as her father and her mother. What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--okay, so you're--okay, so that's, that takes us I guess to what 1880, '70s [1870s] maybe?  That takes us to the 1870s maybe?  Her father and mother?
Speaker 2: They--well they--she was born in '95 [1895], I would guess they were around in 1870, I, I never heard that they were into slavery, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that--there's no stories about slavery on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not that I ever heard of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: John, Reverend John D. McMillan [John McMillan], same spelling.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I believe her name was Chaney.  I never had the fortune of meeting her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so her last name was Chaney before she married him or?  Her last name was Chaney?
Speaker 2: No her last--I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her first name was Chaney?
Speaker 2: --what her maiden name was.
Speaker 1: Okay her first name was Chaney?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Chaney McMillan, okay.
Speaker 2: I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any stories about your grandfather and his ministry that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Well he was both the minister and founder [sic.] of Butler Chapel A.M.E. Zion Church in Tuskegee.  He was a presiding elder at one of the higher ranks in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church and he was also head of Christian education for the A.M.E. Zion church, nationally.
Speaker 1: Okay so did he attain the rank of bishop or anything or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Presiding elder.
Speaker 1: Okay, presiding elder okay.  Now was that the first A.M.E. Zion church in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Butler Chapel, A.M.E. Zion (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 599082
Speaker 1: Was your [maternal] grandfather [John McMillan] close to Booker T. Washington or did he know, was he close to the campus of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or?
Speaker 2: I, I would assume he knew him.  My mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] recalls him, she points him out whenever we pass the statue on the Tuskegee campus.  She also was taught by George Washington Carver.
Speaker 1: Okay, so does your mother, does she have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah, does she have any stories about Booker T. Washington or George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: No, her, her favorite stories were somewhat on the humorous side about the--why she liked to be, go into detention on a Sunday afternoon at the dormitory because there was this handsome looking fellow marching around the block as a guard.  She started out in preschool, the campus preschool with two other women that she faithfully corresponded with until they passed in their nineties and were in three different parts of the country.  One of 'em she had not seen in sixty years, and they all wrote the same, that's my outstanding memory, very distinct writing that was clear to the day she was--last wrote anything.
Speaker 1: Clear handwriting?
Speaker 2: Before she passed in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother was born the same year that Booker T. Washington gave the famous Atlanta Compromise speech.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: At the Cotton Exposition [1895 Cotton States and International Exposition]--yeah.
Speaker 2: Well she, she knew, she knew him, I assume he handed her, her diploma in 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay so she, she went from kindergarten through college at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: And remained in contact and friends for over sixty years.
Story_ID: 599083
Speaker 1: Any other stories about Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], any of the other personalities, Robert Russa Moton or, or I don't know Monroe Work [Monroe Nathan Work] or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, whenever we were there together largely in connection with my father's [William Duncan, Sr.] family reunion, we would visit the campus.  All three of my sisters [Dorina Duncan Trader, Sarajean Duncan and Rose Duncan Rome], both stayed there and worked with my aunt who owned a grocery store and other stores in the heart of Tuskegee [Alabama], and I visited there in spent my last year before--last summer before college [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] at Tuskegee.  Both my two sisters are married to [U.S.] Army medical officers from--who were stationed at Tuskegee and later at the VA [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama] and while I was there I got to meet all of the--not all--a lot of the people from the university and a lot of people from the VA medical center which was the only medical center that veterans could be sent to in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did you go down there?
Speaker 2: I was there in both in 1948 and 1950.
Story_ID: 599084
Speaker 1: Any other interesting stories about growing up that your mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] may have shared with you about her parents [Chaney McMillan and John McMillan] or about what--events at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or?
Speaker 2: Oh, well they always had plenty, plenty of stories.  My, my best one is after my father [William Duncan, Sr.] met my mother through making suits for my grandfather, he went to Tuskegee [Alabama] to visit her in about 1919 and I guess they corresponded when he had moved to Monessen [Pennsylvania] and so finally he wrote her this what we call the infamous now or never letter.  He sent her a letter that said, "Come to Pennsylvania and marry me, or never."  Obviously she, she got there and had six children but we told her--we saw the card that she wrote back to him that, how glad they were to see him, never saying, how glad I was to see you, and I said, "You might've been married a little sooner," 'cause she was not--she had been a school teacher and was out working before she moved to Pennsylvania to marry him she would--for that time somewhat older, my father was thirty when they got married.  So they were--for that generation they were relatively into adulthood when they got--met her, got married but the letter worked.  She came to Pennsylvania on the train and that's where they're both buried.
Story_ID: 599085
Speaker 1: Well, I just want to know if there's anything else about her [Duncan's mother, Willie McMillan Duncan] in specific growing up before I move onto your father [William Duncan, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well she would tell us about you know her friends and so it was really a lot around the current activities in connection with those preschool friendships that she had, that she had made.  The person, one of the graduates had moved to Oklahoma and I was there once and called and she could recite my biography, ask me questions, "Are you still doing this, still doing that?" Almost to the letter because my mother had written about all of her children.  She wrote--everybody knew about her children, the local paper knew about her children (laughter) everyone knew about my mother's children, and Mrs. McAlpine [ph.] knew about me when I called her.
Speaker 1: Okay, well.
Speaker 2: Oh, another--when they, they did have kind of a reunion in Tuskegee [Alabama] and one of 'em was using a cane at that point later in life, but when they got together it was somewhat, I guess back to childhood.  She threw away the cane and they went hopping, and skipping and jumping I guess.  That's what my mother always wanted to do in her later years that she regretted not being able to hop, skip and jump.
Speaker 1: Why what, was there a rule against that?  I mean oh, in her later years she regretted not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: That was her, one of her big complaints (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: The other was that she got toward ninety, ninety-nine that all her friends had passed; all of her siblings had passed and was a good lesson in being the last one surviving of a group or a family or whatever.
Story_ID: 599086
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was William.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the local--William Arthur Duncan [William Duncan, Sr.], D-U-N-C-A-N and the local friends in Monessen [Pennsylvania] to distinguish between the two 'cause they go--both could've been called Will.  My mother called my father Arthur or Dad and my mother's friends would call her Willie [Willie McMillan Duncan] but her really close friends would call her Bill.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your mother, they would call your mother Bill?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) it wasn't enough to be have to use your male name of Willie they would call her Bill, that was her nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nickname for her close friends.
Speaker 1: Now what's your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Father was born January 24th, 1891.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was in Opelika [Alabama].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-P-E-L-I-K-A.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alabama--which is, up the train stop in Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so he was born nearby.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your mother, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah but they say if my father hadn't--grandfather [John McMillan] hadn't been stationed there, that's how he met, met my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: There were ten sons, mother, grandmother's name was Sarah but her friends called her Sally [Sarah Duncan], Sarah with an H and the, the best story I like to tell about her she made sure that those ten sons could do all the household chores where they all learned; all of 'em had something to do with sewing or tailoring or clothes cleaning, some kind of business.  What's now called, has been called the rag trade but she made sure they knew how to do all the household chores, and I guess people didn't take, really take vacations in those days but Grandma Sally packed her bag one time so the story goes, and went away for a couple of weeks and didn't tell anybody where she was going.  "Take care of it yourself, bye," and when she and my grandfather moved to Pennsylvania we actually ended up living in their house.  So I grew up with, in the house of grandparents.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: It was Henry Duncan.  I don't know what his middle name was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My deceased brother [William Duncan, Jr.] says he--my paternal grandfather and his brother came to the United States from Guiana or what was then British Guiana.  Why they came to Alabama, this was--either slavery was still going on.  They were freed as British citizens but why they came there I don't know what kind of work attracted him, but they didn't stay long and there's a--one of the cousins showed us the street corner where they all left from, they--I guess they got on some kind of buggy or vehicle and headed to the train station and all of them passed through Monessen [Pennsylvania] as, as a way stop, then went to Detroit [Michigan], Los Angeles [California], Texas, New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay do you think they came to, well?
Speaker 2: Work, work.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is the--during the great black migration [Great Migration] north for industrialized jobs.
Speaker 1: So there's no story about why they choose to move from Guiana?  Why your ancestors on your father's side, your paternal ancestors you know moved from Guiana to the United States or how they did it?
Speaker 2: I miss- I'm missing you.
Speaker 1: I said there's no story about why or how your paternal ancestors got from Guiana to the United States or why they?
Speaker 2: No--don't, never.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't--that's all I know and that's--I should've talked to my brother like--I'm sure many will tell you that gotten his oral history down more, but you know it's always, there's tomorrow and you'll talk about it tomorrow.
Story_ID: 599087
Speaker 1: There's a trail at least that we can follow, it's--there's some sort of trail at least you know with them [Duncan's paternal ancestors]--knowing they're from Guiana [British Guiana] so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and in the '80s [1980s] my family started having family reunions, and so the children of these ten sons as well as cousins who were my [paternal] grandmother's [Sarah Duncan] siblings, we'd get together and the names, the main names of the family--ours became Duncan because my grandmother who was a Dowell, D-O-W-E-L-L married a Dowell and the family name was Biddel, B-I-D-D-E-L.  I had a great-grandmother, my father's mother was, my father's grandmother--excuse me, was listed in I guess it was about the 1860 census as a teacher.
Speaker 1: What was her name do you know?
Speaker 2: Effie Montgomery [ph.], E-F-F-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right Effie Montgomery, so she's listed in the 1860 census as a teacher, and is that in Alabama, or was she teaching in Alabama?
Speaker 2: I don't know what--she was born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I don't know how she could be listed as a teacher 'cause if this were 1860 there was still slavery and we weren't supposed to have any teachers, but.
Speaker 1: Hm, well that's an interesting question, yeah.  Well, now did your--so they're no stories about slavery from that side of the family that you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, there was cousin Dewey [ph.] had a--the name Dewey and I had an uncle named Sly [ph.], Shy [ph.]?  There were two admirals during the Spanish American War and two of the sons were named for them and so this name Dewey got in there somewhere, but Dewey was--in the '80s [1980s] was the last, last oldest survivor.  He took us to the plantation to the farm and you could see the chimney of the, the master's house and he described the day they, when they got the, "You're emancipated." He wasn't there but he I guess had been told the story and a couple--our, one of our sons and a cousin went behind that property to where--I guess where the slave quarters were and there were pieces of artifacts that were still there.  It's now filled with pine trees that's, that are being subsidized by the government growing but.
Speaker 1: Now this is in Alabama?
Speaker 2: It's still there, it was still there when we visited--you could--the chimney was still standing.
Speaker 1: Okay is this in Opelika, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is in Opelika (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 599088
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [William Duncan, Sr.] have any stories about growing up that he shared with you?  Did he talk about growing up and what it was like to grow up down there [Opelika, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, see I don't--see I don't remember--my grandmother [Sarah Duncan] didn't talk very much and I don't ever remember talking to my grandfather [Henry Duncan] 'cause I was really, very little.  It's one of those faint memories.
Speaker 1: No, I was asking if your father talked about growing up (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They never said much about it, no.
Speaker 1: Never?  Okay, did he talk about how he became a tailor?
Speaker 2: That's what I said I don't know how this tailoring thing got into the family.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh my father spent some time in Georgia, too.  He said he went to Georgia, not Georgia State [Evening School of Commerce; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] but whatever the black equivalent college [HBCU] was for a year, but he was--and somewhere he learned reading, writing, playing the violin, football--he was kind of a Renaissance guy for his, for his time.
Speaker 1: You don't know the name of the school?
Speaker 2: And as I put in the--told one of the interviewers, previous interviewers he said he wrote for Crisis magazine [The Crisis] in the '20s [1920s].
Story_ID: 599089
Speaker 1: And we had books in the house and obviously were encouraged to study, not only by our parents [Willie McMillan Duncan and William Duncan, Sr.] but by my mother's sisters [Sadie McMillan and Ruth McMillan]--remember I said they'd all gone to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?  And the two sisters that are older than I both graduated from Tuskegee and they adopted the brother next to me [William Duncan, Jr.] and myself to help us get through college, but it was--you grew up in Monessen [Pennsylvania] and you were one of those Duncans and so then they didn't ask, "Where are you going to study," or "Do well in school." It's--, "How well were you gonna do in school?"  So in the piece it says I graduated valedic- as valedictorian [from Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania] that was in part a challenge.  My, this brother again next to me and one of his friends sat me down at the kitchen table one night and said, "Okay, your sister graduated sixth, your brother graduated fourth, you can graduate one, and here's what you do to do it," and that's what came to pass.  It wasn't I'm you know I'm, I'm just sitting around--, "How many more books can I read? How many more formulas can I work on? How many more chemistry sets can I blow up something with." It was (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You had, you had--fortunately very subtle sometimes pressure.
Story_ID: 599090
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna get to all that but I--we're trying to move towards it.
Speaker 2: We're still down on the farm (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In a chronological--yeah.
Speaker 2: With the parents [Duncan's paternal grandparents, Sarah Duncan and Henry Duncan].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You're never gonna get your next interview (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, yes we will but, the next thing I want to ask you about is when you consider your parents [Willie McMillan Duncan and William Duncan, Sr.]--now well, I don't wanna get off your father without like verifying some--or trying to figure out.  Now he, he did all the traveling?  You said before then he lived in Tulsa, Oklahoma for a while, he lived in Minnesota.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He traveled around a lot; he was like a rolling stone.  He was a tailor, always had a job as a tailor and then you said he wrote for Crisis [The Crisis] in the '20s [1920s] and you know played the violin, was an athlete as well, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So by the time he gets married though he's what about forty years old?
Speaker 2: Thirty, thirty.
Speaker 1: He's in his thirties?
Speaker 2: He was in his thirties when he got married.
Speaker 1: Thirty?  Thirty years old?
Speaker 2: He's thirty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were married sixty years, so he's--
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were born though he was about forty I guess right?
Speaker 2: Forty-two or something, yeah.
Speaker 1: Forty-two, yes all right, okay, that's what I'm getting at.  Okay, so.
Speaker 2: Well his, his--besides being an excellent, superb tailor he was also a superb gardener.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he.
Speaker 2: He grew, he grew watermelons in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay but he made his living as a tailor though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did--okay, but you're not sure where he went to school in Georgia?
Speaker 2: No, I've forgotten where it was.
Speaker 1: I know there's a.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a black school [HBCU] called Fort Valley State [State Teachers and Agricultural College of Forsyth; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], does that sound right?  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: No, I think it was whatever was then the black equivalent of the state school like.
Speaker 1: Well Fort Valley State (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: --is the only one I can think of in Georgia, right, well.
Speaker 2: It's black.
Speaker 1: Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or Fort Valley State.
Speaker 2: No, it was in, it was in--he always use to talk about Waycross, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Waycross, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was also a linguist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The tailor shop he had in Monessen [Pennsylvania] was the first one in that town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when he died it had been--he had started it sixty years before that, so that would be 1921.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And there were a lot of ethnic people in, in the town working in that mill and he could pick up the languages from just about any country in Europe. Italian, Polish, whatever it was and he had that, he had that gift as well--
Story_ID: 599091
Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' [Willie McMillan Duncan and William Duncan, Sr.] personalities, their talents and their dispositions who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: What do I think they?
Speaker 1: So who do you think you take after the most your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably a mixture of both.  I probably would not jump up and acknowledge how I'm like my father 'cause I couldn't match him.  He could remember the score of the 1919 World Series.  He had all these talents and so the best that I ever did was listen to him.  He would talk and talk and talk, and my mother was this one--kind of sending us off to Sunday school, she sent me off to school but when I was in--this issue about becoming valedictorian for the school [Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania], she was the fighter in terms of making sure that nothing went wrong in the counting.  When she was ninety-five, I was fortunate to have my wife [Lauraine Duncan] there as well as my mother when I was fifty-eight, having that hood put on for the Ph.D. degree [from the University of Pittsburgh School of Education, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So she was very much the one who, who pushed us and some would say showed some favoritism toward this one son that I tried not, not let that interfere with our relationship or relationship with the siblings, but I'm probably a lot like her in this somewhat compelling feeling about being in church on Sunday, doing things, tried to help others, so probably a mixture of both.
Story_ID: 599092
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest childhood memories at home?
Speaker 2: At home?
Speaker 1: Yeah, with your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, reminding my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] it was time for the soap opera on the radio when she was trying to iron and cook and raise these--well most of 'em were gone off to school by then.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and?
Speaker 2: There were only two of us left.
Speaker 1: Yeah how many brothers--yeah, how many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fall?
Speaker 2: I have, it was six siblings.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: Three brothers [Duncan and his two brothers, William Duncan, Jr. and James Duncan], three sisters [Dorina Duncan Trader, Sarajean Duncan and Rose Duncan Rome].
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm number one, but I'm also the middle child of the second three, so I, I claim I have all those attributes of the middle child.
Speaker 1: So you're the middle, middle child of the second three?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right so you're number five I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Number five.
Speaker 1: Number five, okay.
Story_ID: 599093
Speaker 1: What was your, was there a black neighborhood in Monessen [Pennsylvania]?  Now that's in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was but for some odd reason we didn't live there.  We kind of lived off where we were the only black family, and I think that heavily shaped a lot of my views about how this world ought to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had the opportunity to move in what would be considered white circles as well as the black community.
Speaker 1: Now what was your neighborhood called?
Speaker 2: Didn't have a name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't have pavement for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't, didn't have a name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause sometimes people--places do so I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, on the hill or in the flats or, no it didn't have a name.
Speaker 1: Okay what were some--now did you--can you give us I guess an idea of what Monessen was like growing up?  I mean what did it look--I mean what did your house look like and what did your neighborhood look like?  Said it was unpaved you said, unpaved?
Speaker 2: Well, there were still a little bit of overt and certainly a lot of covert segregation, 1948.  Nineteen forty-eight [1948] I got involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: I don't wanna go that far yet.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I wanna keep you as a little kid for a while, we wanna talk about that and then we'll get you.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Not unless you were involved with them when you were four or five (laughter)?
Speaker 2: But it, it was, in a lot of ways it was a great place to grow up because you did have this almost separate black community.  I belonged to a black Boy Scout troop [Boy Scouts of America], so you learn many of the ways of the, the South but you learned how to do things that you had to do to advance in a white society.  This whole quest for the valedictorian-ship [at Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania] for a place in the school play, segregated theaters, bowling alleys, couldn't eat in the restaurant; that was the atmosphere that I grew up in, and grow up to try to change it.
Story_ID: 599094
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up [in Monessen, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well believe it or not I, I enjoyed the smell of that stinky, smoke and soot coming outta those smokestacks from the mills, 'cause when your shirt collar was dirty as characteristic of those towns was, you knew people were working, well pretty much all men at that time.  They were working, there was food on the table.  When they went on strike or they had to shut down because of no business, you had to figure out where, where, where's your meal coming from?  So I may not be as an ardent get rid of pollution person as I might be otherwise because I know the difference when you're being polluted and eating and not being polluted and not eating.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about sounds and sights?
Speaker 2: Oh, I grew up, where I grew up pretty quiet.  There weren't very many cars on the, on the street.  That would take you into sights and sounds that I remember when coming to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to live, the, the contrast.  You just didn't hear many sounds.  Kids would be out on the street playing, would tack up a real basket for basketball on the telephone pole, played softball, World War II [WWII] did a lot of work just trying to keep all the gardens growing that my father [William Duncan, Sr.] loved so dearly.
Speaker 1: So a lot of your food came from the garden?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, also know about pulling the wagon up to get food from the back of the food truck.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is during the Depression [Great Depression], right? When you're--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 599095
Speaker 1: Tell us about school, can you remember your first day in school, and what school you went to?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear)--yeah first--remember my mother's [Willie McMillan Duncan] a school teacher, also the mother of the fifth child.  My best recollection is, is that she sent me--I told you she sent me to school.  I couldn't tie my shoes, I couldn't write my name even though I think she tried to impart--I don't ever remember being read a book--things outta the Bible maybe but not a book.  So there I was the oldest kid in class going off to first grade.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you're sent to first (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was six and a half.
Speaker 1: Six and a half, okay.
Speaker 2: Kindergarten deprived, didn't have a kindergarten, and that's my little story of, oh, gee ended up as valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: It was, it was the top part of the vocational school, but I, it's one I could walk to, I had to walk to school.
Speaker 1: Okay what was the name of it--I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Oh, Monessen Vocational High School [Monessen, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And say, "Boy they starting out early in that time."
Speaker 1: Now vocational high school, now that was like the--was that the black school or was it integrated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was--all the schools I went to were mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were seven in my graduating class of two hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how many--were there many black students in class with you when you were?
Speaker 2: No, there're a lot of classes I was the only one.  If I had, if there were two of us 'cause I went the college preparatory route, there were two of us in the same class at the same time it's unusual.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Not really, the subject I liked for some weird reason was Latin.  I enjoyed chemistry (unclear), I was a person on a mission so I very carefully selected what I studied, took for grades, grade point average and didn't take.
Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't want to take something you didn't want--yeah that you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's right, don't--brother and friend's advice, "Don't take something just 'cause you wanna take it."
Speaker 1: Okay (cough).
Speaker 2: I was also in the band and the one tuba player and the one bass violin player, active in church.
Story_ID: 599096
Speaker 1: Now is this, was this an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church or?
Speaker 2: No, that was A.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't have a Zion in Monessen [Pennsylvania], so my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan]--
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Wayman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: W-A-Y-M-A-N; he was an A.M.E. bishop [Alexander Walker Wayman].
Speaker 1: Okay, Wayman A.M.E. Church [Monessen, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But also went a lot to the Baptist church 'cause that's where my father [William Duncan, Sr.] had belonged and they had youth activities that I engaged in and once in a while I'd sing with their choir.
Speaker 1: Okay now how would you describe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now all these--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --were coeducational activities.
Story_ID: 599097
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how would you describe yourself as a kid growing up?
Speaker 2: As, as a student, growing as a person?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what were you like then, in those days?
Speaker 2: I was always a little different because everybody who I--I did well academically [at Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania], was doing well academically so it's always a little different, but, but I--Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], church activities, school activities, I was, I was in all of those, but I was not the star athlete or the Joe Charming or such.  I thought I was pretty regular, but obviously some people didn't.  I had this strange name, Edgar Newton [HistoryMaker Edgar Duncan]: "Where'd they--where in the world did they get that from?" (Laughter) So I, but I thought I was pretty, pretty average, but I think I was probably--all these charges they're leveling with Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] kind of remind me of me that--now I really never was one to hang out on the street corner with the guys.  I, I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay so people saw you as maybe--I mean the charges--those that say he's a like a arrogant or something or he knows too--he thinks he's knows--too smart or?
Speaker 2: They might of, well I tried to not be that and there were enough elders to keep you in line.  If I was you know out in the middle of the street misbehaving--doing something, you'd be told in a minute.  If I didn't, even if I didn't walk up straight, they would, "Walk up straight," I straightened up 'til I got past their house and.
Speaker 1: But you tried to do the right thing you're saying, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah that was one of my, in fact I was looking at one of the letters from my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan].  She reminded all of us in that letter how blessed we were and to do the right thing if one of us--and she put it in the letter and she would pat me on my head when I'd go out to, to the battles of the academic day.  Now she called me her jewel which is--I tried to avoid, because you know she had these other jewels and the crowns and not just--I, I'd suspect some favoritism and then I ran into it with my mother-in-law so that's you know I've been cursed kind of with this, gee (laughter).
Story_ID: 599098
Speaker 1: Now did your teachers--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) treat you like that too?
Speaker 2: I was one of the Duncans.
Speaker 1: Were you--okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the real key points in my high school life [at Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania], I was--I didn't see where any money was gonna come to send me to college, and at one point I was gonna just go join the [U.S.] Army, at another point I was just go gonna work in the steel mill, those were the choices behind--and, and or some kind of industrial activity and I was gonna go back to that vocational school to become an electrician, which is probably good I never did, but what really interfered with that the Latin teacher, she taught English and Latin, heard that I was signing up to go to the vocational school and she's the one who pulled me aside, "No, you can do the professional bit--doctor, lawyer, chief of something," and I took her advice.
Speaker 1: Okay so you took the college (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the points I like to make along this whole route; I had a person I worked for one time who was very high on this role model stuff, that we needed black role models and I had to stop and think.  Outside of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], Sunday school and whatever blacks, men or women that influenced my life I had never had a black teacher.  I'd never had a black counselor or advisor or person who pulled me in like the guy did into the pharmacy, he wanted to become a pharmacist.  Like the high school teacher said, "Why don't you take college preparatory and do something else beside that?"  Not, not in undergraduate school [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and not in graduate school [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I had some advisors when I was working on the doctoral program [at the University of Pittsburgh School of Education, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but that was it.  I didn't have a person standing up in front of the class, in fact one of the down points for a town like Monessen [Pennsylvania]--my sisters [Dorina Duncan Trader, Sarajean Duncan and Rose Duncan Rome] went away to become teachers but they couldn't come back there to teach.  So this is, if you wanted role models you had to get them some other kind of way.  Fortunately I had done all this family history that you could look toward.  There were some branches on the tree that weren't exactly (laughter) great models but by and large it was all positive, pulling you toward positive achievement, but outside of family in those safe, few community things, church and community things that I was in, it was--they all happened to be white.
Story_ID: 599099
Speaker 1: In high school [Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania] were--now were you involved in athletics at all in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no that's.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: I found out (laughter) I couldn't catch, I couldn't hit, I couldn't run and I sure couldn't take a beating so (laughter) so I just did what I was good at which was taking tests.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now did you, were you in clubs, various clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah like the--I have my yearbook; I'll make sure I go through that, the Latin club.  I think I was in chemistry, but--
Speaker 1: You said you played the tuba and the bass violin, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you run for class office?
Speaker 2: I was the vice president one year, I think junior, junior year in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have a favorite teacher as such in high school?
Speaker 2: I would, I would say the one, the teacher who gave me the advice about, I could so something else.
Speaker 1: And.
Speaker 2: She didn't have to do that, I mean the, the message usually was you know they don't care about us or whatever, but she cared.  Of course the record was there for her to work with, I mean it wasn't like I was making Cs and dropping out.  This wasn't, this wasn't exactly a limb to go far out on, but it was not--not everybody got to go to college.
Speaker 1: Now what about your social life in high school?  Did you, were you able to?
Speaker 2: Remember I told you that you know I would follow the choir from the Baptist church and go to their youth (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so I.
Speaker 2: And they were all coeducational.
Speaker 1: Yeah your social life was outside of church but in the black community, right (unclear) I mean?
Speaker 2: No, a lot of it involved the church.
Speaker 1: I mean outside of school rather and in the black community at church, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were not written--certainly not written but certainly unwritten restraints on interracial dating or boy and girl or who was gonna be the May queen and.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go to the--
Speaker 2: It was always an issue.
Speaker 1: --prom or anything like, you didn't go to a prom or nothing, anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah but it you made sure to take someone of the same race.  It was.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: You didn't, okay. All right.
Speaker 2: This is 1950 and it might as well of been 19--1876, or something.
Story_ID: 599100
Speaker 1: But you were valedictorian of your class right, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right and so were you surprised when you were chosen as valedictorian or did you suspect you probably would be?
Speaker 2: No, remember the, this was a deliberate quest because of the sister graduating sixth in her class, brother graduating fourth in his class and so here I am and I've got this good record up to that point, and the, the two sat me down at the kitchen table and said, "Here's how you do it. You to make it to number one," which was a big thing 'cause it hadn't been done before, again, another first.  I guess I always loved to do these first things, it just--
Speaker 1: Okay so when you graduated were you, did you have a college in mind?  Did you know you were going to school right away, and what--well what year did you graduate for first of all?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--from the high school [Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in 1950, had you chosen a college at this point or did you know what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Well, initially I wasn't going to college, but everybody said, "Don't do that." They raised a part of money in the town and I was, I was just going off to the [U.S.] Army or working the mill, and then when I decided, well, okay, I'll do college.  People say you know that they'll, they'll help see me through.  The guy who started me out in pharmacy, we were supposed to had--I was suppose to have gotten some help from him which didn't, didn't materialize but at least he got me started, he got me interested.  He, he gave me the hope that there might be a way through this to be able to do this, and I registered for both pharmacy at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and college chemistry to be a chemistry teacher at Duquesne.
Speaker 1: Well wait a minute--I'm getting, you get--you got me mixed up now.
Speaker 2: I'm still ahead of you from starting?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're way ahead of me so.
Speaker 2: No, this is still like the last year of high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: What am I doing?
Speaker 1: Okay, so you applied to Duquesne and to--
Speaker 2: And to Pitt.
Speaker 1: --to the University of Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: And to Pitt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and it was just, my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan], my mother's theory that I'd be close by and could get home in case I got jammed up for money, sent my laundry home.
Story_ID: 599101
Speaker 1: Well before we graduate you, can you tell me about graduation? Now you're valedictorian right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what was it like to speak and what did you speak about and how did people receive you as the first black valedictorian right?
Speaker 2: There was, there was issue involved with that.  I thought it was a pretty neat thing to play in the band, 'Pomp and Circumstance,' and then when I would, gave the valedictory speech to jump up out of the stands and out of the band and go up to the podium and, and do the speech.  My mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] saw that as overt, covert, overt discrimination that they didn't want me sitting up on the podium all that time and they'd just yanked me outta the band or give the speech and go sit back down and play and not just bask for the whole time that the thing was going on.  So she, she raised hell with the band director, and he actually lived like down the valley, across the hill and you could see his house from our house and I don't know how many times sitting on our porch she would talk about the band, the band director and he died earlier so he was rolling over his grave every time she talked about him, trying to discriminate against her son (laughter).  Now to get to be the valedictorian, this family friend was working in the principal's office and she was one who made kind of you know kept an out on how the scores were being counted 'cause they did it supposedly on, not just choosing but on if you had the highest grade point average you were it.  And they didn't want any gerrymandering or rigging of the books or anything so she had this little spy network going but once she found out I--this possibility existed, then she, she did all in her power to make sure it happened, that there weren't going to be any slip ups or whatever.  Anyway that's how I got out of high school [Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania] and then I went south.
Speaker 1: Well what was your speech about? Did you make--
Speaker 2: Oh, miracle drugs.
Speaker 1: Miracle drugs (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I talked about--well, I was you know headed toward pharmacy and I talked about Penicillin and the first antihistamine that had developed and tested on [U.S.] Navy, Navy sailors and all these great things to come.  It's 1950 who knows what will, will develop.  Anyway, that's, that's how I got started in pharmacy and that was my valedictory speech.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the speech went through without a hitch, and nobody was upset and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was fine, it was fine.
Speaker 1: --and everybody seemed to be in favor of--?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most people probably didn't even know there was any controversy going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I said, a lot of it was my--I would've been--I thought that was pretty neat.  I mean how, how could you get missed if you had to get out of the bandstand (laughter) and go up to the podium and give a speech, but she didn't see it that way.
Story_ID: 599102
Speaker 1: So you applied to two, two schools Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and which one did you end up going to?
Speaker 2: Well, I leaned to Duquesne for two reasons. One they offered half scholarship and I knew that would be useful and the fact that the chancellor or president or some high official came out to my little high school [Monessen Vocational High School, Monessen, Pennsylvania] and was personally recruiting, so that's how I ended up at Duquesne but when I started I was in the college preparatory program, college arts and sciences to study chemistry and over the weekend I thought about what would I do with this degree, what if I don't make it into medical school or dental school or something after I get this bachelor's in chemistry, or still can't get a job teaching back in my local high school?  So I said, "Well, I think I'd better go sign up for pharmacy," at least I'll--I knew I'd seen black pharmacists.  I knew some of them and knew about there were black pharmacies in this country and I could probably get a job somewhere.  So from Friday to Monday I went in, saw the dean of the school of pharmacy and said, "I'd like to switch," and that's the story.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Duquesne like?  Did you stay on campus or did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed up on, what's now Old Main where the administrative offices are and worked in steel mills between my freshman and sophomore years and then I got a job in a hospital pharmacy at West Penn [Western Pennsylvania Hospital], one of the big hospitals here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, any, anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the final summer I'd met my wife [Lauraine Duncan], married and that was the first time I got back to Monessen [Pennsylvania] that year.  I was a busy little guy.
Story_ID: 599103
Speaker 1: --Really wanted to be a train engineer or a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: --you didn't put that in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: "What, what did you wanna be when you grow up?"
Speaker 2: Yeah at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] now what was--now this is the 1950s?
Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], started in '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '50 [1950] to '54 [1954] I guess, right in Duquesne?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a four year get your bachelor's [degree] and become a pharmacist in four years then, back then.
Speaker 2: Now what was it like for you at Duquesne, you were--they weren't that many black students there I take it?  I mean what over there.
Speaker 1: Well let's say it started out with one other, one other fellow, then there was--I was the only one.
Speaker 2: How were you treated?  How were you treated?
Speaker 1: Oh, superbly.  Again, once they found out you could take tests and get on the dean's list and ended up magna cum laude--you roll!  You just, you just know you're the--become one of the stars and they treat you like that and you bask in that.
Speaker 2: Now did you share your dorm room with another black student or what?
Speaker 1: No, this is post-war; Duquesne still had Quonset huts from World War II [WWII], temporary, temporary classrooms, sixteen of us in double bunk beds on the fifth floor walkup at Duquesne.
Speaker 2: So this was like a big dormitory, I mean a big bunk house or something almost?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Where guys from World War II could play poker all the night long through and then those sounds, trains, planes, cars, street cars, boats, airplanes all going past my open window with no air conditioning.  Hey, I was getting a good education.  I was learning to be a pharmacist.  I was--after the first year and I had all A's, I didn't get a B until my second year in English literature.
Speaker 2: Okay now did have a--is there any?  Who were your friends in those days?
Speaker 1: Oh, one buddy was actually from my hometown [Monessen, Pennsylvania].  I didn't know he was going into pharmacy.  Stan [ph.] and I'd--you know with several other friends and they (unclear)--the, the cafeteria was in the bottom of the basement.  The bottom of the building where we had pharmacy classes, the university cafeteria and that's where you would meet to make your evening dates, sometime to exchange notes, do your student government business in twenty-five minutes.  So I was perpetually late for class, including the dean's honor, but it's, it always amazed me how much latitude you can have when you're doing well academically.  They, they respect that and if you, if you never slept but you could still come in and do well academically, all those other rules were insignificant and you didn't go to jail, didn't get.
Speaker 2: Okay so.
Speaker 1: So I had a good, I had a good experience.
Story_ID: 599104
Speaker 1: There, I also went through a, a lot of going to other churches and denominations including the Catholic chapel [Chapel of the Holy Spirit, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] right there on campus, right, in the same, all in the same building where we were sleeping, and we were on the fifth floor or on the fourth floor were some well known basketball players.
Speaker 2: Well like who, like?
Speaker 1: Fletcher Johnson, Tucker [Jim Tucker], Ricketts [Dick Ricketts]--back when they had the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] sewed up.
Speaker 2: Right, now did they win the championship when you were there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know they won one NIT championship.
Speaker 1: Well I forget which year, that's the school that Chuck Cooper went to the Celtics [Boston Celtics].
Speaker 2: So Chuck Cooper was at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it was, it was a pretty--for that time, a pretty open school.  It was certainly much more open than high school had been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I appreciated that, got involved with the--again, with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], church activities.
Speaker 2: Now what did you--
Speaker 1: I was burning all cylinders working thirty-five hours a week.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were working with the NAACP youth group or what?
Speaker 1: No, in college.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was with the, with the local chapter and it was more toward the end of my college years and that's when I, I actually met my wife [Lauraine Duncan] at an NAACP meeting, not at, not at Duquesne but I was in, I was a student and I'd escorted a young lady to a--one of the fraternity brother's daughter to a prom and I was doing a follow up date and I saw her and I said, "Oh, where you going?"  She (laughter)--so I said, "Oh, I think I'll go to the NAACP meeting too," and that's--
Speaker 2: That's how you got to the meeting, that's how?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now you said you were in a fraternity, now you were in?
Speaker 1: Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Went into that in 1951, so I've been a member for quite a while.
Speaker 2: Was that a help to you in college?
Speaker 1: It was, it was--again, a lot inspiration and encouragement. You were supposedly selected to be in that because you were gonna do well in, in later life.  You were in college to start with and that was a fairly good sized deal but you were also supposedly selected on the basis of you were gonna be a success later in life.
Story_ID: 599105
Speaker 1: So were there any special teachers at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] that, that had a particular interest in you or that you admired?
Speaker 2: No, it was--I was just one of few black students at Duquesne, there weren't very many of us at--on the whole campus and I guess I clearly stood out you know.  Once you saw me it's kind of hard to not notice.
Speaker 1: No, I was asking you was there any special teachers at Duquesne that you admired or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was, I was--outside of the dean that everybody had the highest respect for, the founder of the school, and we still talk about him, still talk about that, that dean 'cause he made sure we were gonna be professional people in this world, high standards, ethical--to really be good at what we were gonna be doing.  The person who got my attention there was a pharmacology teacher, and he's the one who sent me to Chicago [Illinois]. I didn't get to Memphis [Tennessee]--I mean to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] because there were two black physicians who had Ph.D.'s in pharmacology, and he thought I could get both an M.D. and a Ph.D. degree and become maybe the third or whatever number down the line, that he thought I showed that much promise.  That was John Adams, so I'd say he was my most prominent teacher, but the one book I kept from the whole four years was the English literature book.  That big fat B that I got, but I didn't--that's the book I thought was gonna carry on through life, that pharmacy stuff would fade away, it would be superseded.  Although that one of the, well two of drugs I talked about are still with us, Penicillin and Benadryl, but anyway that was--but I did well with all the, all the professors and say I had produced, I, I did what they liked to see their students do.
Speaker 1: So you graduated magna cum laude, right, cum laude right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With what would now be a 3.85 [grade point] average.
Story_ID: 599106
Speaker 1: Did you get married in college [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or did you wait until after?  Did you get married while you were in college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my wife [Lauraine Duncan] has been with me with three college degrees, pharmacy, health administration, higher education and seven with her sons, and she finished high school.  She did go to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] some, she, she's been a teacher also, remember she mentioned teaching preschool students, three year olds who would be about getting close to forty now?  Sometimes I wonder what these kids are doing (laughter), what these kids are doing and she now teaches bridge to senior citizens.  Sit back he [Scott Stearns] said--oh, that's in the tape!  Edit that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, we don't want you to get outta the light 'cause we can't, the lights are--yeah we have a limited kind of a lighting system.
Speaker 2: I have this tendency to lean forward.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He probably thinks I'm on drugs or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're a pharmacist, I mean we don't, we don't know.  You at least are close to 'em if you're not you know (laughter).  So the, the--
Speaker 2: But to make sure that I had work particularly after I had gotten married and Eric [Duncan's son, Eric Duncan] was on the way, I lined up a job working at West Penn Hospital [Western Pennsylvania Hospital, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] full time practically while I was doing graduate student work.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now you.
Speaker 2: I went directly from undergraduate pharmacy to the Graduate School of Public Health [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Now at the Graduate School of Public Health, if you looked at the graduation list there are names from Egypt, Japan, Philippines, but I was the only African American there and one of the students asked me when I gave a talk on the, on my life, "What was it like?"  I says, "In those days in the '50s [1950s], if the dean said, 'We're having a picnic on Sunday,' that meant we, faculty, students, families and you didn't say 'May I' or 'May I opt out of it?' Everybody went to the picnic."  Another story I like to tell about doing all those things trying to fix up an old house in East Liberty [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], trying to work full-time as a pharmacist, and a full-time graduate student, I got a C and you couldn't graduate with below a B average.  I was called into my advisor's office and he said in effect, I'll clean it up a little bit, "Crap or get off the pot."  Now, it was twenty-nine years later that I found out that I was their first and at that time only student and I could've played the race card, man.  I said, "Wow, look at this."  They were about to kick me out and I had to decide whether I was gonna struggle, come back, and fight it and make it through, and I decided and my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan], the whole black community, everyone who knew I was doing this, it was my decision and I had a job, it wasn't like I was unemployed and I had to do this to advance.  I had a job, and so I says, "Okay, I'd like to give it a try," and I thought somebody gave me an A somewhere to balance the C, but again I looked across my academic record and I got mostly all A's that second, second term.  We were only here two terms, and then off for a year in residency, but that's what it was like.  They didn't--what it was like going in I interviewed with the dean who was from southern Maryland with the associate deputy dean who was from Tennessee with a program director who was from Alabama and I said, "If I get one more interview," and 1954 Mississippi was not at the top of our state for blacks to live in, I said, "If I get one more interview," and that was from Mississippi, "I'm gonna tuck my tail between my legs and go somewhere."  I had the Vietnam backup plan; go to Canada before the war [Vietnam War] was even thought about.  I was accepted at Toronto [Canada], Minnesota, Iowa and Pittsburgh, and because of the presence of the house and the job and family close by, Pittsburgh rose to the top of the rank and they also said we can help you financially.
Speaker 1: Well, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how I ended up at Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 599107
Speaker 1: Both at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I--it's kind of the favorite son category.  I'm there at Duquesne; I'm there at the Graduate School of Public Health [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, so you got your degree in public health?
Speaker 1: Public schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Couldn't write my name--end up well at the end, so.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you got your master's in public health and, and?
Speaker 1: Well, it's called a master of science in hygiene, M.S. Hyg.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it would've been a lot of easier if they had awarded a master of public health and I wouldn't have to explain.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm putting Scott [Scott Stearns] to sleep.
Speaker 2: It's a master of hygiene and it's called and--did they have the term then?  Did they even have the term master of public health in those days?
Speaker 1: No they--we finally got rid--I, when I went back to work and some other people finally got rid of that degree so we wouldn't have to explain it.
Speaker 2: It's master of hygiene of what?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Master of science in hygiene.
Speaker 2: Master of science in hygiene, okay.
Speaker 1: M--capital M, capital S, capital H, little y, g.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right so, this is--you got that in 1972 right or was that earlier?
Speaker 1: No, that was.
Speaker 2: That was earlier.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]? Okay, so they've got, they've got it mixed up on this sheet here, 1956.  That makes sense in the chronology we just went through (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 599108
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I graduated I was already at Staten Island [New York] doing my administrative residency for the master's degree and it was there I went into the [U.S.] Public Health Service pharmacy corps [Commissioned Corps] and that actually is a whole string of firsts.  I was the first African American to go into pharmacy corps which is my calculation 'cause I didn't know of any others, haven't heard about any others since then.  First chief pharmacist at the hospital in Chicago [Illinois], that's how we got to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Was that at Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] or?
Speaker 1: No, it was on the North Side on Clarendon Avenue, it's probably not there, it's torn down or--
Speaker 2: What was the name of the hospital (unclear)?
Speaker 1: U.S. Public Health Service [U.S. Public Health Service Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay, oh yes, okay.
Speaker 1: I became president of the Illinois Society of Hospital Pharmacists [Illinois Council of Health System Pharmacists], and didn't do much civil rights activity during that time.
Speaker 2: And you were living in Chicago then, right?
Speaker 1: That's when we lived in--we started out in Evanston [Illinois] and then we moved to Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and that's where we left from when we went to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay, so how long were you in Chicago, about?
Speaker 1: Five and a half years.
Speaker 2: Five and a half years?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Now you were featured, your family was featured in like a four page spread in Ebony magazine that centered on Lake Meadows basically.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And your family was like chosen as I guess the model residential family in Lake Meadows (laughter).  So you had like.
Speaker 1: Yeah we were, we fortunately knew someone to connect with the magazine who thought we'd help to spread out and so there we were.
Speaker 2: It's Hans Massaquoi, right, you know, right, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I don't know whether--it was interesting when Hans wrote his book ['Destined to Witness: Growing Up Black in Nazi Germany,' Hans J. Massaquoi].  I assume he's one of the HistoryMakers or will be or, or did.  I don't know is he still living?
Speaker 2: I'm not even sure, I know I know the name and I know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm not sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Interesting, fascinating story.
Story_ID: 599109
Speaker 1: So you're in Chicago [Illinois] for five and a half years and you went from Chicago to, to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And that's to work with the United States Public Health--?
Speaker 2: I went there as another trainee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I thought computers were gonna take over pharmacy and I should have some options with young kids if they were gonna take over pharmacy or the health field, and planning hospitals and running the Hill-Burton program [Hospital Survey and Construction Act of 1946].
Speaker 1: Now you were working, still working for the United States Public Health Service at that time or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--when I went into the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service, I went in as what would be a ensign or second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: So it's associated with the [U.S.] Navy, right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well they use the Navy, Navy ranks (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Navy ranks, okay, but I often wondered that it seemed confusing that everybody.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: That the doctors have to have the Navy coat to be the surgeon general and--
Speaker 2: It looks like Navy.
Speaker 1: So. Well--
Speaker 2: Well, we get our uniforms at the Navy.
Story_ID: 599110
Speaker 1: Before we do that let, let me just ask you about some dates.  Now when were you in Chicago [Illinois], from what years to what years?
Speaker 2: From '57 [1957] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 1962 you moved to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] we move to Washington, D.C. to start another training-ship and study computers.
Speaker 1: Okay so at this--you were explaining that you at this point you're, you actually had a [U.S.] Navy rank of ensign or something in the?
Speaker 2: Ensign, yeah.
Speaker 1: In the--now what is the naval connection to the United States Public Health Service [U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps] and does it actually require you to actually be in the Navy or what?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the Public Health Service actually started out to take care of merchant seamen [U.S. Merchant Marine], the ones who were where so many were killed in World War II [WWII] carrying materials across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] back in the late 1800s, and it never became a full [U.S.] military service but during war time we are activated as it were in World War II, and they served in various positions during the--Vietnam [Vietnam War] there were people, Public Health Service people in Vietnam, and they can be assigned to any of the military services or they were--I believe they still provide care for the [U.S.] Coast Guard as well as merchant seamen and during Hurricane Katrina they had a lot of teams mobilized to help and down in the gulf.  So it's had that somewhat military defense orientation and uniforms, pay system, benefits, but it's not part of the Navy or the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I guess that, that probably helped clear it up.
Speaker 2: So it's, it's a long separate history.
Story_ID: 599111
Speaker 1: So you're in Washington, D.C. and were you work- you were working in Washington, D.C. yourself, right?
Speaker 2: Right, well actually in Rockville when the promotion to assistant surgeon general came we were working out in Rockville.
Speaker 1: Rockville, Maryland?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, so you worked, you were there over ten years, right in Washington, D.C. from 1962 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're in D.C.
Speaker 1: Until?
Speaker 2: From '62 [1962] to '77 [1977], fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, s'62 [1962] to '77 [1977], okay.  Now tell us about the events leading up to you being appointed assistant surgeon general?
Speaker 2: Well, I was working on what it--were called the health delivery programs of the [U.S.] Public Health Service, not the [U.S.] Food and Drug Administration, not NIH [National Institutes of Health], this was the part that actually delivered healthcare to the seamen [U.S. Merchant Marine], Indian [Native American] health services was part of that at the time, federal health program where people have, in companies and things, have programs for their workers and that was the part that I had started out with in Staten Island [New York] and I was still working in that area until it became clear they were not going to maintain and replace the public service health hospitals where mainly the merchant seamen, had gone and that's when I joined the Indian Health Service.  Then I spent about a year working in EEO, affirmative action, equal employment opportunity, and I would tell people, "That's not a career," that you should get that job, do what you can with it and move on to some other professional career where you're simply recognized like everybody else in the workforce is recognized, and it was also a time when President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had come on board and was decentralizing a lot of things out of Washington and sending them to the ten HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] regional offices like Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York], San Francisco [California] and that required some coordination from the, from the headquarters back in the D.C. area and I ended up with that activity being responsible or being concerned about those ten offices, and during that time I pointed out to the person that I was working for that some of it had to do with the pay structures.  That I would--I was as high as far as I could go to the rank of captain or colonel in the [U.S.] Army and there were people in secretary and general administrative jobs who were earning higher income than I did, and I was also faced with one son [Eric Duncan] going off to a high cost college and another one [Conrad Duncan] two years behind that and it was make decision time.  Do you try to seek a promotion to a higher rank or move on to some, somewhere else in the industry?   And so he inquired about, "Is there a problem with your being promoted?"  I said, "Yeah, no pharmacist has ever done that." Regardless of what they were doing, the people in charge of pharmacy programs hadn't done it, it hadn't been done by anyone with the pharmacy designation in their, in their rank and he says, "Well let's see if we can do that."   And they did it, and because I was not the first African American to become an assistant surgeon general; there'd been a physician and an engineer before me, he says, "But you're the first pharmacist," so that's what went out in the press.  Obviously, if I were the first pharmacist, I was the first African American pharmacist but that's how all of that came about, and it was very interesting a few years ago when they honored the people who had become rear admiral in the, in as pharmacists in the Public Health Service [U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps]. Some were from NIH, FDA, all parts of the Public Health Service.  There were eleven at that time, but it was certainly an honor to be of, to have been the first one to whatever ceiling that might be called rank ceiling I guess.
Story_ID: 599112
Speaker 1: So this is 1972, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is?
Speaker 2: Well actually it was in, very end of '71 [1971] that got into the papers in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a, like a three or four page spread in Ebony magazine I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, again (laughter).
Speaker 1: That we just looked at a little while ago.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Back to the connection with knowing, knowing someone there.
Speaker 1: The same one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Hans Massaquoi.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, but it's a nice spread there.
Speaker 2: Well in between, in between that I'd had a few of those, that section people of note or whatever when they made some major breakthrough, but it was, it was constantly, first of this, first of this, first of.  Some of 'em or just about anywhere I went it was either the first one to do that or the first, certainly the first African American.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so how long did you stay in that position, the position of assistant attorney general, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well I retired, retired in--
Speaker 1: Surgeon general.
Speaker 2: Retired in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'd of been about five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I retired as an assistant surgeon general so I can use that title beyond my name, PSH [U.S. Public Health Service] retired.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were there?
Speaker 2: Retired in 1977.
Speaker 1: Who was surgeon general when you started in, or does it matter?
Speaker 2: That's one, that's one I've got to look up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I left--I know the one when I left because it was--he was the one that I worked directly for.  I did work directly for him at the end.
Speaker 1: Oh, who is that?
Speaker 2: Ted Cooper [sic. Julius B. Richmond].
Speaker 1: Cooper, right.
Speaker 2: He was both the assistant secretary for health and surgeon general.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were when Joycelyn Elders was there--no she's, she's Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].
Speaker 2: She came after (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's Clinton.
Speaker 2: After I was there.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, Clinton administration, okay.
Story_ID: 599113
Speaker 1: Is there a particular highlight to your service as assistant surgeon general that you want to tell us about?
Speaker 2: I--way back when, and the federal government still supports a neigh- what use to be called neighborhood health centers and they still receive report--support to this day.  And the issue was the Republican administration wanted them to be quote, self-supporting, get 'em off the federal rolls.  And I got the privilege of writing the memo that said that they were expected to do this.  When I first started I said, "Oh lord, why me?"  This--you, you can't expect poor people who couldn't pay for care to all of a sudden have money to pay for care, and it never was that there was a day certain by which you had, you would stop receiving money and, but I got the--into that and I said, "Really, wouldn't it be better if these centers that are receiving federal support could lock into the system some way?" He said, "Through some combination of federal help?" And, "If they're that good then they ought to be good enough for you or me or anyone who has coverage or money to come and use."  You shouldn't be daunted by the fact that there's some people come in here who are maybe getting their money from Medicare or Medicaid, and I got to write that memo and I was able to do it because I came to believe that if they were going to survive that federal help would not be there always and that's still pretty much true although they, they came close to getting wiped out several times or taken off the federal support, but I just felt that if that were to happen, that was--I would consider that one that didn't make any news, nobody knew about it, but that was one of the assignments that I was very, very happy to do and really, really believed in it that, that would be a good thing if it came to pass.
Story_ID: 599114
Speaker 1: So in '77 [1977] you came back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right, in 1977?
Speaker 2: No, I went to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Went to New York, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and the reason I got to New York because I decided when the president and the secretary of health and human services were somewhat slow on delivering on their promise to promote or place in important positions African American men and women I'm there--thought I was kind of noticeable and nothing seemed to be happening, I couldn't get any answers so I decided, well I'll exercise what others have done and retire and go work somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Okay so.
Speaker 2: It ended up--I'll make this short.  It ended up--I ended up at Blue Cross and Blue Shield in New York [Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield of New York, New York, New York] because I called the advisor from the graduate school who had personally been my advisor at the Graduate School of Public Health [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the one who had invited me into the office about, "Get in shape or get out," called him and he made the arrangements for the appointments and that's how I ended up as an assistant vice president of Medicare at, in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got to the health planning position because people back in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] headquarters [of Blue Cross Blue Shield Association] remembered that I'd always been interested in doing local health planning as compared to being in the insurance business and a job was open in Newark [New Jersey].  I went there, interviewed and ended up directing that agency [Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey] for two years.
Story_ID: 599115
Speaker 1: In the process of finding jobs for other people as it [Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey] was being closed, I met the dean of the, the new dean at the Graduate School of Public Health and that's how I ended up at Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it's from the party, what's now (unclear) and the Pitt campus, back to the Pitt campus.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So this is--you come back to Pittsburgh in well, what year then?
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two [1982] okay, well, tell us about--now you were there for twenty years, right?  You said for?
Speaker 1: Yeah, all, all together I had a short break, but altogether from 20--from 1982 to 2005.
Speaker 2: Okay and you worked with--now, what was your position when you got there?
Speaker 1: I went to, I went to the school as associate dean for administration.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And planning.
Speaker 2: Okay. And I know one of the things, I don't know if it's too early to talk about this, but I--well I have a note that I guess that one of the big projects you worked on was Pitt's Partners in Education Consortium, that's the?
Speaker 1: Well, I started a program, helped start a program called Public Health Careers Opportunity Program, and we trained graduates including some people who had been out of school for a long time in the fundamentals of public health so they were able to matriculate as graduate students and end up getting a master's degree.  I later got involved with a program, after I retired, from, from the Graduate School of Public Health--I got involved with, I was called back to help find a director for the Center for Minority Health [Center for Health Equity] in the Graduate School of Public Health and while there I was interim director for a short time and I later got involved with a program called Partners in Education Consortium which is an effort to get all--even as far as elementary but mainly middle school students interested in health careers, to expose them, for example we got the anesthesia program at Pitt to take a whole operating room to one of the middle schools and demonstrate with some human interaction and some mechanical activity how they would do a bone transplant from the part of the leg to the tooth.
Story_ID: 599116
Speaker 1: Also during that period I became a research investigator which I consider one of the more interesting things I've done in life.  I went to homes, particularly focused on African Americans, seventy to eighty years old.
Speaker 2: What was the goal of the project?
Speaker 1: It was called Health ABC [Health ABC Study].
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: It stood for something else at one time but then they just figured people remember health, A-B-C and it's for healthy living, and you had to do it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so the goal was to you interviewed a.
Speaker 1: Interviewed them to get into the program.  You had to be able to be mobile, walk a quarter of a mile without a cane or a wheelchair and you were limited on how far back you had, had cancer and a few other things, but you had to be seventy years old, between seventy and not turned eighty years old, and they, they had--just a few weeks ago, they've been at this for, they have an anniversary every year and the people gather for lunch and they've had their tenth anniversary and two thirds of those people are still living in this program.  They get complete physicals, specific tests like bone density, of course blood pressure and all the other things and they've been in this program, it's gone on for over ten years now.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your role back then was to interview them to qualify--
Speaker 1: Just--
Speaker 2: --them for the program?
Speaker 1: To get--right and particularly with focus on African Americans, this was the height of the, the back draft on the Tuskegee study [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male], the long history of blacks being leery of being studied, being angry for not having been asked to be studied and growing--at that age, having grown up at the time when they had blacks all around the University of Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] but it was like anything but the local neighborhood, but we did a, we did a lot and we did a lot with the smaller towns like going as far as Monessen [Pennsylvania] and, and finding particularly African Americans to take part in this, this study, but that was one of my, I, I not only enjoyed that but they invite me back 'cause they know I liked it so much and I'm now eligible but I wasn't then.
Story_ID: 599117
Speaker 1: Now in 1990 you went back to--well, before--well in 1990 you earned a Ph.D. in higher education administration from Pitt [University of Pittsburgh School of Education, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Now when did you decide to go back to school to get a Ph.D.?  Now you're in your fifties here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And you go back?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're on campus, you're a dean on campus but yet you go for a Ph.D., right?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a choice because I didn't have any plans to retire and I recognized that to get a--be in administration in academia you needed to have an earned doctorate, and I didn't have that.  I had a master's degree sufficient for what I ever did obviously, including being associate dean, but I was able to go part-time and five and a half years, another glorious day in life when--say my wife was there and that was her third time with me.  My children [Eric Duncan, Conrad Duncan and David Duncan] were there and some relatives and it was hooded by the, by the person I worked for, the, the senior vice chancellor for health scientists.  They stopped the whole procession, and my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] is in this audience, had been here all day for her son that, that, that little student she sent off to school to get that Ph.D.  She was ninety-five, I was fifty-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a--
Speaker 2: A grand and glorious day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I won't tell you how old my wife was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How old were you Lauraine [Lauraine Duncan]?
Speaker 1: Oh, please don't--that she's (laughter).
Speaker 2: (LAURAINE DUNCAN):  Forty.
Speaker 1: Forty, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, if she says so, she's forty.
Story_ID: 599118
Speaker 1: Now, you retired from University of Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in what year?
Speaker 2: Another time, when I turned seventy I asked myself the question, "What do you wanna do when you grow up?"  I'd only retired two times at that point, three, maybe three times and I knew a pharmacist from all of my days and I'd remained active in pharmacy circles and I knew that it was possible for them to continue working long after most people had decided to go on their yacht or a beach house or winter cabin or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what year did you resign, retire from the University of Pittsburgh?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: The, the last time was 2005.
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005], oh okay, all right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But I took the refresher course for pharmacists at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in 2003 and that was to see if the brain was still working, if I could still continue to learn as you have to do as a pharmacist, and made it through that course and says, "Well now you've got your license back and why don't you go to work?"  So I've been working since then, part-time basis.
Speaker 1: Okay so where do you work as a pharmacist now?
Speaker 2: Well I do this largely through agencies and they get calls from people who need somebody for a day or a week or a specific time or specific days and they call me up and say, "Can you be at such and such a place at this time, on that day?"  And most of this has been with the larger retail pharmacy establishments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A couple of other exceptions, but mostly that.
Story_ID: 599119
Speaker 1: Now, when you look on everything you've done to this point in life, would, would there be anything major that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would--said I wanted to be train engineer, drive that train and but it would've been terrible, I'd fall asleep when the wheels are going (laughter), but it's some things people want to do that they're not fitted to do.  No, what I'd really like to be, I'd like to be like my wife [Lauraine Duncan], and be a professor to really pass on in an organized, effective way to be a good professor at a university.  Looking back on everything, I think that's what I'd like to be--liked to have--I would like, I would have liked to have been, that's future and perfect tense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I would really like, and it's, it's something that I don't do well.  I mean I tell people I don't, I don't do the professor thing.  I do the counseling and advising, telling people but I don't do well in front of the classroom and communicating as a, as a real teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you, you again, go with the, go with the hand that was dealt you.
Speaker 1: Okay. Like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that's what I would like to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 599120
Speaker 1: Well, likewise, when you look back at what you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What's the nicest thing that I've done?
Speaker 1: No, no I said what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That when the opportunity was there go for it, if it wasn't there, help create it.
Story_ID: 599121
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your concerns for the African American community today? Some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: I am, I'm terribly distressed, particularly when I see--when I saw the behavior within the schools, the exception being one parochial school that I've, that I visited.  When I see the behavior on the streets, when I read the crime statistics, when I read the drug abuse statistics, drop out, all of the negative--high age rates in whatever, I'm whatever the opposite is of distressed I'm not that.  I am distressed, that after all of those history makers, all of those heroes, now the opportunities, the ones we didn't even go for because we knew the door was where they wrought.  When my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and my father [William Duncan, Sr.] was working at Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] you didn't apply at Auburn, you just knew the mail person probably wouldn't of delivered the application, but now you can do that and we're dropping out, we're, we're taking the easy ways out, we're taking the least difficult programs.  We're not getting into where the opportunities are there and in addition to what we're not doing, clearly the rest of the world has taken us over, India, China and that's not just the African Americans in this country, but this country.  There's still places where they go to school on Saturdays.  There's still places where they go to school year round.
Story_ID: 599122
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family, I mean you've got, you've got three sons, right and you told us something about your wife [Lauraine Duncan], but you've got three sons and one grandson, right?
Speaker 2: You want some more about my wife?
Speaker 1: Well, just tell us about your family, whatever you want to tell us about these, the ones you have?
Speaker 2: Well she's, she's really the one who can take the most credit for what they have achieved.  First one [Eric Duncan] has a bachelor's [degree] from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], master's [degree] in theater administration from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], the second one [Conrad Duncan] has a bachelor's from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], an M.B. from Yale, J.D. from Georgetown University [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], the third one [David Duncan] has a bachelor's from Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] via American University [Washington, D.C.].  He has his law degree from the University of Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland].  When my mother [Willie McMillan Duncan] passed away she--there were eight children and some of them had children at that time.  Among her eight grandchildren there were three physicians, two lawyers, a couple of other master's--one nephew had not gone to college; he'd been in the [U.S.] Army.  My, on my wife's side and this again not just, 'cause those are their cousins as well, they're physicians, nurses, teachers, police officers people who really make contributions to society, maybe not the big history moments, but I think, I think very great achievements in themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm surrounded by all that, not just--our, our daughter-in-law, I think I told you in the room was teaching immersion Spanish at three universities at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The oldest son with the theater administration degree which he's not ministered, was in the [U.S.] Foreign Service and they waited for him three years while he got his, got his master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So clearly starting with, back there with Montgomery [Alabama], middle of slavery time.  To now education has been the underpinning and that's why it bothers me so much when I see it being squandered.
Story_ID: 599123
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, um-hm. Oh, I didn't mention the person who gave me my first job, first paying job.  My father [William Duncan, Sr.] gave me the gardening job and the truck farm without a truck long before that, but the first outside paying job and that's how, that led to pharmacy 'cause it was next door, was the guy who, was the clean up guy for the bank.  When I was sixteen he trusted me with the keys to the bank to open it up, clean it up and there are things that he showed me that I still remember to this day.  What's that, sixty years later?  Things that I remember from my mother-in-law all these years later, she let me have her daughter [Lauraine Duncan] that was a major trust (laughter).  She, she let me have and she loved education too, she'd show--say they're gonna graduate, she was there.  She was the midwife for all three of their deliveries [Duncan's sons, Eric Duncan, Conrad Duncan and David Duncan]. Worked hard as a single parent and some of our candidates are promoting that--would go to work at night so she could be home with her kids during the day and they've all turned out well, my wife, her sister.  Her sister's married to one of my brothers.  The one, they live out in Monessen [Pennsylvania] in the house we grew up in.  My siblings, six of us, five of us have at least a master's degree, two doctoral degrees.  One brother [James Duncan] has a law degree; a lot of this was done after it wasn't just straight through, somebody supporting you kind of thing, a lot of seeing the vision, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and I still--I was trying to encourage somebody a couple weeks ago to improve her pharmacy technician training.  Of all the, all the secretaries that I had, people in that type of position working beginning in Chicago [Illinois], in Chicago ended up in some other kind of activity, personnel, accounting, computers.  I'd say it was me, that they got tired of working me but I just, a little push on the shoulders to help 'em get ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They also have pretty good roots though I'll say that but, I, I could've gone left instead of right, the right way many a time but I didn't.  All of these people could have but they choose to do it otherwise.
Story_ID: 599124
Speaker 1: Well my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I've been working on my tombstone. I'd--I just hope I helped the lives of others, that's all. Whatever I did whether it was role model or actual job, that I helped the lives of others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was here making that visit to Chicago [Illinois] I remember why I didn't go into pharmacology. I didn't like the dog that they had to cut half open.  I said I don't want to do that so I came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and--it was negative research, but while there we went to a seminar and it was a guy from the Mennonite church and he pointed out that their motto was, leave the earth a better place than you found it, and that's a piece I haven't forgotten.  I guess that's the other piece that goes with, I hope I've helped the lives of others.  That was 1953, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you, sir.
