Story_ID: 22925
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Linneaus, L-I-N-N-E-A-U-S, Cuthbert, C-U-T-H-B-E-R-T, Dorman, D-O-R-M-A-N, Linneaus Cuthbert Dorman.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is June 28, 1935.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a, is there a story behind your name, Linneaus?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother who was very happy with the doctor who delivered me, named me after him.  His name was Linneaus Cuthbert Shecut, S-H-E-C-U-T.  And she named me after him.
Speaker 1: Okay, Shecut, last name, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you both are named, so to speak after Carolus [Carl] Linneaus, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I think so.  I'm (laughter) not sure if he was specifically.  But I'm named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and Carolus [Carl] Linnaeus, he was a pioneer in what field?
Speaker 2: In, he founded the naming of simple plants and animals, you know, kingdom, phylum and sub-phylum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, he lived in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He lived in Sweden.
Speaker 1: In what century?  The 18th or--
Speaker 2: I think the 18th--
Speaker 1: The 1700s?  [1707-1778]
Speaker 2: Eighteenth hundred, I think.
Speaker 1: Eighteen hundreds [1800s], so 19th Century, okay.
Speaker 2: No, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, I wanted to establish that. And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm retired now, but my last occupation was senior associate scientist, and that was with the job as a chemist.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's for?
Speaker 2: It was for Dow Chemical Company in Midland, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 24th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time, we're at Midland, Michigan, more specifically, Larkin Township.
Speaker 1: Okay, in your home, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in my home.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 22926
Speaker 1: Okay, now there are five lightweight questions we ask, and they're really lightweight questions.  And we ask them as sort of a warm up in the beginning.  And they only require a short answer. The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I have favorite foods, but I don't think I have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think brown would be my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't 'cause we haven't been to one place too often too many times.  We've been to many places, but not, not too often.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I would to have ask somebody who knows me and who I talk to a lot to know that, but I don't, in my own mind, I don't have a favorite saying.
Story_ID: 22927
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but separately so we can keep them straight.  So, can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Georgia Hammond, Hammond is her maiden name, Dorman.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'll have to get that from my wife.  She's done some genealogy for the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Should I call her and ask her to get that?
Speaker 1: No, that's not necessary, but about what year was your mother born?  Do you have an idea about, you know--you were born in '35 [1935].  About how old was she when you were born?  Was she in her twenties yet or--
Speaker 2: In 1972, she was she fifty-three so fifty-three from '72 [1972] is--
Speaker 1: Around 1917, is that about right?
Speaker 2: No, she was born before then.  I think, I think she was born before then.  But I'm not sure.  I'll have to check that date.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can get it for you, but I don't know it offhand.
Speaker 1: In the 19-teens?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, was she born in Orangeburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Ridge Spring, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Ridge Spring.  Is that nearby Orangeburg?
Speaker 2: No, that's about seventy miles away from Orangeburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are some of the stories about things that they did?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know specifically, but I, in my mind, they must have been fairly, relatively speaking, prominent because they owned their own property, that is my grandmother, grandfather.  They had twelve kids, and each one had been designated a parcel of land which their respective families inherited in time.
Speaker 1: So was it quite a bit of land?
Speaker 2: Well, I think so.  I think it was acres.  I don't recall the exact number.  I'm thinking thirteen, ten, and they both had children who went to college for the college that was available to blacks at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were your grandparents names?
Speaker 2: My grandparents' names?  Gosh, I only knew my grandmother, maternal grandmother.  I didn't know any grandparents besides my maternal grandmother.  (Laughter) I, I have that information on a picture in my room, but we called her "Mo".
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but your, it was, was grandmother's side of the family the side that had the property or both of your grandparents had this property?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's family had property too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And was this property in Ridge Spring?
Speaker 2: My grandfather?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, was their property in Ridge Spring?
Speaker 2: No, he grew up in another part of South Carolina, near the coast, a place called Catholic Hill, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother died when I was about five years old.  So I don't remember much of her.  And I know even less about my grandmother--grandfather on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did your mother say about growing up?  Now, she knew them better than, I guess, than anybody else?
Speaker 2: What did she say about growing up?
Speaker 1: Right.  What kind of upbringing did she have and what did, you know, what did she--did she talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: She didn't talk to me about growing up so much.  We talked about her relatives.  We were very close to her siblings.  But we didn't talk too much about growing up.  With respect to their growth, I don't know much about their growing up years.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to four different colleges.  And she was a rural schoolteacher.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know the four colleges?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Were they in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: So these are black schools for those days--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and we know that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, did she go to Claflin [University, in Orangeburg, South Carolina] or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Benedict [College, in Columbia, South Carolina] or Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] or Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I knew them at one time, but I've forgotten.
Speaker 1: There's a few of 'em, there's quite a few of 'em--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --around there.  Claflin [University] is in Orangeburg, I-- (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Claflin is in Orangeburg.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So she went to four different colleges.  Is there any story as to why she went to four?
Speaker 2: No, I never asked her that.  I never knew why she went only went--she went to four.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she get a degree?
Speaker 2: I think she got some kind of degree that enabled her to teach school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does she have like what they called a "normal degree," you know, where she can teach school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you remember which one she got her degree from?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, so, but your mother was a schoolteacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Elementary school teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother didn't share any stories about her young life at all or what she wanted to be when she grew up or, you know--
Speaker 2: Curiously, I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were so full of ourselves and looking, always looking forward.  Education was emphasized, from the time I could know what education was, it was emphasized.  So they were always looking forward for us and our lives 'cause theirs was set by rules of segregation at the time.
Story_ID: 22928
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: John, J-O-H-N, Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Dorman, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't think he even knew, but he was, he was drafted for World War I [World War I: July 28th, 1914 to November 11th, 1918] duty so it's around the turn of the [twentieth] century.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was born in maybe 19--
Speaker 2: But if you, my, as I said, my wife has our genealogy and she may have known that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, maybe she can give us a copy of it to put in the archives, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: But around the turn of the century, he was born, and he served in World War I?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have any, are there any stories about his side of the family?  Now, how far back can you trace the Dormans, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, they lived in rural communities.  And the stories I remember dad talking about catching alligators in South Carolina at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the day-to-day activities, I don't remember talking to them so much about that aspect of their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was no, is there a story about how they--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, he went to, he went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduated from South Carolina State College [in Orangeburg, South Carolina], 1925, played football.  He was known as 'Red'.
Speaker 1: Okay, I suppose he had red hair?
Speaker 2: I think his complexion was kind of red.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his hair wasn't red, but his complexion was red.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so do you know what kind of work his father did or what kind of work your grandfather did?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Any schoolteachers on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  If it was, though I had--his brother, uncle was a medical doctor in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's quite a story, you know.
Speaker 2: And he was, he was founder of a 'Back-to-Africa' movement.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Ghee, Uncle Doc, we called him Uncle Doc, oh, gosh.  I, she's [referencing his wife] got that too.  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: So 'Back-to-Africa' movement in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm interested in that.  Okay, but you don't know--so he would be a, he'd be a Dorman too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he'd be a Dorman.
Speaker 1: All right.  This isn't Isaiah Dorman, is it?
Speaker 2: No, but we wondered whether Isaiah, whether we're related to Isaiah Dorman.  He's an Indian scout.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I think that much we never were able to resolve in our family history, whether we're actually related to Isaiah Dorman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but your great uncle, who was a doctor was a Dorman--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we know that much so if somebody wants to look it up.
Speaker 2: We called him Uncle Doc, but I, I have his name, and I can get in my wife's genealogy work to give you that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, that's--
Speaker 2: So I'm not much of a genealogical buff, so I don't have, have not made it a point to learn some of the stuff.
Story_ID: 22929
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your father [John Dorman, Sr.], so he graduated from South Carolina State College [in Orangeburg, South Carolina].  Now, this was after the war [World War I], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he would have come out, what about 1920--
Speaker 2: Twenty-five [1925].
Speaker 1: Twenty-five [1925], okay, 1925.  And, and what did your dad do for a living?
Speaker 2: He did a, he first started out as a schoolteacher.  But he couldn't make enough money to support the family.  So he, during World War II, he worked a naval yard, and when the war was over, he couldn't go back to teaching school because all of his, most of his education as far as teaching school was just about dissipated.  So he took whatever he could.  He worked in a, in Orange--he worked in a naval shipyard in Charleston, South Carolina.  We lived in Orangeburg, but he used to go to work by car, the beginning of the week, and then he'd come home on Fridays.  But prior to that time, he worked at several jobs as a teacher.  And, when he came home to Orangeburg, we were very much growing up.  I was in high school, and I was the youngest, and he took a job as a handyman at South Carolina State College where he once may have worked there, but he didn't.  He actually took some courses under George Washington Carver [African American scientist, educator and inventor].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when he was in college, back in--when he was in college, he took courses from George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he was in college, after his days in college.  But he took a couple of graduate courses under Carver.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about Carver or a story about him?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  (Unclear) I don't remember saying (unclear).
Speaker 1: Did he talk about what kind of a person he thought George Washington Carver was?
Speaker 2: No, no, he never talked about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, growing up, we didn't realize the significance of Carver till later on, and by that time, we had, we had come to separate, all grown and living apart from each other.  He didn't wanna talk about something like that.  There're more important things happening.  These, after all, were the war years, post-war [World War II] years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, so did your father work for South Carolina State for the rest of his life?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22930
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [mother, Georgia Hammond; father, John Dorman, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I guess there is, but I don't (laughter) know.
Speaker 1: Now, they were both schoolteachers.  So is it possible they met--
Speaker 2: On campus, on campus.
Speaker 1: At South Carolina State [in Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is it possible your mother went to South Carolina State too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, they met on the campus of South Carolina State, okay.  And do you know when they got married?
Speaker 2: Again, I'll have to refer to my genealogical wife's knowledge of that.
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in '35 [1935], right?  Are you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: You're the youngest, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: My brother, John, was the oldest.  I think his was 1927, thereabouts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying, you think they were born between '25 [1925] and '27 [1927], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their tendencies, the way they walk, talk, look, you know, their opinions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Which one do I take after?  Well, my early years, I took after my mother, but she died in 1972 when I was a senior in high school.  So I got to know my father a lot better in her absence.  And naturally, I adapted to the things he was, had adapted to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you mean she died at fifty-two, right?  Fifty-two, when you were a senior in high school?
Speaker 2: She was fifty-three years old, I think.  Let's see, was she fifty-three or fifty-seven?
Speaker 1: But you said that she died the year that you were a senior in high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be what?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, 1952, excuse me, 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay, there we go, okay.  So she was, she born around the turn of the century then if that's the case, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so were she and your father about the same age?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so now, it's becoming more clear.  They probably met as students at South Carolina State--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and then they get married and have children.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that makes sense now.  Okay, all right, now, tell us about your siblings.  Do you have more than one brother or sister?
Speaker 2: I had two of each, two brothers, two sisters.  My two brothers have passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you say you've got a brother named John.  He's John, Jr., I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, John Albert, Jr.
Speaker 1: He was the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then came who?
Speaker 2: Then came my sister, Jessie Romor (ph.) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then came the twins, LaBrone and Laverne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then came me.
Speaker 1: So you had a LaBrone in the family, huh (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right.  The first time I had ever heard of that name was with the basketball player [LeBron James], but, LaBrone and Laverne, okay.  So, that's five of you all together?
Speaker 2: Yes, five all together.
Story_ID: 22931
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My mother [Georgia Hammond], I was a special child to her because she took me under her wing to teach me how to read.  In fact, I read so well, I'd memorize the story.  So she will often show me off before friends, you know, "Linn can read."  And I'd be reading, but I wasn't really reading.  I was reciting what I had memorized (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so they called you "Linn"?
Speaker 2: They called me Linn back, Linn so much that I, during my fourth grade, we had a practice teacher.  And I was gonna be a smart aleck with her, and she asked me what my name was.  And I said, "Linneaus Dorman."  And she says, spell it for me, and I couldn't spell it.  I was very embarrassed (laughter).  So from that day on, I learned how to spell my name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But all my life, I've been known as Linn.
Story_ID: 22932
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe--now, did you grow up in the same neighborhood in Orangeburg the whole time or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the same house?
Speaker 2: Same house.
Speaker 1: All right, now, was there a specific name for your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, we lived just on the outskirts of town where a lot of blacks lived 'cause we didn't have to pay city tax at that time.  And we could grow animals, farm animals.  We had two hogs and chickens.
Speaker 1: So this was like semi-rural--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --area.  And there's no name for it.  They didn't have a name for what part of town it was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, okay.  Was it North side or West side of town or East side or--
Speaker 2: I don't know about the geographical area, but there was a area, it was a little further than we were that was named Brooklyn, and I don't it got, had the name Brooklyn, but it is named Brooklyn.  But we lived a little closer to the, to the college [South Carolina State University] than the Brooklyn section town.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is the Brooklyn section like an all-black section of town?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you lived near South Carolina State [University, in Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Relatively speaking, yes.
Story_ID: 22933
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now we always ask this question just like this.  What, sir, were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the sights that come to mind are, would be the colleges during football season.  I remember the pageantry of homecoming, and that kind of stuff.  The sounds, the smells you'd get would be from people's--depending on the weather type, when the wind blows, the pig pens, the people who had, who had hogs.  And what was the third thing?  The sights, the sounds--
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds, well, the smells, I've told you about, and the sights were on the colleges.
Story_ID: 22934
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were describing where you grew up, and so you're in the outskirts of Orangeburg [South Carolina].  Is this, and so you were able to have like some farm animals and grow some food and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, that's important during the [Great] Depression.  You were born in the middle of the Great Depression where people had little actual cash, but they couldn't (unclear) have food, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, my father [John Dorman, Sr.], he had majored in agriculture [at South Carolina State College, in Orangeburg, South Carolina], so he, he--this was a necessity as well as a occupation or a hobby.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Reasonably so, yes.
Speaker 1: And what church did you all attend?
Speaker 2: Went to Mount Zion Baptist Church, my--the church of my mother [Georgia Hammond].  My father was Presbyterian.  We went to his church occasionally.  We participated in theirs occasionally, but for the most part, we spent most of our time as kids in the Baptist church.  I was baptized in the Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is it the same church the whole time you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and stories about church?
Speaker 2: Not specifically.  It was, I remember how they used to count the money.  After the sermon, they'd collect the money, and then the deacons would count the money, and they would announce how much they had collected.  I remember several sisters who would come with, with the emotion during the services.  One sister, particularly, who would really become emotionally involved with the choir.  I remember certain activities vespers, vesper services, seasonal activities like plays for Christmas.  And I remember Sunday school.
Speaker 1: Did you take any youth leadership roles in the church growing up?  Did they assign any special duties to you when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, but I had several roles that I participated in.  I remember singing a solo with my sister playing.  That was probably be--my big sister insisted that I sing a solo (laughter) 'cause I didn't, wasn't able to sing that well, I didn't think.  But I remember the minister who was I thought a lot of.  My mother thought a lot of him.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Reverend Sims.
Story_ID: 22935
Speaker 1: Tell me, when did you and where did you start school?  Did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I started with my mother [Georgia Hammond].  She was a rural schoolteacher and up until the time I was going to, to nursery school.  And in nursery school, when someone had a birthday, they would serve ice cream.  So I went, distinctly remember telling Mrs. Holloway, who was the school Madam, tomorrow is my birthday.  I'll be five years old.  And she said, tomorrow's your last day (laughter) at this school 'cause they, that was the age limit for the nursery school.  And that fall, since my mother taught school, I had no place to go to be left, nobody that she could find right away.  So she took me to school in the first grade, and I was five years old.  So I've always been a year ahead in school because I started school under her tutelage when I was five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Middle Branch.
Speaker 1: Middle Branch, okay, Middle Branch School, and--
Speaker 2: And I went there for a year, and then I went to laboratory school at the college, at South Carolina State College [in Orangeburg].  That school was named Felton, Felton, F-E-L-T-O-N, Felton Training School.  I think it's still, it's going on today.
Speaker 1: Okay, Felton Training School.
Speaker 2: Started there in the second grade.
Speaker 1: Now, was it named after a--
Speaker 2: I don't know what, who Felton was named after, but I guess a Mr. Felton (laughter), but I just knew Felton.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You know, the president of Southern University was Felton Clark, and, you know, it may be a famous Felton who's a black educator here in (unclear), you know, it's being hinted at in these names.  But, okay, so Felton Trade School was the lab school of South Carolina State College.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, so this is probably, and I'm guessing this is the best education available in that area?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was intended for faculty school kids to go to.  It was private.  We actually paid a small tuition to attend it.
Speaker 1: So this is about 1941, I guess.  You're six or--okay, you spent a year at Middle Branch, well, maybe 1940 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let's see, '35 [1935] to '40 [1940]--
Speaker 1: Maybe '40 [1940], yeah.  Is it 1940?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940], probably the school year of 1940--
Speaker 1: Forty [1940] to '41 [1941]?
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Education, as I said, was drummed into us every since we knew what education was, and my mother being a schoolteacher, she took me by the hand.  She set up all kinds of goals for me to achieve that I would be rewarded.  I made fifth grade by the time I was ten years old.  I'd get a bicycle.  At that time, the Warrior's bicycles were very, very expensive.  But she lived up to her promise, and she gave me a bicycle, and I was ten years old in the fifth grade.
Story_ID: 22936
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the war [World War II] actually starts when you're in school, right, 1941--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Pearl Harbor is bombed and--
Speaker 2: That December, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did the, you and the other students, were you aware of that there was a war going on, I mean at that age?
Speaker 2: Yes, but we didn't know the severity of war.  You know, a lot of us, our activities were digging fox holes.  We were mimicking war in play, go around with handmade wooden rifles.  But we didn't, we soon began to get the feeling of war.  We had air raids and this kind of thing.  And, of course, everything was rationed.  The gasoline was rationed and all of other things were rationed.  That's how we became aware of the real significance of the war.
Story_ID: 22937
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, let's see.  Do you remember your first exposure to science?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had a good friend who got a chemistry set for Christmas.  I had never heard of chemistry or the word "chemistry".  But he got this chemistry set, and the early chemistry sets was how to make different kinds of smoke, how to make this thing, that thing, explosions and disappearing inks and stuff like that.  And I was, became fascinated with the fact that you could put two things together and make something entirely new.  So that was my first introduction to chemistry, and I've been associated with the field ever since.
Speaker 1: Now, was this a Gilbert chemistry set?
Speaker 2: I don't know what kind, 'cause I don't remember the kind of chemistry set it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, usually the old ones were Gilbert for some reason, but it would have been some other kind, I guess.  But, okay, so do you remember the first thing you did with it, what you and your friend did?
Speaker 2: I don't know what we did, but we tried to carry out some experiments which were described.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, in school, did you like mathematics or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked math and I've always done well in math.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's, it's almost a requisite for a scientist.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So were there any particular teachers in elementary school or grade school that stand out as being like extremely helpful or role models for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was a Mrs. Squires, S-Q-U-I-R-E-S, who was very dramatic and dogmatic and taught us.  I can remember her best of all, but I don't have much of a recollection for any others.
Story_ID: 22938
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet any, I know often on college campuses, there are visits from famous people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was one of the hallmarks of the contributions that the college [South Carolina State College, Orangeburg, South Carolina] made to blacks in town, people, cultural, very educated people coming through, giving talks.  So we were exposed to that at a very early age.  That helped me formulate my future later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the people that came through that you remember, that talked to the students?
Speaker 2: I can't recall specifically, but there's one name that I can recall, a gentleman who would go on to [South Carolina] State College, who was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. Benjamin Mays.  He used to come to give the Easter sermon.  And I remember him talking and how distinctive he was.  It was very influential to me.
Speaker 1: So he was an alumnus of South Carolina State?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They called him Bennie Mays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, he's certainly an illustrious person.  Anybody else, did any of the entertainers come or sports figures?
Speaker 2: Philippa Schuyler.
Speaker 1: Philippa Schuyler, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her father was on the 'Pittsburgh Courier's' editorial staff.  She was a child prodigy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and played the piano.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She did a concert for the students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I remember that.  But you gotta, this was some time ago, and it took me a while to think of some of the other people that I saw at the campus.  But we also had a lot of speakers.  We had chapel two times a week.  It wasn't called chapel.  It was called during school--what was that period called?
Speaker 1: Convocation, did they call it that?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't call it convocation.  Three times a week, we were doing these--between the second and third periods, we had chapel.  Maybe we called it chapel.  So we had a lot of college professors come over and talk to us, and a gentleman I remember very well was named Dr. McMillan, McMillan.  He's a historian.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he from on campus?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was his message?  Do you remember what kind of, you know, as a historian, what was he trying to--
Speaker 2: I don't remember a specific message.  They were general messages, but usually they were designed to encourage us to go forth and to do well in school.  That was usually the general theme that everybody talked about.
Story_ID: 22939
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you know about, in those days, did you know about any black chemists?
Speaker 2: The only chemists, George Washington Carver was the closest one that I knew about then.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he, I think, by the time you were in school, I think he--I'm trying to think of when he passed away.  Now, did he pass in the '40s [1940s] or--
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: --or thirties [1930s].  I'm drawing a blank now.  I know it's either in the mid-'30s [1930s] or mid-'40s [1940s].  I'm thinking it's the mid-'40s [1940s] [It was 1943.]  But--
Speaker 2: I would not have been in high school at the time, so I probably wouldn't have, would know that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, okay, now, what about Percy Julian?  He probably was just in school himself at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Got to know of him through my latter days in high school, college, early days of college.
Story_ID: 22940
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of young man were you?  What would people say about you?  Were you outgoing or were you shy or you--
Speaker 2: Well, I was very serious.  I had learned about segregation and I could never figure out why we had segregation.  And, and the general perception was that white kids were smarter than black kids.  So I wanted to have the opportunity to go and show them what I could do as a student.  That thought pervaded my training in the high school.  And I was, at a very early age, I could speak very well.  So teachers would, would get me to be in programs so I, in chapel, for that purpose.  And I, I liked sports, and I liked extracurricular activities, being--I was in student government.  So I was very active in school for that reason.  And you want to go further, take that thought a little further?
Speaker 1: Was there more, so, yeah, but that's, you're saying you took on leadership roles in school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you're in student government.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was president--
Speaker 1: Speaker, you know.
Speaker 2: --of the student body my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22941
Speaker 1: And because I was in and out of the office [of student government in high school] a lot, one day my, during the twelfth year, I ran across a pamphlet that was sent to the guidance counselor at that time, who put these booklets out on her table for us to look at and see.  And I, one caught my eye going out of the office a lot.  "Do you wanna go to college?"  That's what the book said, and it was by the Negro--I've got that, I have a letter from them in there [pointing off camera] that I want you to see.  But they, what they did was to assess your total persona and the criterion was that you would go to an integrated school.  That was what, they would help you get into an integrated school.
Speaker 2: Is this the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 1: No, it was an organization in New York.  It's, I think it's among the things on the table there, a letter form.  But they--
Speaker 2: So that's different from United Negro College Fund or--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --'cause they would try to get you in a black school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But this is an organization thats, goal was to get you in an integrated--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Integrated (unclear).  So they sent you a kit to fill out, and (unclear), "Did you have any relatives who lived in any larger cities in the North that you could live with while going to a school in the North?"  They wanted to know how well you attended school, how will be off (unclear) from your parents, what you could afford, what courses had you taken?  So they took all this information and digested it, and then made recommendations about possible schools that would admit you, 'cause after all, if you didn't take subjects, you couldn't be admissible to certain schools.  And then they sent you about five schools where they thought you might be able to get into.  And they went a step further than that.  They, they wrote the letter for applying for admission.  You had to retype the letter and ask (excuse me) for information about school, whether they offered scholarships, what kind of scholarships, what kind of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] programs they have.  So it turned out that my father [John Dorman, Sr.] was a World War I veteran, and one school, Bradley University [in Peoria, Illinois], offered a scholarship called a 'Laverne Noyes Scholarship for Descendants of World War I Veterans'.  So I got his papers together and sent this in to five different schools, four different schools.  One was to [Case] Western Reserve [University] because I had relatives, aunts and uncles who lived in Cleveland, Ohio.  Bradley was in Peoria, Illinois, and I got pulled from Bradley with a scholarship that enabled me to go away.  Western Reserve would have admitted me, but it was required that I take certain subjects, courses for courses I didn't take in high school.  I thought Bradley was gonna do the same thing, but when I get, got there, they didn't require me to take--the kids who had had German in high school and had analytical geometry in high school, physics in high school, that I didn't have.
Speaker 2: So you didn't have physics in high school?
Speaker 1: Didn't have physics in high school, but they let me--
Speaker 2: Did you have chemistry?
Speaker 1: I had chemistry.
Speaker 2: Okay, so chemistry is as high as they went?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They didn't go to physics.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did you have, what's the highest math you had at high school?
Speaker 1: I had advanced algebra--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in high school, so.  And I did a lot of studying on my own because I loved, I loved algebra.  So that enabled me, I'll never forget, telling my father I was gonna go over to Bradley University.  And I went away that summer, when I graduated from high school to go live with my aunt, and I was gonna get a job in Cleveland, Ohio, to earn some money to go to Bradley.  And the, but I got back that fall, I'll never forget, my father saying, "You can still go to South Carolina State [College, Orangeburg]," because that's where all the kids went to school, went to Wilkinson High School, went on to South Carolina State or to Claflin which was the other black school of higher learning in Orangeburg.  But I said, "No, I'm not gonna do that. I'm gonna go to Bradley." And I showed him the money that I earned that summer which wasn't very much, but he let me go.  And I--
Speaker 2: So, this is the fall of 1952?
Speaker 1: Fall of 1952.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 22942
Speaker 1: So you didn't stay long after your graduation.  You went right on out to--now, Bradley's [Bradley University] in Peoria [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: But I went to Cleveland [Ohio] first--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to get the job, lived with my aunt and then on to Peoria to Bradley [University].
Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do that summer?
Speaker 2: I worked at a hotel, Carter Hotel (unclear).  I'll never forget that.  It was quite an experience.  I was a busboy in room service.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you learn some things you never knew before (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, I learned a lot of things that I never knew before.
Speaker 1: In respect to you (unclear) (laughter) didn't completely (laughter) disappear, did it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll never forget, that year [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower was running for office, and he stayed there one week, after I left, but they made all kind of preparation for his coming to the hotel, stayed at the Carter Hotel.  And, and Joan Crawford stayed there one time.  And I will never forget going up to her room to bring back a table.  And she had people around her and tending on her every whim.  So, that was quite an experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, these are people that you'd only seen on, in the movies, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: News reels and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is, okay, so Joan Crawford, anybody else.  Now, could black people stay in this hotel in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: I think they could if they paid the, paid the room rate.  But I don't recall any, seeing any black people staying at the hotel.  But I think they could have had they, had they wanted to.
Story_ID: 22943
Speaker 1: All right, so you worked at the Carter Hotel during the summer, and--it's interesting.  You're in Cleveland [Ohio].  And this is the place where Dow [Dow Chemical Company] was founded, you were telling me earlier.  But--
Speaker 2: That's for the founder.  He'd gone to Case Western [Reserve University, Cleveland Ohio].  It was Case then.  And he went from there to Midland [Ohio].  He knew about the (unclear).  He was an expert in electrolytic chemistry where you reverse the process by which if you'd add sodium and chlorine together, they would react to form sodium chloride.  Putting in electricity, you would reverse the process so you'd produce chlorine and sodium.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And his name again, founder of Dow?
Speaker 2: It was Herbert Henry, H. H. Dow, crazy Dow they called him.
Story_ID: 22944
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so after the summer, you went down to Peoria [Illinois], I think where the biggest product is Caterpillar tractors and, was that--
Speaker 2: At that time, it was Caterpillar [Inc.] tractor and Walker's distillery.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, Walker's, like Johnny Walker Red [Scotch]?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) [Nodding, yes].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, how did you like Bradley [University, in Peoria, Illinois] and how were you treated there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of, learn to do, coming from the South, that the things were gonna hunky dory.  And so learned that there were certain elements of discrimination in Peoria.  But that didn't deter me at that time because I knew what I wanted to.  So I could put a, tolerate the inhumanities of a few places that wouldn't admit blacks to--the campus was smaller than it looked in the release information.  But that was no problem, eventually.  And eventually, I met up with a bunch of other black guys.  We did all right, and I, I think at the height there were about twenty-five of us at Bradley University.  And we, some was (unclear), well, with the church youth group.  And there was a minister, Reverend Moore and his wife, Mrs. Moore, she was a singer.  And she had the youth choir, and for a couple of years, we, we were in the youth choir, and we sang on certain Sundays.  And this was a great outlet to us at that time until they were killed tragically in an automobile accident.  But I discovered that Bradley--Peoria and blacks were different from the blacks who were in Orangeburg [South Carolina].  We had college people [in Orangeburg] doing all kind of wonderful things.  When we got to Peoria, the people who were recognized were the tavern owners, the prostitutes and the Johns and the--we got to be castigated as the Bradley boys.  We were mama's boys, so to speak, going to school.  And this kind of continued until, at that time, there was a transformation in sports, black basketball players, college players were coming of age.  And Bradley got two high school kids, after our sophomore year.  And they started integrating, so to speak, the blacks who lived in the community with the black students on the campus.  And we lost that title, the Bradley boys, but I remember that very distinctly.  Next question.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Next question.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  I was just thinking, well, it's interesting, the dynamic.  The town people versus the students, in a town like Peoria where there's no black college tradition or anything.  So it had to be a lot different.  The most famous black Bradley resident is probably Richard Pryor, who, whose mother ran a big body house in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Peoria.  So, then, you know, it's a working, most of the men were either railroad men or working men in the factories, if they had those kind of jobs.
Story_ID: 22945
Speaker 1: [While Dorman was at Bradley University in Peoria, Illinois] And got to know a young lady who was fairly attractive or very well known in the community [in Peoria, Illinois], who happened to be a sister to my wife later on.  They, I got to know her, her mother, her sister.  All the while I was going to Bradley in Peoria, my wife, Thae, was going to Wilberforce University in [in Wilberforce] Ohio.  So when I went home to Orangeburg, she was coming to Peoria.  So this went on for four years, until--and my fourth year after I graduated in chemistry, I got a job working at the Northern Regional Research Laboratory [now known as the National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research (NCAUR)].  This was a department, a USDA [United States Department of Agriculture] laboratory.  And I went back to work after my first year of graduate school in Indiana.  And a mutual friend of ours wanted us to meet.  And I'd just bought a car, and I was going back to have a lot of fun with the girls I had known in Peoria that summer.  And I'll never forget this, Catherine Tims was the name, she got me and Thae together.  So I called Thae up and, and Thae (unclear), we talked for a while and we went out to a movie that night.  And we've been together ever since, fifty-five years.  And--
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's how you met.  That's an interesting story because she was always gone when you were there.
Speaker 1: Her sisters have both passed.
Speaker 2: She must have come into Wilberforce [University] right after they reconstituted it.  I mean they, remember the split between Central State [University, in Wilberforce, Ohio] and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Wilberforce occurred, I guess, just before she went to the school?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that was in 1946 that they split up.
Story_ID: 22946
Speaker 1: But, so, okay, now, at Bradley [University in Peoria, Illinois], I have a note here that one of your fellow students was Robert [H] Lawrence [Jr., who became the first African American astronaut].
Speaker 2: Yes, he was my roommate one time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about him.  He's--
Speaker 2: Bob was from Chicago [Illinois].  He was a very bright student, but he had to work a lot.  So he worked in the cafeteria downstairs every, all the three years I knew him.  And as a consequence, his grades reflected the fact that he had to work while the rest of us were studying.  And that fourth year, he really took off, like nothing.  He ran, he had a straight A average his last year, and he was in ROTC [Reserved Officers' Training Corps].  And he took the ROTC, and when we graduated I went on to graduate school in Indiana, he was in the [United States] Air Force.  He was a, he was a, lieutenant ROTC program.
Story_ID: 22947
Speaker 1: I followed him [Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., who was Dorman's roommate at Bradley University in Peoria, Illinois] into ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], but my junior year, after one year of ROTC, I got a letter saying that for the convenience of the government, whatever, that they were gonna cut the Corps, and the three, named persons would no longer be with the Corp, and I was one of them.  I had completed a year, and I was heart-stricken because I had summer plans to go down to Mississippi for training.  And I'll never forget, I went to my, to my advisor, chemistry advisor.  And I told him what had happened, and he said, "Well, maybe, now, Dorman, you can go to graduate school."  And I could because he had had (unclear) a year.  I suspect that he came in the classroom and instead of talking about chemistry, he talked about mediocrity.  He said, "Do you know that they actually pay you to go to graduate school?"  Well, I didn't know anything about that.  You know, I thought if I go to graduate school, wow, maybe I'd get a master's and work for a while.  But he said, it, due to the fact that, since many occupations have, have to--kids have to take a semester a year of chemistry, whether it's engineering or nursing or pre-med, name it.  So, this meant that the chemistry departments of the major schools had a lot of kids for one year.  So they needed a lot of teaching assistants.  So that if you could get into school, you're more likely at least to get a job as a teaching assistant.  And I didn't know that then because the thought of me going, going to get a Ph.D. was just, you know, that's just pie in the sky.  That's what, ghee, I don't know if I could ever do that.  But that, that little lecture that morning planted a seed in my mind that I could do that.  So he ended up writing a, the way you got into graduate school, your professor wrote a letter to the department.  And they picked the school that they thought you might have a chance to get into.  So he wrote a letter of recommendation to Indiana University [in Bloomington, Indiana] and also to Iowa State University [in Ames, Iowa].  So I went to, chose Indiana University.  And that was the beginning of my graduate work.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, is this, was your advisor John Shoyer?
Speaker 1: John Shoyer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, and we became very close friends.  When he retired, he was living in an assisted living facility down in Kalamazoo [Michigan], and I went down to see him a couple of times, had lunch with him.  And I, 'cause when I first went to Bradley [University], and you go in these serious classes, you go in, get real serious, sit on the edge of your seat and you prepare to take notes right away.  And he lived up to that, to that persona.  He was so good, and he's, very, very much influenced me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 22948
Speaker 1: And then just to follow up with Robert Lawrence [Jr., the first African American astronaut], he was, he was killed in a--
Speaker 2: In a training accident.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was training German pilots.  He learned, he continued the German that he studied at Bradley [University, in Peoria, Illinois], enough to be able to talk to them in German.  So he was coming in for a landing, routine landing, and he had an accident, and it killed him.  And he was a, he was the first black astronaut candidate, and because he had never quite flown 100 miles up in the sky for a long time, he was not considered an astronaut.  But later after I began working here, a Congressman from Ohio, from Illinois, Chicago, worked on getting him recognized.  And he was finally recognized.  We went down to a ceremony inducting him into the astronaut category.  So he is considered to be, to have been an astronaut through his astronaut training.
Speaker 1: Right, now he's widely considered to be the first to get certain kinds of training.  But there was also Ed Dwight that we interviewed who was actually chosen before Robert Lawrence was, though, the administration washed him out before he really got a chance to do very much, though he had some training.  But, it became a political thing with the FBI, and he was washed out.  So he's now a sculptor, doing quite well (laughter), Ed Dwight.
Speaker 2: What is his name?
Speaker 1: Ed Dwight.
Speaker 2: Ed Dwight.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's out in Colorado now, yeah.  But Robert Lawrence is generally considered to be the first one.
Speaker 2: Yes, and they have Robert Lawrence scholarship at Bradley University.  And I was the Lawrence lecturer at one time while I was here at Dow [Chemical Company].
Speaker 1: Right, and he had a degree in [physical] chemistry from Ohio State [University, in Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he went through, got his Ph.D. after he got in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], after he got in the regular [United States] Air Force, I should say.
Story_ID: 22949
Speaker 1: Now, and the church that you attended was Ward Chapel there in Peoria [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Peoria, Ward Chapel.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ward Chapel, AME [African Methodist Episcopal Church].  So, so you leave, anything else about Bradley before we--were there any other teachers there or people that you remember that we need to mention before we move on to graduate school?
Speaker 2: There was a Paulson, P-A-U-L-S-O-N, Paulson.  There was a Dr. Sain (ph.), who was physical chem [chemistry] teacher.   And then in speech, I got to know Larry Norris who is no longer with us.  I was Pi Kappa Delta which is an honorary forensics society.
Speaker 1: So were you on the debating team or--
Speaker 2: Well, technically, I was, although I didn't do any debating.  I would participate in discussion activities my first year, and I received recognition for excellence in discussion.
Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to ask you, like who were the, do you remember who were the black basketball player, wherever they came from?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Shelly McMillan and Curley Johnson.
Speaker 1: Shelly McMillan--
Speaker 2: Shelly McMillan and Curley, Curley Johnson.
Speaker 1: Curley Johnson, okay, 'cause Bradley [University] is, became really one of the elite basketball schools
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during that period of time.  Okay.  Now, I have a note here too that in both Peoria and Bloomington, there was a lot of activity by the Ku Klux Klan and did you experience any of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's something I guess the researcher came up with, but, okay.  I thought I'd ask.
Story_ID: 22950
Speaker 1: Now, while, okay, so what was the chemistry department like at Indiana University [in Bloomington, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, one of their most unpopular professors ended up with a large number of the people in my entering class because all of his projects were independent, different from the others, whereas a couple of professors who were in sulfur chemistry or natural products, you joined as a team.  And we didn't wanna, most of us weren't interested in being a team member because you didn't seem to have enough independence.  But our professor who was, had gained tenure, and he was lazy.  He didn't go out and get money for students.  He didn't contribute to the department very much.  And he was kind of not keeping up with all the latest things going on in the field.  But we were happy with him as a, as a professor because of the, because we were independent.  And I worked four summers [1956 to 1959] at the Dalton Regional Laboratory [Northern Regional Research Laboratory, USDA, in Peoria, Illinois] during the time I was in graduate school.  And I considered those four summers as being very important to my education.  I learned things there that I would not have learned had I depended upon my, my major professor.  I, I had good relationships with the other graduate students, had a great relationship with Dr. Harry Day, who was chairman of the department.  He was a very nice man, very influential, and when, my last year there, I had a fellowship, the Dow Research Fellow, which Dow [Chemical Company] provided the money for.  And it ran from September to June, but I wasn't finished.  I wasn't ready to come out of school.  So I, I had no money.  So Dr. Day went to the Dow, went to the Indiana University foundation and got us money, got our fellowships to be extended through the summer months.  So I was able to continue on and finish and come to Dow to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you earn your, finish your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well, like a lot of us, we left early.  We may have been, we finished all our laboratory work we may have needed to finish a thesis.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which I did and sent it in, and came back, and took the finals, which was a, a oral session with the committee that you had for your Ph.D., and you had to perform one last time before them.  And so I did that in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why my degree is listed as 1961.  But I left in 1960.
Story_ID: 22951
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you got married in '58 [1958] to--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, yeah, to show (unclear) our affair, we got married.  We got together in '57 [1957], and '58 [1958], we got married.  And I must have been (laughter) out of my mind because I said I'd never get married before I finished, finished school and certainly not while I had a child to support.  But I did, and we got together.  And at the time, she had gone back to Atlanta University [Georgia] to finish up her master's degree in library science.  And that summer she was working at the library, and I was working at the lab.  And we would, we would have two checks, but it was on the weekend.  So we couldn't cash 'em, so we, we had to sit in our apartment with no money until Monday.  But we made it all right, and my last year, '58 [1958], '59 [1959], my daughter was born.  So my wife was alone with my daughter while I was in school doing my last year.  Evelyn was born.  She was a university baby, and, but we managed okay.
Story_ID: 22952
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in this interim too, between the time that you left Bradley [University in Peoria, Illinois] and to the time you were awarded your Ph.D. in organic chemistry, you were the winner, the co-winner of a Bond Award--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for the best paper presented at the national meeting of the American Oil Chemists' Society [AOCS], right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: Now, that's a, this is--I'm sure a lot of people presented.  Were you the first black person to receive that honor?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I, there were about five black chemists at the lab [Northern Regional Research Laboratory, now known as the National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research (NCAUR) in Peoria, Illinois, where Dorman worked during the summers from 1956 to 1959] at that time.  But the only place they could get jobs was the government lab.  So, but they were all good people (unclear).  I don't think I was the first--I may have been the first that [won] the Bond Award.  That's a (unclear) four (unclear), that's a specialty, but I was lucky to be a part of the team.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so at Dow Chemical [Company] in Midland, Michigan, so your work over the summer sort of segwayed into a job.  Is that what happened?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, each summer, I went back I had a different assignment.  That's for each summer, each summer I progressed, so they got a little higher grade, and I was given a little more responsibility working in the lab.
Speaker 1: So when you were gonna graduate, when you finished your coursework, they offered you job or did you apply for one?
Speaker 2: At the lab?
Speaker 1: Yes, I mean at Dow [Chemical Company], period?
Speaker 2: I, at my last year of graduate school, that's when you start the interviewing process for, in anticipation of your graduation that year.  So that would have been 19--early 1959 when I started my process for interviewing, going up to interviews when companies came through during interview season.
Story_ID: 22953
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what I didn't ask you, I need to ask you before we move on, and that's like, what was your Ph.D. thesis, what was your dissertation?
Speaker 2: Oh, ghee, I have a thesis, but (unclear)--I'll have to get it for you because it was rather long.
Speaker 1: Well, if you don't, if you can't remember the name exactly, just kind of, briefly kind of tell us in a way that we might be able to understand what it was about?
Speaker 2: Heterocyclic compounds, and it had to do [unclear] pharmaceutical [unclear] associated with it because it was compounds we made that were later tested by a company for certain activities.  But it was on heterocyclic compounds.
Speaker 1: What are heterocyclic compounds (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, organic chemistry is chemistry of carbon compounds like, say benzene or cyclohexane.  Heterocyclic means if you were to introduce another element substituting for carbon, where you have cyclohexane, you introduce a nitrogen compound and it makes (unclear), a piperidine [organic compound with molecular formula(CH2)5NH] in that case. That's what the heterocyclic means, something, it contains something other than carbon.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 22954
Speaker 1: All right, also in our outline, it mentions here that you considered at one time teaching for a historically black college?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I, something told me I didn't wanna teach because that's what so many of my friends and relatives had done, not because they wanted to, but that was the only job open to them.  So I wanted to do something other than teach.
Speaker 1: Now, did you believe that Dow [Chemical Company] would hire you?
Speaker 2: At the time?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I didn't think Dow would hire me because some of my friends in graduate school had told me that Dow would not hire me, because they, some of them who had gone, who worked at Dow, (unclear) come back to Indiana University [in Bloomington, Indiana] to do further study, they told me that Dow would not hire me.  But I went up to, to the Dow interview because I had a Dow fellowship.  And I felt out of respect for the department [of chemistry], I should at least go up for the interview.  Well, it turns out that Dow was desperately trying to get a black person, preferably one who had a Ph.D. who could come to work and be standing on your foot, on your feet alone, somebody who was strong enough, educated enough to not just be a laboratory worker, but to be an independent laboratory worker.  So I discovered the chairman who was eager to hire, to talk to me and try to get me interested in Dow, much to my surprise.  And I still didn't think it would happen, and I also got an offer from Ex-, it wasn't Exxon.  It was Esso at the time out in Linden, New Jersey.  And I thought that was a real possibility because Dow wouldn't, you know, because of the fact that this was an all-white town, Dow wouldn't probably hire me.  And I'll never forget, my wife said to me, "Ah, I'll bet you get the job at Dow and not at Exxon."  And that, I went out to Exxon and I followed all the people who were, with their heads in the clouds, who were not very sympathetic to a graduating black person.  And sure enough, they didn't offer me a job.  But Dow, I came out to Dow, and they were all very nice to me, and encouraging to me and recognized that Dow was trying to get blacks to come to work there.  And it was encouraging enough that we had to make up our minds whether we were gonna take a chance on living in an all-white community.  And we took a chance, made up our minds to do that and not stay a while and go someplace else because I could have done that after staying around.  My telephone rang for a period of time, almost every six months, some other company wanting me to come, stop Dow and come work for them.  They were offering me all kind of incentives.  So I got to a point, I asked them what can you do for my retirement?  They could never do anything to--I would be giving up those years working for, towards retirement.  So that was always a no-no, and I had a feeling that they were trying to hire people just like Dow was trying to hire people.  So I said, no, no, no.  So I stayed here, and that, we decided to retire and live here.  And we're happy with that decision.
Story_ID: 22955
Speaker 1: Okay, so is Midland completely devoid of a black community?
Speaker 2: You'd be hard pressed to find two blacks living next to one another.  And it got to be sort of a practical thing, that if you, as a black person, insisted on another black person moving, you moving next to another black person, if one of you decided to go some place else, who, then you've gotta look for another black person to buy your place, well, who--you know, that's not very likely.  So we went through a period, we were very--housing was the biggest obstacle there was.
Speaker 1: Did Dow [Chemical Company] help you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they were looking to help settle me.  So they helped me find an apartment.  Dow (unclear) actually subsidized, helped me subsidize the rent for a year so I could see the folly in that.  And I wrote and told them that, you people have helped me for a year and that's enough now.  I don't need your help anymore, and I got out of that.  And then we, basically, through our minister who was really active in the Civil Rights Movement, got us a house.  A schoolteacher was going to work someplace else and the house was available.  And we were able to buy it, but we later learned that some neighbors began to go up and down the streets in somewhat of a complaint mode, and it was gonna snowball till it got to one lady who was half Mexican.  And she kind of put a stop to it.  And it shows you the power of one person.  That activity stopped, and we moved into our house, and that was the beginning of integrated neighborhoods 'cause a second family came along.  I'm sure that there were people who would care to discriminate against you, but there were also people who would also not want to incur the wrath of Dow in discriminating against us.  So we had our problems, but we were able to work them out and move where we wanted to.  And this one family moved into one of the most expensive neighborhoods there was, a guy who's now, who (unclear) Dow Corning, General Counsel of Dow Corning.  He quit and went to John Deere, got to be their General Counsel, and he's gonna retire at John Deere and gonna come back here and live.  But he's, he lives in a very, very nice neighborhood.  And that has become a non-(unclear) to us, probably unique situation.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you, is there a black church in town or--
Speaker 2: There's, there's a black church in town, but the blacks go to all kinds of churches, all over town--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is a black church, and I think they have some white members.
Story_ID: 22956
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, during the course of your career, your research changed focus at different times.  In the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you were focused on, from what I understand, peptides, right?
Speaker 2: Pharmaceutical compounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And later to, when I got here, one of the things that Dow [Chemical Company] did was to become involved in the pharma--in some pharmaceutical business, thought it was a good venture because the return on pharmaceuticals is like 20 percent, which chemicals are around 10 percent.  So Dow was gonna, Dow was very, always into agricultural compounds, and its agricultural compounds were tested for medicinal chemistry by somebody else.  We had something called a K-List which every compound we made, you sent a sample of it, and it got a number, a K-number.  And those are, one of the things the K-List did was to check it for various, for biological activities.  But that was all agricultural until we got into the chemistry, to the drug business.  And I was, just so happened to be in position at that time to also become a part of the drug business by synthesizing compounds here in Midland [Ohio].  We had a pharmaceutical group here in Midland.  And, well, they later asked me to get into peptide chemistry because that, that was--peptides are like small proteins, and they were becoming more, more prominent because there's a guy by the name of Muirfield who devised a way to make peptides using a solid phase that would cut out a lot of the steps involved in make a peptide.  Peptides are made from about twenty-five amino acids in different combinations, but to make a simple peptide, di-peptide, it's many steps, [to] make a tri-peptide, many more steps.  So I became involved in the solid phase peptides chemistry, which I made some contributions to the field when I was doing that.  And later on, the pharmaceutical business, we had the group here in town which was a part of the pharmaceutical effort, moved down to Indianapolis [Indiana].  And I didn't move with them, so I started something else.  And that was diagnostic, latex diagnostic gauges.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: How's that?
Speaker 1: About what year is this when you start with the latex diagnostic gauges?
Speaker 2: Oh, ghez, I don't, '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: Is this in the '70s [1970s] or--
Speaker 2: It's in the '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good enough.
Speaker 2: And we worked on developing a pregnancy test, and I worked in, in that area for a while.  And from there we went to control, control release technologies.  And from that to plastics.
Story_ID: 22957
Speaker 1: Okay, now, it says, we have here that you, in '83 [1983] Dow Chemical [Company] honored you, your innovation in organic chemistry by awarding you the coveted 'Inventor of the Year' award--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eight-five [1985], and that's for a patent that, well, it may not have--okay, what was that for?  The 'Inventor of the Year' award, what invention was that?
Speaker 2: Mineral-filled prosthetic materials, meaning for (unclear) from poly-amino acids, mineral-filled polyamino acids.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, anything that you invented during the time that you worked for Dow, is that considered the property of Dow?
Speaker 2: Dow, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They gave you a dollar for a patent.
Speaker 1: A dollar, okay.
Speaker 2: One dollar, usually a silver dollar.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Now, you invented, you received a patent for absorbance for airborne formaldehyde'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in '85 [1985] as well.  And then, okay, let's see.  At some point, you invented a way to make artificial bone material?
Speaker 2: That's, yeah.
Speaker 1: As that what you received the 'Inventor of the Year' award for?
Speaker 2: yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so that's in 1985 or '83 [1983] rather.  Now, what gave you the idea to invent artificial bone material?  What was the need?  Was there a chemical need for, I mean a medical need for that?
Speaker 2: Well, it started with new projects.  We were asked to consider new projects, areas to work on.  And I remember hearing a guy who came through to talk about new materials, other than carbon.  And one of them was amino acids, new materials, polymers from amino acids.  And we first were able to show that we could make mineral-filled composites to do other things.  But then we found that hydroxyapatite, the main element of bone, could be used in this process with--I'm trying to think of the name now, (unclear)--these were reactive, monomers from amino acids which in the presence of amines of alkali would polymerize.  We found that hydroxyapatite would also form polyamino acids in their presence alone so that you end up with a (unclear) mixture of amino acid--polyamino acid and hydroxyapatite.  Further, that if you peroxisize this by adding salt and then leaching your salt out after forming the material, you could then use this as a prosthetic material such that the, the amino acid part would serve as the superstructure that would hold the minerals in place as it, as the polyamino acid form slowly dissipated.  What would be left would be the hydroxyapatite growing into bone.  So that, that was a, led us on to process it for making prosthetic materials from amino acids and hydroxyapatite.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did the same, similar process inform the invention of artificial ivory?
Speaker 2: Well, ivory is a mixture of hydroxyapatite and polyamino acids.
Story_ID: 22958
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], your research included among other things a study of elastic materials like rubber, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: The goal is to find materials that can last longer and be more easily recycled than ordinary rubber?
Speaker 2: Thermoplastic elastomers.  You, if you take something (unclear) and you take a rubber, like precursor, and you make the material, whatever shape you have at the end, that's the shape it will be.  So you can't use it over again because it's shaped that way, three-dimensionally speaking, whereas a thermoplastic elastomer is like a rubber that can be reheated and reshaped, reclaimed and used again.  So that's a thermoplastic elastomer concept (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay,--
Speaker 2: Now, example is a telephone cord.
Speaker 1: Okay, the coating on the phone cord?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22959
Speaker 1: Now, in 1990, the American Chemical Society recognized your outstanding service to the profession and, now, were you at the ground, at the beginning of the formation of the, of NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers]? Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was not, I was an early supporter at the, when the first ones.  I wouldn't say I was a, but I brought, I introduced NOBCChE to the Midland community when it was in its infancy.  And it's grown since.  In fact, they gave me a, recently, a medallion to hang around my neck, as a (unclear) as a Percy Julian awardee.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Now, so it was in 1999, right, that you received the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Percy Julian Award from NOBCChE.  And you said before that time, you didn't know much about him, Percy Julian [U.S. research chemist, one of the first African American with a Ph.D. in chemistry, and the first African American chemist to be inducted into the National Academy of Sciences], right?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I knew about Percy Julian.  That was a long time--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, before--
Speaker 1: Before--
Speaker 2: --when you were in school, you didn't know about him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but as a professional, and when I was in school, I knew about Percy Julian.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell us now, what position does Percy Julian have amongst the black chemists?  I mean what is he known for and why is he so admired?
Speaker 1: He's probably the most eminent black chemist.  He came along when there was still segregation in hiring.  He got to the point where he was so good, he started his own company.  And he did some wonderful things when he was, he was in practice.  He worked at Glenn Paints.
Story_ID: 22960
Speaker 1: Now, you're on the board of directors, financial advisors in both--oh, you're on the board of directors of the Comerica Bank of Midland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, that ended some time ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, or you were on the board--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you were on the board of the Saginaw Valley State College [University, Michigan], Indiana University Chemistry Department, financial advisor in 1994.  You're a lifetime member of NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers]--
Speaker 2: Those other things have ended too.  In that write up that I gave you I have the termination dates there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did you, I was asked to ask you about James Stith and William Lester.  Those are two--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lester was a tremendous theoretician. I don't know about the other guy.
Speaker 1: James Stith [physicist], yeah.
Speaker 2: That doesn't ring a bell.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, let's see, so now were you involved in any or was it even feasible to be involved in any programs to get black youth or minority youth involved in chemistry?
Speaker 2: Well, we're still trying.  It's a problem, the American Chemical Society has programs to get kids involved in chemistry.  That's what a lot of the local sections, it was always hard for anybody, but it's harder for black chemists to get started.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you do any teaching?  Have you done any teaching at any of the schools for it or like Saginaw [valley] State [College/University] or--
Speaker 2: No, I, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Let's see, so you've got a lot of volunteer activities.  You were chairman of the Midland Black Coalition from '73 [1973] to '77 [1977] and lifetime member--
Speaker 2: No, '73 [1973] and '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: And '77 [1977], okay.  I'm sorry, '73 [1973] and '77 [1977].  Now, what is the Midland Black Coalition?
Speaker 2: Well, we started out after more blacks came to Midland, say in the early '70s [1970s].  Things we used to put up with, such as where do you get your hair cut?  And what do you do to treat your hair?  What about your kids in school?  It sort of came together out of a need because we were big enough to reorganize to try to get the committee to recognize these needs.  In fact, we got the committee to organize stuff to begin to hire black teachers in the public schools, many whom have since retired by now, believe it or not and it turned out to be that they were good teachers.  And a lot of the big, excuses for not having black teachers were we can't find them.  Well, they didn't go to the right place.  If you go to black schools, you could find black teachers.  And they found some who were exceedingly good teachers, who came and made their marks and have since retired.
Story_ID: 22961
Speaker 1: Yeah, did, sir, did you spend much time overseas working on projects?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, Dow [Chemical Company] didn't have you traveling?
Speaker 2: No, we had the main research facilities here in Midland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked in the Central Research Independent Laboratories for the entire time I was here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were supposed to be the, at the forefront of science doing the, trying the new things, trying to open new frontiers and checking things out like the peptide chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about the rest of the country?  Did you travel much in the United States?
Speaker 2: For one reason or other I've been, we were waiting on our food one night, and we were saying how many states we've been in to, I think we got up to thirty-some states we at least had been into for one time or another (unclear).  But that was related to a lot of different things, some business, some pleasure.
Story_ID: 22962
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: What are some of my--?
Speaker 1: Your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I, my hopes and concerns, I hope they continue to grow.  Believe it or not, we don't see too many people down here living out here.  By the time we, we are always out of phase when we go to the Post Office, they're working.  When we shop for grocery, they're working.  And so we don't see too many people very often.  But we noticed a couple of people of color who've come, who've been head of this division, the Michigan division, head of the tax division.  So that's been very encouraging.  We've had a guy who was in management, major management for a number of things.  So that's been very encouraging.  But what we don't know is what's coming next.  Who's coming next, whether anybody's coming next?  And we're pleasantly surprised sometimes to see who is coming next.  I take 'Black Enterprise Magazine' and it's surprising sometimes who you see.  Like, for example, the head of McDonald's [Corporation], one of the top guys, a black man.  So that was kind of surprising to us.  But it is happening (unclear).  And more and more people are going into things that we weren't never in before, see new faces on TV doing different things.  That's always very encouraging to me.  And in my lifetime to see a man who could-, rose to the presidency of the country, that's really surprising, in spite of (unclear) perception a lot of people have, and a lot of little prejudices that people have.  It's still, there are people who are succeeding.  Then you hear, stats about the number of kids, who are kids who are dropping out of school, bad news.  But then again, you hear about the kids who are going, going on to school.  You see them graduating from college.  That's encouraging.  So it is a mixed bag, but society's going to demand that more people be able to do more things.  And that you just can't afford to drop out of school anymore because what are you gonna do for the rest of your life?  There just isn't anything for you to do.
Story_ID: 22963
Speaker 1: Tell me this, now, you were a pioneer at a major corporation doing major research, one of the few minority members there, what advice would you give to a young, African American person now going into a big organization like Dow [Chemical Company] or, or any (unclear) organization, General Electric or whatever?
Speaker 2: Well, I think communication is very important.  That's timely reports because a lot of times you can put off writing reports and (unclear).  Then someday someone is gonna say, what has John done lately?  Well, he's just written only one report.  And whereas, if you write a report, that becomes a part of that company's record and it's something that you have always in your favor because the guy you're working for today, he knows you're a good person, knows you're a good researcher, but, guess what?  If he's gone tomorrow, and a new person comes in, and you've got no record of what you've done.  So communications is very important, not taking that for granted, but always trying to be the first, the leader in everything you do because you're in competition, even with the guy you, you call your friend and you go to lunch with everyday.  You're in competition with that guy and so you have to look out for yourself and keep your persona strong.  And, and in my field, in research, the best way to do that is to write company reports.  I don't mean just junk, but write it well, what you're doing, keep up with what's going on in the literature and keep working on that.
Story_ID: 22964
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would, that you would go back and change if you could or do over?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I would have had more opportunities if I were coming along today.  But to tell you the truth, what I wanted to be, and what I wanted to become, I adapted to do that, that's become a first-class researcher because when I first came here there were people who were, who had reputations which were high up there and were recognized.  And that's who I wanted to be like, and I went as far as I could go, but possibly better if I had concentrated a little bit more and I tried to, to try a little harder to go higher.  I think I would have had that opportunity, but from where I stood, where I was many times first of many, second of many, the first of two or something, first of one of the three of this, I think that my perspective of where I could do or what I could do and what I could be like would be higher now.  I think, I think I would have had a better chance of advancement than I had when I was coming along.
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point in life, what today would you consider to be your contribution or your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I was able to show that people of color could compete in the workplace like everybody can.  I think that's my credit, legacy.
Story_ID: 22965
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us something about your children.
Speaker 2: Well, Evelyn, first black kid in the modern ages to go to school here, was a very precocious child.  She, she wanted to work, she wanted to be first in anything.  She learned ballet and there were limitations on what happened during her life.  For example, when it got to the dating age, there were dates that she had with smaller, than her friends.  But she wanted to, she studied very hard.  She went to a good school.  She went to private school.  Her college, [pause], let me see this thing again.  She went to Kalamazoo College [in Kalamazoo, Michigan] which is a very good school.  She went on to get a master's at Northwestern [University in Chicago, Illinois] in journalism, but she had studied French, she had done well in French from the time she was in middle school.  She could speak the language.  She had the enunciation as well as the grammar.  And she actually majored at, minored in journalism, but she went to journalism school because her thoughts about getting a job with just French alone was very poor.  And the closest market for her was some place in Canada.  So she went, she worked for several newspapers, and that was not too satisfying.  And then she worked, worked for Encyclopedia Britannica, Ameritech, but somebody asked her to teach some elementary school kids a little French.  So she fell in love with teaching, so she went back to school, got a teaching certificate, later went back to school and got a master's in French from the University of Wisconsin [in Madison, Wisconsin].  And she's been a French teacher ever since in high--she started out in elementary school, then junior high and now she's teaching French in high school.  And she works in, she lives in Evanston, Illinois.  For one reason or another, she never found a permanent partner, so she's alone, but she seems to be happy with her life.  And she's doing very well.  She soon became a homeowner, and she's been out to California for a while to try out the markets out there.  She went there to Bakersfield, California, and she found Bakersfield to be kind of backwards and hot in the summertime, like the dickens.  So she came back to this part of the country.  And she landed a job in Evanston, and so that's where she's been.  She's fifty-three years old now.  Son, John, was not as good a student as she was.  He's a happy-go-lucky kid.  So he went down to Wilberforce University [in Wilberforce, Ohio] for one year.  And he wanted to transfer back to Central Michigan [University in Mt. Pleasant, Michigan], came back to Central, and kind of goofed off and then went into the Marines where that straightened him out.  He got out and that was the time when if you didn't have a college degree, you could still earn a pretty decent living.  And he thought he could do that.  So he went and joined the police force in Richmond, Virginia.  And from there, he went to another place, and he's had several jobs, some with the sheriff's deputy and he now works as a correctional officer at a correctional institution in Nash, South Carolina, Nash Correctional Institution, Nashville, North Carolina, where he's fifty-one years old today.  So that's, about the story of the kids.
Story_ID: 22966
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, then, how did you get involved in so many things that were not directly related to your job?
Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that working in chemistry and solving problems can be a very lonely process.  And you may have, you may work very hard and not have something to show for it except you write a report for all the things you did.  You could end up with a lot of negative information that was still necessary to solve the problem, but doesn't solve the problem.  I can go work for, looking for a compound to do this, had this particular activity.  I can look at a lot of different compounds, but, you know, you look at the drugs that come about, you look at the number of actual candidates, thousands of candidates, (unclear) for the one that turned out to have the activity that was desired.  So you, you can feel like there isn't much exciting happening, whereas, if you were in production, you could see the change every day, so much of this, or stats.  It's a more dynamic kind of thing.  But when you're in something else like board of fellows or the Rotary Club or, or alumni group, you get instant satisfaction out of the things you're able to achieve.  And that can, that can help you, you can go about feeling good that you've done something that someone can recognize very easily, whereas you may work in the lab all this time and only communicate with the people who know the-- and took, (unclear) sees what you're working with.  So, the satisfaction factor is limited in the scientific career, whereas the other things you do, you interact with people more often and derive satisfaction from that interaction.
Story_ID: 22967
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a guy who wanted to try to be somebody to, to do things that were, that were difficult but you were successful in achieving them through your own desires and your own cunningness and skill, that you did your best and you had derived some satisfaction out of what you were trying to do.
Story_ID: 22968
Speaker 1: Okay, can you see that one?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that picture, please?
Speaker 2: This is our anniversary picture.
Speaker 1: It has 25 above it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's probably 25th.
Speaker 1: Twenty-fifth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 2: So we're gonna record your voice and then somebody will type up the caption for the photo from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember what occasion this was?
Speaker 2: This is the occasion, two years ago--was it two years ago, Thae?
Speaker 1: I can't see the picture.
Speaker 2: At the country club, it was two years--us retirees getting together.  We're all Midland people, friends.  You want the names of the people on there.
Speaker 1: I guess it's not necessarily, so they all worked, they're all retirees from Dow Chemical in Midland?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, retired from Dow.  Where was Sarah's, Midland School.
Speaker 1: Oh, she was from, she was in the Midland public school system.
Speaker 2: Okay, but these are general retirees from Midland area.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the occasion?
Speaker 2: Occasion was a get-together, a summer get together.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Here's a picture of you.
Speaker 2: At San Simeon.
Speaker 1: San Simeon, California.
Speaker 2: Thae, what's this one for?
Speaker 1: We were going to a dress affair at Bradley University.
Speaker 2: At Bradley?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Thae, where is this one from?
Speaker 1: I told you that was San Simeon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is also in California.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the same picture, isn't it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: A different one, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where I received the NOBCCE Award, Percy Julian.
Speaker 2: That's 1999.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw the speech.
Speaker 2: That's in Oakland.
Speaker 1: Circa 1963, we were, daughter and son and wife in the backyard, summertime, 1963 [newspaper article and photo].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You all were in the paper a lot (laughter), it looks like.  The only black family here in town (laughter).
Speaker 1: For four years.
Speaker 2: This is at Bradley University.
Speaker 1: And that looks like the school magazine.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the 50th year class reunion at Bradley University.
Speaker 1: That's wife and her senior in high school.
Speaker 2: Friends at Bradley University, 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear) in Peoria.  Let's see, that would have been 19--ghee, '55' [1955], see '56' [1956].
Speaker 1: That's good, it's very close.
Speaker 2: It's very close.  Is there anything on the back?
Speaker 1: No, Polaroid.
Speaker 2: The one in your hand.
Speaker 1: Oh, this one, no.
Speaker 2: Thae, where's this from?
Speaker 1: I can't see it.
Speaker 2: That's during the age of Polaroid photography.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's you and me.  I don't know what the year was though.
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, Thae was pregnant with our first daughter.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957]?
Speaker 1: No, '58' [1958] probably.
Speaker 2: Oh. '58' [1958], okay.
Speaker 1: ROTC Cadet, Bradley University.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, Larry, upside down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was gonna receive a Senior Researcher and Scientist Award--Senior Associate Science Reward.
Speaker 1: Dow, right?
Speaker 2: Dow.
Speaker 1: That was at, I was a bank director at Comerica, first year.
Speaker 2: Thae, when was this picture taken?
Speaker 1: Here we go.  That's you with Dow, right.
Speaker 2: That's me at Dow Laboratory, 1965.  You've seen this picture before. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: That's me at, giving Percy Julian Award to Michigan Tech University, 1988.
Speaker 2: With Susan--
Speaker 1: Williams.
Speaker 2: Two thousand ten [2010].
Speaker 1: Twenty-five year at Dow picture.
Speaker 2: You mean 25 years at Dow.
Speaker 1: That's RISA officers.  RISA is now Sigma Zi, 1969.
Speaker 2: This is 1951 here.
Speaker 1: So we're all living--
Speaker 2: Who is that?
Speaker 1: That's my father, mother, sisters
Speaker 2: Your family.
Speaker 1: Yes, sisters.
Speaker 2: Can you name them from left to right, please?
Speaker 1: Okay, Laverne, Georgia, John, Jessie Wilma, Doc, Linn, Labron and John.
Speaker 2: Can Labron play basketball (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's another recent picture, 1970 officers.
Speaker 1: This is 1961.  You want me to name the people again?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The bottom, Laverne, John, Jessie Wilma, Linn, John and Labron.
Speaker 2: This is 1961.
Speaker 1: We can probably just say family gathering here (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Christmas in South Carolina, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1961.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Percy Julian Award presentation. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Now, this is--
Speaker 1: Family.  That's Glen Dorman, my nephew.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: This is your daughter here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, this is a school picture.
Speaker 1: School picture, Wilkinson High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Melanie, my niece was the first--
Speaker 2: Chemistry talk.
Speaker 1: She was the first--
Speaker 2: First woman that joined the fire department in Peoria.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: She's still a firefighter.
Speaker 1: In where?
Speaker 2: Peoria.
Speaker 1: Peoria, okay.
