Story_ID: 245562
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Lillie Dickerson [HistoryMaker Lillian Dickerson], Lillie Venning Dickerson.  V-E-N-N-I-N-G, D-I-C-K-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is your first name Lilly or Lillian?
Speaker 2: Lillie, no, L-I-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: L-I-E, okay.  Fine, Lillie.  All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June the 12th, 1902.  Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], 1116 Fitzwater Street.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So you were born in this house?
Speaker 1: No in--at 1116 Fitzwater Street, same street.
Speaker 2: Same street, but different--
Speaker 1: Different address.
Speaker 2: All right.  And what is your occupation, or what was your occupation when you worked?
Speaker 1: Well I was a secretary for a number of years.  Then I've worked in the post office.  I retired from the post office.
Speaker 2: So you worked for the federal government, basically?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And what was your position when you retired?
Speaker 1: I was a clerk in the post office.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?
Speaker 1: Date?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Today's date is, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: February 7th I think.  Yes, 2005.  Can you say it for us, February 7th, 2005?
Speaker 1: Yes, February the 7th, 2005.
Speaker 2: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're in my home at 2107 Fitzwater Street.
Story_ID: 245563
Speaker 1: Before I go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.  And the first one is, ma'am do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I don't believe that I do.  I like junk food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I guess pink would be some--my favorite.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well I don't like win--spring I guess, spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't traveled a great deal, but I used to go to New York quite often to weekends to shows and things like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: No, I'm afraid I don't (laughter).
Story_ID: 245564
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George Venning] side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name is Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Capps, C-A-DOUBLE P-S, Venning, V-E-DOUBLE N-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh Lord, I-I honestly can't tell you.  She--I can't tell ya that offhand--I have records of it, but she, she died, my mother died in about 19--I don't know, I have--can't even give a good guess on that (laughter).  I have it--I have the time down, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Well do you think she was born in the 1880s or, or?
Speaker 2: Oh I guess--oh yes, yes.  Sure of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what do you know about your mother's side of the family, about that side of the family.  Where do they come from and how far back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's mother came from Sierra Leone, Africa.  She came here as a young girl.  She came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] too.  I believe they had a good bit of slavery over there and they sent her over here.  They--they was--they were afraid she would be stolen and sold into slavery.  So she came over here.  She was a ward of the Biddle family here in Philadelphia.  They raised her.
Speaker 1: Okay, raised by the Biddle family.  Is that the famous Biddles, Nicholas Biddle?
Speaker 2: I think they're all related.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  By the Biddles okay.  And, what else do you know about that side?
Speaker 2: Well that's all I know.  And when she was old enough to go around with the--you know, have--people say they took her to St. Thomas Church [The African Episcopal Church of St. Thomas, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they were all Episcopalians, and they took her to church with them.  And then they took her there so she would meet some other friends and some colored girls and boys, people.  And that's where she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the famous St. Thomas Church, the first--
Speaker 2: --that's right.
Speaker 1: --black congregation in the United States?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it.  We're all members of the--I'm a member of St. Thomas too.
Speaker 1: The one founded by Absalom Jones.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your great--did your grandmother know Absalom Jones or had he?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I can't remember these dates right now.
Speaker 2: I--no.  No, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So has your family been a part of St. Thomas since--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  We've been a part of St. Thomas for--ever since I can remember (laughter) about four or five generations I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably ever since they came to Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 245565
Speaker 1: What else about your mother's [Julia Capps Venning] side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know of anything else.  She met my father [George Venning] at St. Thomas Church [The African Episcopal Church of St. Thomas, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They were married.  He was--her husband--my grandfather was a runaway slave.
Speaker 1: What was his name, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Augustus, Augustus Capps.
Speaker 1: And he was a runaway slave?
Speaker 2: He was a runaway slave.  He--and they thought--he didn't--he was--he didn't know how to read or write.  And he was--they felt that he was trying to find his way to Canada.  And in some way he got out here on the Main Line.  He was picked up by a family out there that took him in and he remained there.  He stayed there all his life after that.  He remained with them.
Speaker 1: Now has it, has it been passed down where he ran away from?  I mean, you know, where did he runaway from?
Speaker 2: That's in my records I think.  I don't know where that was, some place in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He hadn't been treated very well and he ran--he managed to run away.
Speaker 1: And these records are in the library you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which library is it?
Speaker 2: The 13th [Street] and Locust [Street] of Benjamin [Franklin].  They call it the Philadelphia Library, the library by Benjamin Franklin, 13th and Locust [The Library Company of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you, did you ever meet your grandparents?  Did you ever have a chance to know them?
Speaker 2: Oh yes I knew them well, very well.  And he stayed out there even after he married, he'd come in all the time.  Because he bought a home for his family here on Carpenter Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your grandparents like, you know, were they?
Speaker 2: Well, what do you mean what were they like, they were?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what were their personalities like and what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well he worked in--in this--where he, you know, where he lived out there on the Main Line.  And my grandmother was--
Speaker 1: What is the Main Line? We're from Chicago [Illinois], so we're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I call that out there--out there, we call it the Main Line out there where all the wealthy people lived on the outskirts of Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania] and Villanova [Pennsylvania] and places like that.  And my grandmother was a dressmaker.  Both my grandmothers were dressmakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's somethin' new to us, the Main Line.  We ha--really haven't heard of it.  (Simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that would be called the Main Line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's where the rich people were?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 245566
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's what?
Speaker 1: Full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: George Edward Venning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his date of--can you spell it for us, George?
Speaker 2: Pop died when he was about, pop was about--he was in his nineties when he died.  He hasn't--I can't keep--I don't wanna misrepresent anything and I really can't think of dates.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll probably assume he was born in the late 19th century?
Speaker 2: Yeah, poppa died in the 1980s some maybe I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was grown, I was working.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: His what?
Speaker 1: His side of the family.
Speaker 2: His side of the family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well he was one of the children who was brought up here by the grandfather [Dickerson's paternal great-grandfather, Richard Walpole Cogdell].  See the grandfather brought all these children up here and it must've been many, many years ago 'cause I remember they said they came by stagecoach.  And he bought this home down here 20--at 1116 Fitzwater Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And he used to come up here, had his eldest son who was named Robert Venning [sic. Robert Sanders].  He was in charge of the family.  And the grandfather used to come up here and give the money to live.  He wanted them to be educated.  They went to a school, some kind of schools they got down there.
Speaker 1: Now where did they come from?
Speaker 2: Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father came up from Charleston to--
Speaker 2: No my father was born up here I guess.  The generation ahead of him came up from Charleston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather came up from Charleston.
Speaker 2: Yeah and then I had a deed to the house down there and I noticed there were two deeds.  And I think what happened when Mr.-I can't even think of his name now.  When he bought that house down there, 1116 Fitzwater Street, there was another deed the month--a month later deeded over to his son Robert.  And we assumed that colored people couldn't inherit any money and they were afraid that if--if he died, they would lump that house up with his--with his, you know, the things he had in Charleston 'cause he was a very wealthy man.  I've been to Charleston, I knew the addresses and I saw the houses--the house where he lived in, where my great great-grandfather lived.
Speaker 1: So, Ms. [HistoryMaker Lillian] Dickerson you were sayin' that your grandfather came here when--
Speaker 2: Great-great-grandfather [sic.].
Speaker 1: Great-great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great-great-grandfather came up here.
Speaker 2: His name is Cogdell.  Mr. Cogdell.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Cogdell.  Is that C-O-G-D-I-L-L?
Speaker 2: D-E-double L.  C-O-G-D-E-DOUBLE L.
Speaker 1: Okay, Cogdell.  You were sayin' that in--they weren't allowed to own property in Charleston or here?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.
Speaker 1: They couldn't protect it, they couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he--he was afraid that they would--they assumed--the family assumed that he had transferred the house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], after he bought it, to his eldest son Robert [Sanders] to be sure that they would have that home.  Because he was afraid if they--if he died they might bunch that property along with in Charleston and they wouldn't have anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they were able to salvage that house.  They never got any money.  He had quite a bit of money I understand and he left it to one of his friends with the understanding that he was to get some of it.  The rest was to be turned over to this colored family he had.  But they--the fellow wouldn't--never gave him anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: He kept it all.
Speaker 1: So this great-great-grandfather is he black, is he African American?
Speaker 2: No he was white.
Speaker 1: Okay now you have to tell us (laughter) it's important (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr. Cogdell was--he had this black family.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I--we never knew much about their mother [Sarah Sanders].  We assumed that she had died and that's why--'cause she didn't--nothing about her here in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this had to be your great-great-grandfather had done this prior to the Civil War, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  All right, so--
Speaker 2: See all those kind of things, the dates and things like that they have down there at the library [The Library Company of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't furnish.
Speaker 1: All right, well that's good.  I mean people will know where to find the dates.  That's good.  But the stories are important.  Any other stories from your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: No nothing that I can think of.  I went to Charleston once--I was in Charleston once and I saw where he was buried, Mr. Cogdell.  And he was a member of St. Phillip's [Episcopal] Church [Charleston, South Carolina].  If you go there now, that's one of the sightseeing places.
Speaker 1: Is that an Episcopal church too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  The St. Phillip's Church.  And I--I don't know anything else about him.
Story_ID: 245567
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your parents [Julia Capps Venning and George Venning], about their--we'll start with your mother, what was your mother's personality like and did she talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well she grew right up here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She--after my--as I said her mother was a dressmaker.  And her husband [Augustus Capps] was the one who was a runaway slave.  And he--he lived out there where he worked.  He would come in periodically every, maybe couple times a month.  He would come in to--'cause he bought a home on Carpenter Street for his family.  And she was--she stayed right there and had--they had--I think they had either four or five children, five children I think.  Uncles and my, my--course my mother was one of them.  And that's all I know about them, they.
Speaker 1: Well in terms of your mother, did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked for the--the people my grandfather worked for was one of the Thayer families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the Thayer family, what's the significance of the Thayer family?
Speaker 2: Well they're just pretty well known and people wealthy, aristocrats out there on the Main Line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did your--your mother went to school here in Philadelphia right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went, what was the school.  I can't think where my mother or my father went to school, but they went to school here in Philadelphia, I know that.
Speaker 1: When they grew up, was there a defined black community that they lived in and or?
Speaker 2: Well see, my grandmother was with the white people at first when she--'cause she came from south, from Sierra Leone in care of this family, the Biddle family.  Then she got in--when she got to St. Thomas Church [The African Episcopal Church of St. Thomas, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] she met colored people and knew more about them.  And so I don't know whet--where she went to school.  I can't tell you much about their schooling, but they went to school here someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have an Episcopal school here or do you know?
Speaker 2: Episcopal church.  No, no--
Speaker 1: No school associated with it?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  Not that I--
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of churches, Episcopal churches have schools attached to them.
Speaker 2: No I never heard of any Episcopal school that we had here.  'Cause when we started--I knew when I went I went to [The] Church of the Crucifixion [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] down there.  It's still there, I believe it's still there, 8th [Street] and Bainbridge [Street].  And I don't know where it was prior to that.  I guess that was the beginning of it.  Then they moved from there to 12th [Street] and Walnut [Street].  And then they went to West Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Did your mother have any stories about growing up, any favorite stories she would tell?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard her talk about anything.  She--they had a lot of activities in the church.  They had a parish house in the church.  And they enjoyed things there.  No nothing is particularly interesting I guess.
Story_ID: 245568
Speaker 1: Now what about your father [George Venning], did he talk about growing up and going to school and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No he went to school here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Where the schools were located, I don't know.  They all went to school.  (Unclear) I don't know whether my father ever went to 20th [Street] and Catharine [Street] around here or not.  A lot of the old timers went there, started there at school.  But I don't know whether my father did or not.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The school is still there, 20th and Catharine.  I don't know the name of the school, 20th and Catharine.  And I imagine he might have gone there.  On the other hand, he might--he might have gone to a school down there--oh yeah, he went to--he did go to a school down there around 8th [Street] and Bainbridge [Street], around 8th and Bainbridge he went to a school.  Yes, because what happened, I don't know what--they--when they started school, old enough to start school, he had been going to a playground on a little school down there around 8th and Bainbridge.  And my grandmother [Julia Sanders Venning] enrolled him and her nephew, her sister had died and left this other child.  And she took them to enroll them in the first grade.  And the principal said that he couldn't take them because they didn't take colored children there.  And they'd have to go to some other school, he told her where and she said she didn't want to take them there because it was too far for them to go alone.  And so her brother-in-law, whose child she was raising, her sister had died and when he came home he was a barber, ran on the boat from here to Europe.  So when he came home she told him, she said we're having trouble about have--getting the boys in school.  And he--she told him what happened, so what are we gonna do about it.  He said we're gonna fight it.  So they had a case.  They both went and got--and they said they had no colored lawyers.  Nothin' colored.  Everybody in court was white, everything, nothing colored whatsoever.  And so my father said he remembers he didn't know what it was all about 'cause he was younger, it was his brother, older brother who was going.  And he said they had to take--they were taken to court every day and had--as I said everything was white.  And they didn't think they would win the case, but they did.  They won the case.  They could go to the school of their choice.  And so we've often thought, we didn't know--they said it was in the paper--the daily papers and we don't know what papers were in existence at that time.  We've never been able to check up on that, but they won that case.  And that you could go to the school of your choice.
Speaker 1: Cool.  Somebody doing some research should be able to find that.  That's pretty significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And they told me that it was an interesting case was in the papers every day the progress.  I don't know who, what lawyers they had or anything else, but they did say everything was white.
Story_ID: 245569
Speaker 1: Now did, did your parents [Julia Capps Venning and George Venning] have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No they didn't go to college.  No.  My grandmother, let me see--no she didn't go to college, no, uh-uh.  No none of 'em went to college.  They worked.
Speaker 1: What did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well both my grandmothers were dressmakers.  Mr. [Richard Walpole] Cogdell, their father, wanted them to--he did not want them to be domestics from what I was told.  And so they, they--he--they were dressmakers.  And the men were carpenters.  I don't know, I'm not sure about it, but I think Robert, I think Robert San--his name--they didn't go by that name, Sanders, they went by the name of S-A-N-D-E-R-S.  They never took Mr. Cogdell's name and took the name of Sanders.  And that--I understand the one of 'em was a member of a carpenter's hall down there.  They were all--all the men were carpenters.  I understand one of them was--belonged to a carpenter's hall down there on Chester Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But I--I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So all the--all of Cogdell's children went by the name of Sanders?
Speaker 2: Sanders, yeah.  Call 'em Sanders.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I don't know where the Ven--when they started the Venning name.  I don't know.  As my father's name was Venning.
Speaker 1: Did your father have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't.  And what did he--was he a carpenter too?
Speaker 2: No my father--well in my day my father was in the--went to post office.  He was a mem--you know, worked as a mailman.  And 'cause I remember when he died and I was cleaning out some papers and straightening up some things I found where he got a letter from the post office department where he had received a raise, two dollars an hour (laughter).  Two dollars an hour.  He raised us on two dollars an hour.
Speaker 1: Well that was some time ago though (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, a little while ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's when two dollars was two dollars.
Speaker 2: Two dollars an hour from the Philadelphia post office.
Speaker 1: And what did your mother do?
Speaker 2: She never--as far as I know mom never worked.  She ju--she got married and she just kept house here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 245570
Speaker 1: Do have an earliest childhood memory?  What's the first thing that you remember in your life?
Speaker 2: I don't--they were very strict, very strict.  Not like children today.  I don't know of anything interesting that we did.  We just did like everybody else.  I can't think of anything.  We used to--my grandmother, my Grandmother Capps had a property in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  I don't know just where it was located.  She had bought a property down there.  And we used to go down there, that's all I can--in the summer a lot.  And that's the only thing I can remember sort of different.  Because we had some papers when she sold it.
Story_ID: 245571
Speaker 1: Tell us about how life was different for you growing up then it is for people today?
Speaker 2: Well, oh it's quite different.  Our parents [Julia Capps Venning and George Venning] were very strict.  We didn't have the freedom that children have today.  We did--and we didn't have the money to do things we--we didn't know that we--I guess we were poor but we didn't know that because we had all the necessities and we enjoyed ourselves.  And, but we had to respect everybody, parents, neighbors, every--don't let anybody say you were rude or did anything bad or we were really punished.  My mother was very strict with us about things like that.  And it's entirely different from what it is today.
Speaker 1: How were you punished in those days?
Speaker 2: How was--we were denied the things that--I was the youngest one and I guess I was spoiled and I got in trouble more than my sisters did.  And well they would be ready to go--we had to go to school and study our lessons at night.  But weekends, we had, you know, we're free to go places.  And I would be getting ready to go with my sisters and my mother would say to--what're you doin'.  We're going such and such, maybe to Rittenhouse Square [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or something.  No she said, you don't know how to behave yourself.  You're not going, I told you wouldn't go.  But I told her I wouldn't do that anymore, but mother said well maybe you won't, but you're not going.  And she meant I wasn't going (laughter).  They were very strict.  And children were--had to respect everybody, your neighbors.  I look at 'em today and I think my mom would kill me.  Very different way of raising children from what we had when I came along.
Story_ID: 245572
Speaker 1: You've been in this house since 1910, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your father [George Venning] bought it in 1910?
Speaker 2: And his sister, they were both--they were the only two children left.
Speaker 1: And how much did he pay for it?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: This is a--so it's an attractive, nice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three-story.
Speaker 1: Three-story townhouse, right.  We're looking at hardwood floors--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --and the wood banisters, the marble tile--
Speaker 2: No, we--they didn't have it when we bought the house.  My father had these things done from time to time when we were young.  He--he improved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had a friend of ours did our paneling the walls and painted.  I don't know whether you knew him or not, he died not too many years ago, Robert [S.] Harris.  He was an Episcopal minister and a friend of ours.  And he had--he'd painted here.  And this is--the walls have been like this for, oh I guess I was, well I guess I was out of school, but a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 245573
Speaker 1: Tell me now, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well our activities were (laughter) taking walks, that's about--nobody had money to be going places.  We would go to Atlantic City [New Jersey].  My [maternal] grandmother had a place and she sold the place.  But we would go to Atlantic City for outings in the summer.  And they had dollar excursions.  And my mother [Julia Capps Venning] would take a box lunch, you know, a basket with lunch and we'd have a lovely day.  And from time to time we had friends down there, we'd go and stay maybe two or three days at a time.  And that was the extent of our activities.  We didn't have a lot of money to go--we never knew we didn't have any money 'cause we always had something to do that we enjoyed doing.  So we didn't know the value of money I guess either.  And then we had a lot of church activities.  We had things.  They--our church, Crucifixion Church [The Church of the Crucifixion, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], had a summer home out here in West Chester [Pennsylvania] and we used to go out there in the summer and stay.  And they had a brook, a big house and we really loved going out there.  We enjoyed that a lot.  And that's about the extent of our activities I guess.
Story_ID: 245574
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have, you've got sisters, right?
Speaker 2: I had two sisters--I had three sisters, one baby sister died when she was--shortly after she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From something nobody would die from today from teething.
Speaker 1: Teething?
Speaker 2: She was teething, had convulsions.  And but the others, I was the youngest, youngest of the three.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your sisters' name?
Speaker 2: Maddie [Venning] and Mary [Venning].  Mary was a school teacher.  She taught at the Martha Washington [Public] School [Martha Washington Academics Plus Elementary] in west Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And Maddie married.  She worked for a short time for a real estate broker and then she didn't work anymore.  And I worked, when I started I worked for a realtor, and he was also a ward leader and politician.  And I--I was with him for years.  When I started I was getting fifteen dollars a week and that wasn't bad money in those days.  And I had always been taught to save money.  And I had to save it.  I remember my father [George Venning] gave me a talking to when I started to work.  He said now you're on your own.  He said, and now you know you have to eat, sleep, have a nice place to live.  He said I don't want any money from ya.  He said this is my house, but it's your home.  And he said, but you give your mother [Julia Capps Venning] some money because he said your mother cooks and cleans.  When you come home you sit down to the table and so forth.  So I gave mom two dollars a week.  I think car fare was maybe around a quarter, that was it.  And I spent five dollars a month in the building and loan, with that little bit of money, you know.  But course nothing costs the way it does today.  But I never felt--I never felt that I didn't have anything, you know.  And when I got that thousand dollars from the building and loan, I was--oh I thought I was rich.  But it--it taught me some good habits.  My father really did teach me some good habits.
Story_ID: 245575
Speaker 1: And then my--as I said my sister [Mary Venning] went to normal school.  In those days, you had to go to normal school before you could teach.
Speaker 2: Like a teachers college?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And it was a long time before they could teach.  They'd go to a normal school, they could graduate, but they didn't have any schools for the colored girls.  They did not integrate the faculties.  I was--I think I was out of school before they integrated the faculties.  'Cause somebody was arguing with me about going to a colored school.  I said I went to one.  'Cause my aunt was a teacher there.  Right there near 16th [Street] and Fitzwater [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And she took me to school, lived in the other house when I started school.  And that was the only school where I had colored teachers.  I said I'd never had a--after that--see in those days we had kindergarten, primary school, grammar school and high school.  I don't want they have today that's different.  So I went to--
Speaker 2: Middle school and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I went to a private kindergarten, just--
Speaker 2: What was, I'm sorry, what was the name of the school that you took it to?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 1: The [Robert B.] Pollock [Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the colored school I went to was right down here on Fitzwater, Fitzwater and a little street between 15 [Street] and 16th.
Speaker 2: It's called the Pollock School?
Speaker 1: Pollock.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: P-O-L-L-O-C-K.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's where I went to my first, second and third grade.  They're the only colored teachers I ever had.  I left there and I went over to, the school's still there, the one at 17th [Street] and Christian [Street].  What was it called, [Edwin M.] Stanton [Public] School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I can't recall the name now.  That's where I went for my grammar school.  Then I went from there to South Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, South Philadelphia High School.
Speaker 1: So I never had any more colored teachers.
Speaker 2: So even in high school they were all--all white?
Speaker 1: All white, all white.  All the teachers were white in high school.  I don't think they integrated the faculties until I was out of school.
Speaker 2: Now was this neighborhood integrated or was it all black when you came?
Speaker 1: No, well the neighborhood down there where I was born was primarily white.  All Italians.  Because I know this little kindergarten I went to was just a one-room place on 12th Street and the lady was--she was white.  And I don't know whether that had anything to do with the board of education, I don't know.  But my mother [Julia Capps Venning] just wanted to get rid of me 'cause my sisters were old enough to go to school and I wasn't.  And they went to the [Nathaniel] Hawthorne School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and that still--well it isn't a school any more, but it's at 12th and Fitzwater [Street], yeah 12th.  And after that I just went to the regular schools when I left Pollock school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How did you like school, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 1: I liked school, yeah, I liked school.  I always did well in school.  But I never wanted--I never wanted to teach.  Everybody wanted to be a teacher 'cause you made fairly good money then.  And, but I--I guess my aunt was a teacher, my sister was a teacher, I had two aunts who were teachers, and I guess they wanted me to be a teacher and I just wasn't crazy about it.  So I didn't take that course.
Speaker 2: Did you have a favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 1: I don't know that I--no I can't say that I did.  I don't think I did.
Story_ID: 245576
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little girl, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know anything we did except take walks and, and, and when I was a little older we had a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] down on 16th [Street] and Catharine [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I used to go there all the time, I loved that.  I went swimming and things like that.  And I did that and we went to dancing school.
Speaker 1: Oh, where did you go for the dancing?
Speaker 2: Well just private, you know, we had a teacher.
Speaker 1: Who was your teacher, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but I can't even recall her name now.
Speaker 1: Was it classical dance or was it tap or what was it?
Speaker 2: No, it was classical dancing.  I never learned to tap.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we just go someplace around 16th and South, a little whole on South Street, someplace around there.  I guess my parents [Julia Capps Venning and George Venning]--I guess they paid for us.  And outside of that, I--the things that didn't cost a whole lot of money I guess.  Although I imagine they paid for dancing lessons, I don't know.
Speaker 1: That was your--were you fond of music growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like music.  I like music.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of music did you like?
Speaker 2: Well, popular music I guess and my, my mother's sister was a music teacher and she used to give me lessons.
Speaker 1: Piano lessons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, piano lessons.
Speaker 1: Yes, I see the piano right behind you, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah everybody had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About everybody.
Speaker 2: I can't give this away.  Everybody--this belonged to my brother-in-law, he played in an orchestra.  And when he died and my sister came home to live, she brought the piano.  And I want to give it to my godchild, this piano here, I was gonna give 'cause she plays beautifully and she's only eleven years old.  And she doesn't have a piano.  I said have you practiced (unclear), the parents bought her a keyboard.  She lives out in [New] Jersey some place, and I said well I'll give you my piano and I'll pay for the--to have it moved up there.  And what did they wanted, a thousand dollars to move this piano from here to there.  I know they have to take the legs off and the top.  But I said no you can buy one over there for less than that.  But every--when I came along, everybody, everybody had a piano, 'cause people had poise in the house, you know.  And all the children took music lessons, and we loved it.
Story_ID: 245577
Speaker 1: I used to play the piano.  I used to play very well.  I remember I played for--John Wanamaker had some of his--I think the fellas that ran the elevators in all his store were colored.  And he had a group of fellas there that he did things for.  And they had a concert, we knew the man that--he had a little orchestra and we knew the man who was the head of it.  And Marian Anderson, lived right down here, and Marian was gonna sing, she was just a little girl then too.  And so I think I played for Marian and not television, radio was just starting and we all went around to a drugstore, I think it was at 18th [Street] and Christian [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to hear--hear Marian and me on the radio.  And that was a long time ago.
Speaker 2: How old were you then?
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, I--well of course I was in school, but I guess grammar school with Marian.  Marian--Marian had two sisters and I had two sisters, but she was the oldest of the three and I was the youngest of the three.  But we graduated together because Marian had lost a lot of time in school when she'd go--began to sing.  She'd have singing engagements, go out abroad and they never helped her to make up the time.  And my principal, South Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], went to hear her once, she was singing at The Academy [of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And she was impressed with her of course and she had an interview with her.  And she said you should be a little farther in school.  And she told her why she missed a lot.  She said well you come--transfer to my school and I'll see that you never miss any more of your work.  So Marian did.  She transferred right away.  And she got the VIP treatment after that.  She'd--when she'd go off on engag--engagements, they give her a set of work to--to do while she's away, do as much as she could.  And when she returned--she didn't sit in classes with us, 'cause she next to me in assembly.  She wouldn't sit in classes with us, she had--did all her work in the office of the head of the department so she was able to bring her work up.  But we graduated at the same time.
Speaker 2: From high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from high school, South Philadelphia High School.  Because she had--but that's why she was a little back, 'cause at first they didn't help her at all when she was going, I think, to Girls' High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But Dr. [Lucy] Wilson really helped her.  'Cause she always lived, not always, but she moved there--right down there in Martin Street.
Speaker 2: So Marian Anderson was fairly, was she fairly well known when she was in high school as a singer?  Did she--
Speaker 1: Well no she was just beginning.  The people knew she had a lovely voice.  She wasn't doing anything too public.  Yes, as she went on in high school she began to get engagements abroad.  She was known better abroad at first and that's how she--this--the man who was her--what do you call the people that presents you, the--
Speaker 2: Impresario or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--he went abroad, he heard about her.  He went abroad, she was signing over there.  And her sister always resented it and that he found out that Marian was a good money maker.  Her voice was beautiful, had developed then, and he wanted to have her.  He had people like Lily Pons, Robert Merrill and people like that he represented them.  So he got Marian there.  But Marian signed, whatever she signed, he got a cut, not only paid a certain amount of money, but he got a cut of the gate receipts.  And when Marian always sang to sell out audiences.  I've been used--having music standing room only.  He made more money than she did.  And her sister, she had two sisters, and Alice [Anderson], she died.  Alice always resented that.  She said Marian didn't know.  She should have waited and come home and had, you know, had some legal advice.  But Marian did very well for herself.  But we went through school together.
Story_ID: 245578
Speaker 1: We're talking about Marian Anderson as a young star and you had a chance to accompany her, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were.  That was--we were quite young when we did that.  Yeah, I was on radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when did you graduate from high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh my Lord, when did I graduate?  I have to count back too far (laughter).  'Cause I guess I had to be, when do you graduate, when you're about 18.
Speaker 1: Yes, so that'd be 1920?
Speaker 2: Yeah about that time I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1920, 'cause that's exactly the year that radio, you know, started, commercial radio started (unclear) same year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Yeah 'cause I remember, my father [George Venning] got--we all had a little--we used the earphones.
Speaker 1: Oh that--what they call that a crystal set?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the crystal set.  And then when they began selling them, my father bought--bought a nice one for us.  Before that we--'cause we'd argue over that crystal.  We had one crystal set and everybody had to use the earphones.
Speaker 1: Well what was, what was Marian Anderson like, what kind of personality did she have?
Speaker 2: Oh Marian was a lot of fun.  You wouldn't know it, you know, she was very gracious and lovely on the stage.  But Marian was a bunch of fun.  She had a sense of humor.  And her mother [Annie Delilah Rucker] was a lovely lady.  I remember she told me when she began to really make money, her mother did work very hard because her father [John Berkley Anderson] died when they were young.  And Mrs. Anderson raised those three girls herself.  She worked hard.  So Marian said to me one day, I was down there and her mother was home and she never was home as a rule, she was working.  So she said Buzz [HistoryMaker Lillian Anderson] no, she doesn't work anymore.  She said--she said, you know, the happiest day of my life was when I called up that man and said my mother will not be coming back to work.  'Cause my mother scrubbed floors on her hands and knees to put us through school.  And when I reached the point where I could take care of her, and she said mom had a fit when I told her what I did.  I quit her job for her.  And she said, you had no business to do that.  But she said I didn't--I told her I never want to see you go out that door to do any work like that again.  And she never did.  She took wonderful care of her mother.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 245579
Speaker 1: Well, when you graduated from high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--now did you have--were there any teachers or people in high school or when you were growing up that you--that you would consider mentors?
Speaker 2: No I can't say they were.  My first school, I knew almost all the teachers there, the colored school [Robert B. Pollock Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I went to with my aunt.  I knew all those teachers.  The others I didn't know.  But no none--none in particular in high school or in grammar school.  'Cause I went to grammar school [Edwin M. Stanton Public School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as I said, right here at 17th [Street] and Christian [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And then you're supposed to go to the school in your area and that was in my area.  And they were all--they were all white, 'cause Christian Street was all white people living there.  And I think the first colored people I knew moved there, one was a caterer, a lady, bought a beautiful house there.  Then later on, one of the--a man, an undertaker, bought a house on the corner, and then people began moving in and it was mixed for a long time.  And the fella that's on television now, he lived and worked there at the YM--that had the Y--the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], 'cause the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] was on Catharine.  YMCA that was in the 1700 block of Christian Street.  And we used to go there before we had a YWCA.  We could go in there and--and they had a swimming pool and all.  I used to go around there.
Speaker 1: And who was it that worked there you said?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You said that someone worked there that's on television.
Speaker 2: The fella that's on television on--don't see him too much anymore, he may be retired too.  I can't think of his name now.
Speaker 1: So a white man or--
Speaker 2: No a colored fella.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him well.  He was never home, you know, he was always traveling around.  It'll come to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well when you were about ready to graduate from high school, what, what were your prospects, what did you think that you would do next?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't really know.  Because as I said, the girls were--all wanted to be teachers, I didn't.  And I didn't know what to do.  I took a commercial course.  So what happened, my father [George Venning] knew this man who had a real estate business.  And they were talking, talking about me, and he said well I need a secretary.  And he said, I'll take Buzz [HistoryMaker Lillian Dickerson], my nickname is Buzz.
Speaker 1: How did you get that nickname?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I never knew anything else but Buzz.
Speaker 1: That's what they called you?
Speaker 2: They tell me when I was born somebody, another girl, I guess they wanted a boy, and they said here's another little buzzard (laughter).  And then I became Buzz.  So anyhow, he said I'll take her, he said, if she wants to work for me.  He said I have a--so he lived in--in the 12th [Street], near 12th and well you don't know Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] streets do you.  Well anyhow, a little distance from here.  And he gave me a job in his office.  And as I said, I think I got fifteen dollars a week, which was not bad, I had no experience or anything.  But it worked out because, and I not only did his work, but then he had a lot of political work he had to do.  And I remember I met a lot of people, Jesse Owens, I knew him quite well.  And he would came--they'd have him here for different things they wanted to do.  And I always got extra money for those things.  So it turned out to be a pretty good job.  And I kept that job until my, my boss' felt--health began to fail.  And he said I'm gonna get you another job because I don't think I can keep going in the office any longer.  And he had thought that I would--he would put me--get me a job as a clerk in one of the courts because colored--before that there were no colored people in any of these city jobs.  And he said go up to one of the courts and you get pretty good money there.  But that's when I went in the post office.  I said well I'll go there for the holidays and then I'll--but I went there for the holidays and I liked it.  And--I liked the money.  And so I just stayed there.  Because they didn't have a lot of places for colored people to work in those days.  There were nobodies--there was nobody in--you didn't see any colored workers in city hall.  And John Wanamaker--and he had colored people work in his store [Wanamaker's], I always remember that.
Speaker 1: In his department store?
Speaker 2: I always remember that, yes he did.  And not only fellas drove the elevator, he had women, he had some women clerks.  And I don't know any other stores had that.
Story_ID: 245580
Speaker 1: When you were coming along did you ever meet Paul Robeson or--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Paul Robeson?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did meet Paul Robeson.  My sister lived here at 18th [Street] and Fitzwater [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that's just three blocks from here.  And Paul Robeson's sister lived next door to her.  She was a school teacher, taught right down here in South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And Paul was--Paul was very outspoken.  He had this beautiful voice, as you know.  And--but he didn't like the prejudice we were going through.  And he spoke out all the time and he wasn't very--he got in trouble a lot of times with that.  So he went abroad on a trip, you know, when he was--a singing engagement, and some things happened and he talked about them.  And he just--he was just--he gave this country, gave them a very bad name and they began to follow him around and check up on him, give him a hard time.  So this last trip that he took abroad, when he came back, he had been so outspoken over there, they really hurt him because he wasn't getting the engagements and things that he used to get, he wasn't making the money, and he began to go down.  He had this magnificent voice, but they'd follow him every place.  So he came to live with his sister, Marian [Robeson].  Not to live with her 'cause he had a family in New York, but his son, I think, went away for a while and he came over to stay for a while with his sister, Marian.  And who is this--who is this man--was it--a very well-known white man had the place up the state here, he was a friend of Paul Robeson's.  And he heard that he was--he couldn't get in touch with him and he called Marian.  'Cause Marian told my sister, she said that--oh what was his name--and anyhow, he said, "Where is Paul now?"  She said, "Well he's with me now for a while until his son comes back."  And he said, "Well I want to see him."  And she told this man, she said, "You'll find him very different.  He doesn't talk.  He's very withdrawn," and she said, "he just sits."  He said, "I can't believe--," he said, "he'll talk to me."  And--Oscar Hammerstein, Oscar Hammerstein [II].  So he said, "I'm coming to see him," so she said, "All right."  So he came down there to see Paul.
Story_ID: 245659
Speaker 1: Ma'am, you were telling us a story of Paul Robeson, probably in the '70s [1970s] right or late '60s [1960s] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, he was going on--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the '70s [1970s].  And he was here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] staying with his sister, Marian [Robeson].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Oscar Hammerstein [II] called to come and visit (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And want to see him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: And he did.
Speaker 1: And this was towards the decline of Paul Robeson's life, right.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: He wasn't talking to people, right?  So what happened, what happened with Oscar--
Speaker 2: Didn't talk to him, didn't do any--didn't recognize him at all.  I guess his mind was gone by that time.  And this, no Hammerstein never, I don't think he ever came back.  He told Marian if you ever needed anything, you know, let him know.  He was heartbroken over the way his--but Paul did it to himself in a way, you know.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well he was--the prejudice and the things that he had--he met in a lot of places.  He was bitter about it, bitter.  And he was very outspoken, which was hard for him.  But he had made--he had done very well up to that time.  But the government, the government was watching him very carefully.  He had gotten so that he just said everything he wanted and he couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So was there--was there a time when he was back here in the neighborhood that he did say anything or did he--is there any stories about him or any (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I don't know what he said around here because, I said, I don't--he had gotten to the point where he couldn't even get engagements.  He didn't--I don't know whether he was too old or what.  But he didn't work.  He lived with his son [Paul Robeson, Jr.] in New York [New York], he didn't live here after that.  His son--he was over here just for a short time with Marian because he couldn't stay alone and his son had gone away.
Speaker 1: Okay, Robeson died in '76 [1976], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976]?
Speaker 2: It was just before that.  And she said, she said he would just sit there.  She told my sister, she said he'd just--he just sits there.  He doesn't do anything, nothing.  So you see his mind was gone, I guess.
Story_ID: 245660
Speaker 1: Now did you know anybody involved in the [Marcus] Garvey movement?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.
Speaker 1: You didn't know?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was that big here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh I think they had something over here, I think so.  But I didn't know anybody.
Speaker 1: But your impression it was a pretty popular movement here in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What about--'cause you worked for a ward committeeman right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As a secretary?  Did you meet any of the people in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or Urban League here or anybody else?
Speaker 2: Well I would--yeah when--when they had, they appeared here sometime, we had something to do.  I met, what's his name, the fella, the runner.
Speaker 1: Jesse Owens.
Speaker 2: Jesse Owens, yeah, Jesse Owens and Walter White.  I just met them and they were here, maybe they'd have concerts or meetings.  And I can't think of anybody--a couple of others I can't think of their names now.  They were members of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: How were you treated at the post office?
Speaker 2: At the post office?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had no trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the black employees of the post office were treated okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the post office was all right.  I never had any trouble there.  Oh except that as--as a woman, I decided to stay on the post office.  I went in first for the Christmas holidays and that's when I decided to stay on a while.  And they needed people because the war had started and they were losing men.  And our postmaster didn't want women.  And we had--and he was terrible.  And there were thirty women, twenty-eight colored, two white women.  He wouldn't give us--he wouldn't even put us on the list with the substitutes.  We had an awful time.  And we went to work and if he didn't need us, he got rid of us as soon as he could.  So I said to the girls, this--this is not right.  This is the government.  You don't take this without making a protest or they're afraid they'd lose their jobs.  So we finally did--they said who will we talk to?  Go to Eleanor Roosevelt.  So we wrote a letter to Mrs. Roosevelt and told him just that we were--they kept us on a separate list from the men, we could never get an appointment, we could never be appointed, but be substitutes the rest of our lives.  So when she heard it, she--we didn't know it, but she was sick herself at the time.  But she wrote and told us that she would--was distressed when she heard the conditions and that she would have somebody look into it for us.  And I'll never forget the name of the woman, it was Esther Peterson in Washington [D.C.].  And she said, asked us to come down and have a meeting with her.  And I didn't go, couple of the other girls went.  And she told them she never heard of anything like that.  We--I said tell 'em we were on what they call a temporary indefinite list when we'd have the examinations for the post office.  You know, you have one list.  No, they had us on a separate list from the men.  So she said, "Oh no, no, no."  She said "Now that will be done away with immediately."  And she checked it out and found that's what is was and she had that done away.
Story_ID: 245661
Speaker 1: So then he treated us even worse 'cause he had to put us on a regular list so the girls could get appointments.  And that went on for quite a while.  I don't know whether he retired or when he went out.  But after they got rid of him, that postmaster, then things improved in the post office.  But while he was there, he didn't want us, he didn't want us.  And I'll never forget that list, temporary indefinite subs.  She [Esther Peterson] said there is no such thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Temporary indefinite subs.
Speaker 1: Temporary indefinite.  And we didn't--I worked with a fellow that I don't know what my average was, and my average was like, I'll say like eighty-two and this fellow had seventy-eight.  I remember that and he got appointed long before, not before I did 'cause I didn't get appointed at all until after that postmaster got outta there.  But he was appointed.  Then he was--he didn't sub very long because they needed men, needed help.  And he was appointed.  And he said did you get a lit--did you get a letter, a little wise fella.  And I said no.  He said well I got an appointment.  And I said you told me your average was seventy-eight, he said that's what it was.  I said well I beat ya, I was 81 or 82.  Oh he said you'll get one.  Never got it til after they got rid of him, then I was appointed.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so you--
Speaker 1: After Eleanor [Roosevelt] went to bat for us.
Speaker 2: Do you think that Eleanor Roosevelt gets the credit as she deserves for some of the things that she was able to do for (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well I, well I don't know about all the things, but she certainly did deserve rec--she couldn't do it, 'cause as I said, I--we didn't know it at the time, she was not well.  But she put us in charge of a woman that did know.  She said I have a friend that'll take care of things for ya, and she did.
Speaker 2: Now who led your group, I mean, did you have a leader or?
Speaker 1: No, we just got together.  We had a couple meetings right here when--'cause the girls were in, you know, they were just glad to get some work and they weren't fightin' for anything.  And I said well you can't go along like this, you're never gonna have a permanent job.  And some of 'em needed it worse than I did, some of those girls were married.  I remember one girl wasn't married, but she had a little girl and she was sick, and she needed, you know, a job very much.  So they finally decided to fight this--fight the thing.
Speaker 2: Now whose idea was it for you all to meet and talk about it?
Speaker 1: To do what?
Speaker 2: To meet and to talk about it, you all to have a meeting together and talk about the situation.
Speaker 1: Oh I don't know, we just things--little things would happen, you know, at work that we didn't like and we'd get together and talk about it.  And we finally decided we'd try to do something.
Speaker 2: Now anything else about the post office?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Nothing (laughter), okay.  How long did you work for the post office?
Speaker 1: Well I didn't work very long.  I had--see I had been workin' at this other job and I went there, and I retired from the post office.  So I wasn't there--several years, several years.
Speaker 2: When did you retire, I mean?
Speaker 1: Well, can't think of the year now, but--
Speaker 2: What's the retirement age at the post office?
Speaker 1: For years?
Speaker 2: Was it 65 or 70, what was it?
Speaker 1: I guess when, what time can you get your social security?  When my social security, I think I, it had to be in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Okay, the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  I think retirement is sixty-five I think, so that would put around 1967, I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, I--I retired when I was eligible for it 'cause I had gotten fed up with a lot of the things and, yeah, I--I retired shortly after I was eligible for my social security.
Story_ID: 245662
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you do after that [retiring from the post office]?
Speaker 2: I didn't do anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you married at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was married.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband [Earl Dickerson]?
Speaker 2: We had a mut--I had--I have a very dear friend and it was her cousin.  And he didn--he wasn't--I had met him but I didn't see much of him because he was born and raised in, I think it was someplace in Virginia.  His grandmother died and his grandmother raised him.  And he had a rough time in a way because he couldn't, you know, there were segregated schools and things and he had to go a long way to school and his grandmother needed him to help in--outside work and all.  So as he got older, he would come up here sometime.  His cousin lived here and her mother.  And that's how I met him.  And he said he wasn't thinking about coming up here to live at the time.  But he worked for a man down there where he lived.  The man had some kind of a delivery wagon he said, and he used to--the man would drive the wagon and he had to get off whatever he delivered.  He would get off and deliver these things for the man.  So he was a youngster and I guess he was kinda lazy sometime.  So one day the man called him a lazy little nigger and he hit the man and jumped off the wagon and ran home.  But he--he said he didn't realize how serious that was and he said he knew they hanged people, colored people, but he said he didn't go in the house 'cause he knew his grandmother would punish him for hitting somebody.  He hid in the barn and he said he finally saw this man in the wagon coming up to his house.  So the man told his grandmother about it.  And she came out to the--out to the barn and she said Earl, I know you're in here someplace, come out I wanna talk to you.  I'm not gonna do anything to you.  So he ca--went out and she said I want you to go upstairs, put on your good clothes, take a bath, put on your good clothes, you're going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] tonight.  And he said I am.  And she said yes.  And she said don't tell--say anything to anybody but do it as quickly as you can.  And he said she took him to the railroad station and she said now you don't talk to anybody, you just sit quietly in your seat until they say Philadelphia.  And when you hear them say Philadelphia, you get off the train, your aunt will meet you there.  And that's what he did.  And he said he never went back there.  She was afraid they'd lynch him.  He hit a white man.  So he said he was too young to--he knew that those things happened, but he said he didn't realize how serious it was.  And that's how he came to Philadelphia.  And his aunt said to him then after he came here, she said Earl, she said, you have to go to school and he was delighted to go to school.  But when he went to school he said he had had so little schooling he was bigger than all the children and he didn't wanna stay.  He told his aunt, I don't wanna go to school.  So she said you have to go to school.  And he said but I don't wanna go to that school, maybe I can go to another school.  She said no.  She said well all right, I'll get you your--you'll have to work and I'll get somebody to teach you, help you.  So he said that's the way it went for a little while and later on he said he did go back and go to school, 'cause he realized he was lacking in it.  So that's how he got to Philadelphia.  And of course he said he never--he said they--his grandmother came up a couple times.  He saw her, but he said he never went back at all.
Story_ID: 245663
Speaker 1: What did he [Dickerson's husband, Earl Dickerson] do for a living when he got here--what did he end up doing?
Speaker 2: Well when he wouldn't go to school in the beginning his aunt got him a job.  He was--I don't know--he was washing dishes out in a restaurant or someplace in west Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And then after that, he got in--what did he do, oh my uncle was in the post office, he retired and he had a job, he wanted to work, but he had a job in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] someplace in a big, big apartment house.  And when Earl--so Earl he went down there, they were talking about work.  He said Earl, come on up, I think I can get--you remember Connie Mack the (unclear]--
Speaker 1: Baseball player (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he lived there and he said they have a nice place that they--and they could you use, you know how to drive and all.  So he said come up there and I'll see if I can't get you a good job someplace being a chauffeur.  So they did.  They worked and they got him a nice little job and finally he met a woman that needed a chauffeur and he talked with her.  She said I'd like to have a chauffeur.  And they got together and he went to work for her.  And he kept that job and it was good for him because he said she never took anything out for his--out of his salary.  She paid him a decent salary and he said she never took anything out for--she paid all his--all his, you know, things, they--they take out from the salary, he got his full salary.  And he stayed with her for a long time.  In fact, he stayed with her until he stopped working. I don't know whether stopped or she stopped, as she got older and didn't go as much.
Speaker 1: So when did you all meet?
Speaker 2: Well I met him through his--his cousin.  I knew her long before he came to Philadelphia.  I met him through her.
Speaker 1: Okay and when was that?
Speaker 2: In west Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: No I said when.
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Yes.  How old were you when you got married?
Speaker 2: Well I was--I was working.  I was well I guess I was in my thirties I guess, in my thirties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any children?
Speaker 2: No we never had any children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you live here?
Speaker 2: We lived here, yeah.  When we decided to get married neither one of had any money (laughter).  So my father [George Venning], my mother [Julia Capps Venning] had passed away, and my father we talked about it, he said, where you gonna live?  So I said we gotta get an apartment or something someplace, we don't have any money to buy a house yet.  So he said, "Why don't you just stay here?"  He said, "You can have the third floor.  There's nobody, you know, your mother's gone, there's nobody here but us."  And so he let us have the third floor.  He made it into an apartment, where I live today.  I stay up there the third floor today.  And he said you can have that.  So he said, "Work hard and save your money."  Okay.  He didn't charge us any money.  So we got a break there.
Story_ID: 245664
Speaker 1: Now, what have been--now, you're 102 now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and when's--your birthday is--
Speaker 2: June the 12th.
Speaker 1: June the 12th okay.  What've been I guess the significant changes that you've seen, you know, in your lifetime.  I mean what, you know, I guess they could be in any area, politics or civil rights or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think the thing is that this new segr- won't say no, but segregation's gone.  And when I was young everything was segregated, everything.  You couldn't go in the restaurants.  I was working then.  You couldn't go in the restaurants.
Speaker 1: We're talking about Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I'm talking about Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: This is not down South, everybody thinks the North is--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I'm talking about Philadelphia.  And they segregated you in the movie houses.  Now I remember my father [George Venning] liked baseball and he'd be off on Saturdays and he always went to the movies, the little cheap movies someplace around Market Street.  And one day my mother [Julia Capps Venning] was going someplace and he said, "Come on go along with me, I'll take you to the movies."  She was going to Wanamaker's or something.  He said, "I'll take you to the movies and you go on to Wanamaker's, I'll go on up to the ballgame."  So she went with him.  And when they got in--my father looked like white.  When they got in, he bought the tickets, they went in, the usher told him (gestures). So he told him, "No, we're together."  So he said, "Yeah, but she is colored she can't sit over there."  So he said, "What?"  He said he didn't realize before.  He said, "And I've been coming here give you my money and now I've got my wife and I can't sit with her."  So of course that was the end of that.  He said he never went there anymore.  And then my sister had an incident at--they built a beautiful movie house not far from here.  And Saturday she'd go shopping and she'd go up to the movies or the show, they had a stage show and everything was beautiful, beautiful place.  And I suppose she didn't--I can't--she didn't look like white, but maybe some white people might have taken her for white.  And she would go up there and she didn't have any trouble sitting where she wanted to sit.  And one day she went in there and somebody else was there and the usher ushered her upstairs or wherever they sit colored people.  And she said, "No, I always sit at such and such a place, I prefer sitting."  He said, "You can't sit--," he said, "Are you colored? Are you white?"  And she said then she realized, she said, "What's that to you?"  He said, "Because if you're colored you can't sit here," wherever it was she wanted to sit.  She said, "Oh I see.  Well, I'm not gonna sit there, so I want my money back."  So she got her money back.  Have you ever heard of Raymond Alexander?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Raymond.  Well we knew Raymond very well.
Speaker 1: Raymond Pace Alexander the lawyer, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah Raymond Pace.  So Mose [ph.] came home and she called Raymond.  And he said, "Don't worry about it, Mose."  He said, "Because we have a case coming up," you know, the restaurants, there was a series of restaurants, I think Childs Restaurants.  And he said, "They've brought a case up and we have a lot of these white girls are on--are gonna appear in court with us."  And he said, "So you don't have to worry about your case--we're goi--," he said, "this time I think we're gonna win."  So sure enough, the case came up and they won the case and they didn't had any more trouble about segregation in those restaurants on Chestnut Street.  And then that meant the movies and everything else.  They didn't have any more trouble here.
Speaker 1: So he sued the restaurants on Chestnut Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the restaurants on Ches--they--that was the case.  When they did that that settled it for everything.
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: And then that place closed and they didn't get--it cost a lot of money to run that movie house where she was going and they closed up anyhow.
Speaker 1: So about what time--what year is this or when they finally achieved this victory?  Was this before the war or after the war or?
Speaker 2: Let me see, where was I at that time? What was I doing at that time?  I--it might have been during the war, I don't know.  I can't give you dates, I don't know.  But there was a case, a court case.
Speaker 1: And was Raymond Alexander working for--was he working with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time?
Speaker 2: Well he was the--he was the lawyer in the case and I don't know whether him--whether they were involved too, I guess they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Anything else?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of anything else.  But that broke that down and little by little it broke a lot of things down.
Story_ID: 245665
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now what did you thing about the Civil Rights Movement and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s Montgomery bus boycott and all that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah that's wonderful, yeah.  He's a wonderful man, wonderful. (Pause)  I can't say anything else about him.  I never met him, I didn't know him, but--personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In terms of that, the Civil Rights Movement you followed that sort of from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my yeah, yeah.  Always yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you know anybody involved with Father [Reverend M.J.] Divine's movement?
Speaker 2: Father Divine's mov--
Speaker 1: Was it Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca]?  Which one was here?  Daddy Grace or Father Divine?
Speaker 2: Father Divine, Father Divine up on North Broad Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He had a big place up there in the country.  And no I didn't know anything too much about that movement.  I just know what he was doing, you know, from what I'd read, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know people say that during the [Great] Depression he fed a lot of people, you know, through his soup kitchens and so forth.
Speaker 2: He did what?
Speaker 1: He fed a lot of people during the Depression is what I've heard, I don't know, you know.
Speaker 2: Well that's what they said.  He had this big place [Circle Mission Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] up there on Broad Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know--did you know the Nicholas Brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know.
Speaker 1: Well they started here, they got their start.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no.  I did not know them.
Speaker 1: Or did you ever see them perform here?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yeah I always see them perform.  I used to go to New York [New York].  I had friends in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  I used to go to New York quite often.  And I would always see a show or something when I went over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 245666
Speaker 1: I want to get what you just said on tape (laughter).  You know, I won't say it again, but I was asking you about--you live on the third floor of this townhouse?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: And you're 102 and you go up and down the stairs--
Speaker 2: I do
Speaker 1: --every day.
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: And you say you have a history of walking.
Speaker 2: I have everything I need and want up there.  But I come downstairs here if I wanna come down to talk.  Get tired of my own company (laughter).  I come down--Michael [ph.] stays here.  He came here with my husband's [Earl Dickerson] nephew about, oh about twelve years ago.  My nephew's name was James [ph.].  He had a condition.  He had to out to University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] have treatments.  And every--he had to be out there at six o'clock in the morning every other day.  What'd they call it the thing he had.  Well anyhow, Michael was driving him.  He was with him.  So he eventually died.  And when he died, Michael just stayed on here and he is good for me because he takes care of everything for me now.  And so I'm stayin--and when they came, that's when I went up on the third floor.  I said I'll give you the first two floors because he and his brother, and this--and Michael they needed the space.  So I said I'll have it changed so I already had a bathroom up there, but I had to have a little--I have a small kitchen put up there.  And so I've been up there ever since.
Speaker 1: You just had to walk and used to walk home from work?
Speaker 2: Yeah I walked home from work.  Couldn't walk to work 'cause I'd never gotten there.  I didn't get up early enough for that.  But I used to walk home from work all the time, unless the weather was too bad.
Speaker 1: How many blocks is it?
Speaker 2: About twenty-four.  That was at 12th Street and I'm at 21st [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  That's nine blocks isn't it?  And nine and I was four blocks above nine, nine and four--
Speaker 1: Is thirteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Is what I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so yeah, you're used to walking?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm used to walking, yeah.
Story_ID: 245667
Speaker 1: You've been here since 1910 in the same house.  Very few people can say they've been in a house that long.
Speaker 2: Yes I have been here.
Speaker 1: How has the neighborhood changed since you moved here?
Speaker 2: Oh well it's changed a lot.  They--when we came we were the second colored in this block.  My cousin lived over 2116 [Fitzwater Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we used to come out there all the time to see them.  And my father [George Venning] wanted to make a change.  The house was old where we were and he wanted to make a change.  So he said well maybe we'd get--so when they found--they called him once told him this house, the lady had died and her daughters were gonna move out of town.  So that was a house gonna be for sale.  So he said okay.  So that's how he came to buy it.  So we were the second colored in the block.  Now it's never been all colored or all white, it's always been mixed.  Now it's getting more white than colored because the property values have gone up.  And I guess the colored people don't have the money to pay--pay.  They sold a house down--the end house this block, the last house on the other side of the street they sold that for over seven hundred thousand dollars.  It's a very big house, very big house.  And this one, they just built it, it hasn't been opened yet, they just built one on the corner here and I forgot what that--that's gonna be sold for quite a bit of money, not that much, but quite a bit.  And then everything that's been sold in recent--recently, I've been surprised at the values how they've gone up.  And some time ago, a man called me from one of the big real estate office.  He was in the area and somebody said I had an old house here.  And he came to the door and he said he'd like to see it and he showed me his card.  So I said if I want to sell my house what would I be able to get for it.  He said, well quite a bit of money, he said quite a bit of money.  He said I don't know.  So he came in and looked at it.  And he looked at the mantle and the different things and the floor.  He said these are the things they would look for.  You don't find them anymore because people can't afford to have them put down.  And he said--and at that time that was about two years ago.  At that time, he tell me I could--that he could get me, he said I know I could get you over a hundred thousand dollars for the house.  And has gone up, they've gone up since then.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think it's probably worth quite a bit more than that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.  I told him I'm not interested in selling, where would I go.  I said not interested in selling.
Speaker 1: So the neighborhood, the population has pretty much stayed--
Speaker 2: It's a mixed, as I said it's mixed.  I have white on both sides of me now.  In fact from the first house all the way up to the middle of the block is all white.  'Cause a fella just came in here last night, he just had a new baby 'bout four days old.  He brought the baby in to see me.  And he is a white fella, David [ph.].  So that--they're all white, except me.  And down further than that, they're colored.  And the colo--mostly colored are on the other side of the street on the other side, but down here, they're mixed on the other side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the people who are buying are white.  People who are buying houses.  They've been two, Michael saw in the paper yesterday, he cut it out, that two houses that had been sold and the names shown.  He said they are white.
Story_ID: 245668
Speaker 1: I know--I've read in an article about you that was on the Internet, well it's about the community garden back in 2002 that was snatched up by real estate developers.  Can you tell us about that, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well that, what was funny.  There were three houses and they--the houses had been torn down.  And this girl next door worked very hard in this.  She loved it.  And she made a garden over there and did spend a lot of her own money fixing it up and everything.  And then finally the man who owned the land on one of the--middle one, he decided to sell it and build a house.  So that's what we were fighting.  We had asked him if he wouldn't use one this--one of the other houses, then there'd still be two houses together we could keep on with the little garden.  And right next to it was a girl, who was a lawyer, and she's a colored girl, a young girl.  And she was there, where she'd gone at that time, I think she was away.  But she would've been fighting with us too.  So that's what we were fighting about, trying to make this man take this, but he wouldn't do it, he took that center part and that just broke up and we have no garden, nothing there now.  Poor Kathy [ph.] was crying and--'cause she'd spent a lot of her time and money there.  But we couldn't do anything about it.  And, and now, the house that they did--he did build in the center, the people are suing him because a lot of the things they found that they don't like about the house and they had been--it had been misrepresented to them.  So I don't know how they're gonna do that.
Story_ID: 245669
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh I just hope they'll continue to make progress and they've made so much progress in my lifetime and there's always more to be gained and I just hope they'll--the right people, the right people will take over.  Because they had wonderful people in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Walter White, those people, they were wonderful.  It was beginners, now you don't hear too much of the NAACP.  I don't say they don't do anything, I'm sure they do.  But they don't have those dedic--I don't think they have those dedicated people like we had in the early days.
Speaker 1: The likes of James Weldon Johnson.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  They were wonderful.
Speaker 1: [W.E.B.] Du Bois, you know.  I don't know.  Did you ever meet James Weldon Johnson or Du Bois or?
Speaker 2: No I met Du Bois here, met him and Walter White.  I didn't meet in of the others.  We had--we had wonderful leaders, wonderful leaders.
Story_ID: 245670
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on all the things that you've done, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh sure yeah.  I never did much publically, public, public work.  I didn't belong to those organizations or things.  But I think I would've liked to have been more active that way if I had my life to do over.
Speaker 1: Were you active in neighborhood things, you know?
Speaker 2: No there wasn't anything to do in the neighborhood especially.  And no I didn't do anything.
Story_ID: 245671
Speaker 1: Do you have a secret for, we always ask, if you reach a hundred everybody's gonna ask you this question, what's your secret, you know, because so many people--
Speaker 2: For reaching 100?
Speaker 1: --yes, and especially--let me set this up, 'cause this is especially interesting in your case, but some people are 100 and they really look like they're 100 (laughter) and they can't do anything and I mean they can't walk.  I mean they can hardly hear, you know.  But you're walking up and down three flights of stairs, you've got a memory that's as good as most peoples and you seem to be, you know, alert.
Speaker 2: I never could keep dates in my head.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--yeah but you seem to be very, very alert and you can conduct a conversation very well.
Speaker 2: Maybe it's because everybody, maybe it's because all my friends are younger, I don't know.  My family and my friends.  I don't have a immediate family, I have no more first cousins, but we're all very close, are still am.  I hear, we talk on the phone.  They're all out of town, they don't live here.  I don't re--did you speak to be about [HistoryMaker] Kent [B. Amos]?
Speaker 1: Right, Kent Amos.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well see I don't see Kent a lot, but I talk to him on the phone.  I know what's he doing, the things he's doing.  And his brother in California, I talked to him last week.  So I--I'm in touch with all of them.  I don't see them a lot, but I'm in touch with them.  And the other side of the family, that's they're my--yeah they're my mother's [Julia Capps Venning] side of the family.  And the others, as I say, I keep in touch with them through the telephone.  But I don't travel a lot and I don't see them.
Speaker 1: Do you eat any special foods?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I don't like to cook.  And for one person it's a nuisance.  So I get frozen dinners and I cook little things occasionally.  But I, I eat balanced meals, I don't eat junk.  I eat junk, but I eat balanced meals.  I have two good meals every day.  And after that, I--that's when I eat the junk.  Ice cream every night and things like that.  I'm not too fussy about food.
Story_ID: 245672
Speaker 1: So you don't have a regimen of drinking so many glasses of water a day or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't like to, as far as drinking is concerned, when I used to go around and go out, I would have a highball or something like that, but I never liked the taste of that.  One thing I think kept me from drinking was people did drink.  When I was little they didn't take you to the doctors every time you got a cold or something.  They made home remedies and my mother [Julia Capps Venning] could cook up some awful stuff.  And it always had liquor in it.  And I don't know what it was.  You'd have to take that medicine.  And I think that's what turned me against liquor, the taste of it.  And when everybody else was--when we were growing up and people were starting to drink a little, not me.  I didn't want that stuff.  And I think that's--I got--and then I got drunk once.  I went to a party and they said--it was a holiday.  They said Buzz [HistoryMaker Lillian Dickerson] you're gonna have a drink tonight, no doubts, no thank you stuff, you're gonna have a drink tonight.  I don't know what we were celebrating.  I said I don't want that stuff.  So these fellas that I knew quite well--you knew--did you know Evelyn that used to write here in Philadelphia, Evelyn Reynolds, Hobson [R.] Reynolds' wife.  Well anyhow her brother.  We were all raised together.  So Ruben [ph.], his name was Ruben, we thought he was smart and he got a bottle--yeah, glass and put liquor, a whole lot of different things in it, they could've killed me 'cause it made me deathly sick.  And they said drink it.  I said I can't, I'm not gonna drink that stuff.  And I had on--it was Christmas and I had all my Christmas clothes, I didn't wanna get anything on my dress.  But anyhow, I drank some of it and oh I never got so sick in all my life.  So who came in--so a fella I was seeing played in an orchestra and when he finished what he was doing he came out to this party.  And he saw everybody but me, said where's Buzz and they said Buzz is drunk.  He said not Buzz, she doesn't drink, she doesn't drink anything.  He said Buzz is drunk and she's in there asleep.  So he--wherever I was, he came in to see me and I said I'm gonna die.  I never felt so badly in my life.  He said what happened.  And he said you drank.  I said I didn't want it.  But anyhow, I came home, he brought me home and my mother was--and lady and her cousin across the street were having a little reception, a little Christmas--it was a little Christmas thing going, and she called up to me.  How I got in the house, I said how am I gonna get up to the third floor without my mother knowing.  If she thought I was drunk she'd kill me.  And so I crept up the steps and she heard me and she said Buzz, I'm glad your home 'cause it's gonna snow, glad you're in the house.  So I went on upstairs.  And the next morning she called upstairs and she said I'm going across the street we have a lot of stuff to get together and come over when you're ready.  And when I finally made it--managed to get myself together and go over there, as soon as I hit the door and I smelled the food and it was hot in there and then I thought oh I get sick again (laughter).  And I'll never forget that day, I said now how can people drink?  I know, I didn't like liquor, I never drink liquor, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did you ever smoke?
Speaker 2: And as I say, they used to put it in medicine for me, that turned me against it.
Speaker 1: When you came along everybody was smoking, did you smoke?
Speaker 2: I smoked, yeah, I liked cigarettes.  And one day I had two or three people telling me you're hoarse.  What's the matter you got a cold?  And I say oh they were talking about cancer then and getting the cancer.  So I quit smoking.  I haven't smoked for a long time.  I was surprised when they told me the price of cigarettes now.  I said well it was a good thing I stopped smoking. No, I didn't--but I smoked a long time.  Smoked a long time.
Story_ID: 245673
Speaker 1: When you look back on, on your life, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I, well I guess I--I--maybe my health.  I guess I--I--I did the right things health wise, I think.  I didn't do them because I knew they were right, I just happened to do them (laughter).  And I think that may be it.  'Cause I don't get sick.  I--I don't think I've had half a dozen colds in my life.  I don't catch things.  I may have a little annoyance here and there sometime, but it--it doesn't amount to much.  So I think I have fairly good health and I think it's because I've just been normal with most things.
Speaker 1: Kind of moderate, huh (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never dieted, and I, but I never overate either.  And if I did over eat, I always exercised, I always walked and I think that had a lot to do with my condition, walking.
Story_ID: 245674
Speaker 1: Do your doctors have any idea or any ideas about why you're so healthy and have lived so long?
Speaker 2: No they don't, no.  'Cause I have--I go to my doctors every three months.  I go to a--my general doctor.  And then I go to the heart specialist to check me out and that's every three months.  And then, oh my eye doctors, so the eye doctors they get all my money (laughter), my eyes, me eyes are the problem I have.  I have a specialist and a regular doctor for my eyes.  And yeah I guess, what's the other doctor, I have four doctors and I go to the other one, the heart specialist he just checks me out.  So they--they gave me year before last, the heart specialist, I only go to him every three months.  And year before last, it's around my birthday time, course he knew my dates and he finished with me, said everything is fine, it's all right [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Lillian] Dickerson see you in a couple of months.  So I was getting ready to go out when he said just a minute.  And I waited there a minute and he opened the door and I heard all these voices outside and they started to sing happy birthday to you.  And everybody in the--in his area there, he must've told them it was my birthday.  I guess that when I was 100, maybe that was when I was 100.  And I got--and I said who was that and what is it.  He said it's a birthday party we have for you today.  And so they appeared in the doorway, a great big basket of fruit and they sang, and they had ice cream and cake, a real party there.  And so she said now we're gonna take this home for you 'cause you can't carry it by yourself.  I said yes I can, I can get a cab outside here.  And that--and that was my heart specialist.  And he said, you're the--he said I have another patient as old as you but she's not in good condition like you are.  He said you're the best patient to have and I want to celebrate your birthday.  And I thought that was a big surprise to me.  It was nice.
Speaker 1: Has there ever been a big community celebration for your birthday?
Speaker 2: No, no, they don't even know when I have a birthday, no.
Speaker 1: So people really don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They all--they all know.
Speaker 1: I mean the neighborhood knows that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--they--I think--I guess they know.
Speaker 1: It would seem like (unclear).
Speaker 2: No I had a--I have a friend, she's an in-law in a way and when I had my 100th birthday, she lives in [New] Jersey and she gave me a big party.  A big party.  And we had a lot of people there at that.  So, but that's all.
Speaker 1: Now is there--is there any question I haven't asked you that you think that there's something I haven't asked that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: No I can't think of anything.
Story_ID: 245675
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I never thought of that.  Well I like people, I like people.  I--I don't know.  I never wanted to hurt anybody, when I say hurt I don't mean physically.  I always wanted to be friendly with people and I do have a lot of friends.  And I guess that's the way I'd like to be remembered.  That I found something good in everybody that I've been associated with.
Story_ID: 245676
Speaker 1: In the post office where he worked at 10th [Street] and Snyder [Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my father.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know when this may have been taken?
Speaker 1: Oh no, I have no idea, but--
Speaker 2: Could this be like in the--this is while--when you were a little girl or were you older?
Speaker 1: Oh no I was grown.  I was--
Speaker 2: There we go, there we go that helps.  That helps.
Speaker 1: I'm sure I was grown.
Speaker 2: So maybe the '30s [1930s] or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but probably--
Speaker 2: Twenties [1920s] or '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: No I was probably in my thirties then.  Yes I was probably.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Oh I don't know when that was taken.  There's--that's my sister-in-law and her husband.  And that is standing up, that's--looks like.
Speaker 2: Can you name them from right to left?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean from left to right, left to right from this one on, who is this?
Speaker 1: This is a man, I can't who is she.
Speaker 2: No let's start out at the end here.
Speaker 1: That's Gladys [Amos], that's my cou--that's Kent's [HistoryMaker Kent B. Amos] sister, Kent's sister and that's her husband Benjamin Amos.  And that's--this is me.  And that's my sister Mary [Benning].  And that's my sister-in-law Octavia [ph.] and her husband in back of her.  I don't know where we were.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That was 1974.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't see that--that's upside down.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well that's one with my father and one of the workers at the post office.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It looks like it was about the same time as the other one.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's my pop again.
Speaker 2: What's his name again?
Speaker 1: George.  George Edward Venning. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The same thing there?
Speaker 1: Yes same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay go ahead and tell us again.
Speaker 1: George Edward Venning, my father.
