Story_ID: 485916
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Legal name William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Hudson, H-U-D-S-O-N, William Henry Hudson Duke, D-U-K-E [HistoryMaker Bill Duke].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Named after a river.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Henry Hudson the personality, I guess from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a river--the Henry Hudson River [Hudson River], Poughkeepsie, New York--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hudson River.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 26, 1943 in Poughkeepsie, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: P-O-U-G-H-K-E-E-P-S-I-E, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a film writer, producer, actor, director.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  Oh, today's date is September the 19th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your offices I think?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: We're in your offices here in--?
Speaker 2: In my offices in Los Angeles, California (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 485917
Speaker 1: Before we get--go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and I don't know why, but they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know if you call it favorite--ice cream--no, specifically, Haagen-Dazs ice cream; more specifically, Haagen-Dazs co- Haagen-Dazs coffee, butter pecan, vanilla ice cream.  I don't eat it anymore, but if you ask me my favorite food, this is--say putting a beautiful woman in, in front of your face like this close (gesture), and asking not to respond.  If it's in the store shelf, it's okay, but you cannot present it to me that way. I have a little addiction to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: (Pause) As my father [William Duke, Sr.] and grandfather would say, (laughter) every day I wake up clothed in my right mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I like, I like cruises, so I'm--I've been t- on a couple of them.  Caribbean is nice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question in this set is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I have a couple of 'em.  First is Winston Churchill: "True power is an individual's ability to move from failure to failure with no loss of enthusiasm."  And there's a black theologian, Howard Thurman, and Howard Thurman said, in each of us there is a sea, and in that sea there's an island, and on that island there is an altar, and standing guard at that altar is the angel with a flaming sword, and nothing may be placed in that al- nothing may pass that angel to be placed on that altar unless it bl- unless it bear the blood mark of our consent ['The Inward Sea,' Howard Thurman].  And the last one is Albert Einstein.  Albert Einstein said, there are some things that are counted that don't count.  Said, then there are some things that count that cannot be counted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are my three favorite.
Story_ID: 485918
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Duke, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ethel Louise--do--her maiden name or her married name?
Speaker 1: Well, both--yeah, Ethel--
Speaker 2: Ethel Louise Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, and Ethel Louise Duke [Ethel Douglas Duke].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 4th, 1911, West Point, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: West--
Speaker 2: Point.
Speaker 1: West Point.
Speaker 2: Mississippi (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, West Point, Mississippi.  I think there's a West Point club in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: West Point Baptist Church [West Point Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: So, tell us now, what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace I guess the Douglases?
Speaker 2: Well, we're in the process now of digging very deeply into my mother's side of the family, and we are finding that they--my mother's mother [Virgie Douglas] was basically a Choctaw Indian [Native American], and my mother's father [Albert Douglas, Sr.] was black, and her--my mother's grandfather was one of the leaders of the Choctaw tribe in West Point [Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians], or in that area, so we're doing research on that as we speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's, you know, well known in Mississippi, the Choctaw presence there.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Greenwood, Mississippi's named for Greenwood LeFlore who was a Choctaw.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so, so you're doing some research to, you know, make--I guess--clear those relationships up, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Are there any stories that, that come down from that side of the family?  You said you had a great-grandfather that was a leader of the Choctaw Nation, any, any of his--
Speaker 2: I'm just recently finding some of this out, and my mother didn't really talk about it very much.  They, they didn't really talk about their parents that much, or the past that much, you know--that generation.  We had no family reunions or any of those kinds of things, so it's been incumbent upon me to begin to address some of these issues through my own research and resources to find out and to pass it on to others that come after me, hopefully.
Story_ID: 485919
Speaker 1: Did your ancestors on your mother's [Ethel Douglas Duke] side own their own land, or were they sharecropping, or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, they--yes, they owned their own land; they were not sharecroppers, they were farmers, and, and the reason they moved to the North was because my grandfather [Albert Douglas, Sr.] had a gigantic spread with cattle, et cetera, and the white farmer next to him which wanted his land said that one of his cows crossed over into--my grandfather's cows crossed over the fence into his land and destroyed some corn, and as a result, they took my grandfather's land and gave it to this gentleman. And so my grandfather was very, very distraught, and think a--think he probably would have been, done bad things if he had not left, and he didn't wanna jeopardize his family so he moved north.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year was it that--or what time period was it when your grandfather moved north?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I don't have any idea of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So your mother was born in 1911; was it after that she, she was, was it after she was born?  I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think she was in her late teens, early twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it may have been in the 1930s then.
Speaker 2: Approximately, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, why--did, did, did they move to New York right away, or was it some other part of the North first?
Speaker 2: My--one of my uncles had already moved to Poughkeepsie [New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Uncle Roy [ph.], who had married my mother's sister, Kate [ph.], and so they lived with them for a while, and then they found their own places to live.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did Poughkeepsie have a lot of promise in terms of jobs and that sort of thing in those days?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was a little pre-war [World War II, WWII] I think, and so there was some work there--much more work there than it was in the South, and so--there was Schatz Federal [Schatz Federal Bearings Company; Schatz Bearing Corporation, Poughkeepsie, New York], which was a bearing company, then there was the De Laval Separator Company [Poughkeepsie, New York], which made everything for milking cows and all the equipment, and all those things for that. And there were several other corporations that were there at the time.  Plus, there was building going on, and my, my uncles were carpenters and Masons and stuff, and so they were able to get work.  And, but my mother's and my father's [William Duke, Sr.] side picked--they were both very industrious people.  And they accomplished something that, you know, many of us, of us have not accomplished to this day that--my Uncle Lee [ph.], for example, never worked for anybody in his life.  He came up and he started a garbage business with my Uncle Charlie [ph.], and they had a garbage business, oil delivery business, bus driving business.  They, they, they were very industrious self-starters, and they were their own bosses, and that's what--one of the things that inspired me, I think, to be more entrepreneurial in terms of my life and my thinking because I saw examples of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some of 'em--my uncle, my Uncle Albert [Albert Douglas, Jr.]--I don't think he ever worked for anybody in his life. He was a contractor and he just prepared and built, and my father had--he worked for the De Laval Separator Company but he worked almost seven days a week, and so you--we, we saw examples of hard workers.
Story_ID: 485920
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ethel Douglas Duke] have any stories of growing up--any personal stories of growing up from either Mississippi or Poughkeepsie [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, stories that she was afraid to even tell.  I mean, you know--'cause she, she didn't wanna scare us or--because--painful, bitter, horrible memories of the South. You know, in those days you couldn't--if you were walking down the street and you were on your way to church and a white family was coming in the opposite direction--they had wooden sidewalks and dirt streets, and if it was raining or whatever, you--in your Sunday go to meeting clothes, we used to call 'em, if you were a black family, you had to step into the mud and bow your head and not make eye contact until the white family passed and they were a hundred yards past you, you could get back on the sidewalk and walk some more.  But for every white (unclear) family that came that way, you have to get into the mud and come back until you got to church.
Speaker 1: I've heard that story probably a hundred or so times, the same, you know, so these, this is, you know, real, you know, it's real (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the way it was.  So, so you take it your mother didn't really yearn to go back there or anything.
Speaker 2: No (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And once the family came to Poughkeepsie, they weren't--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no desire to go back.
Speaker 1: --thinking about going back.
Speaker 2: The memories were probably so painfully, just--can you imagine, I mean I'm sure they saw lynchings, they saw lynchings, they saw s- things that you cannot imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We can only imagine it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did she finish high school in--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in Poughkeep- okay.
Speaker 2: My mother went to, I think, the fourth grade--that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have like--did they even have a high school down in Mississippi when she was there, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did; they had, I think, private school and, and, and schools where they, kids went, but my mother didn't go very far in school; she's one of the brightest people I ever met, but she--it wasn't from a formal education, it was from just life and common sense stuff.
Story_ID: 485921
Speaker 1: What were some of her [Duke's mother, Ethel Douglas Duke] talents and, and activities?  You know, what did she like to do, and--?
Speaker 2: Incredible singer, wonderful cook, great organizer, a good friend, good family person, and a really good mother.  I mean she--they were strict, I mean you didn't, you didn't get out of line because in those days--suppose, you know, your family told you not, not to do something.  Don't, don't take the cart and, and race it down the hill 'cause the cars there might hit you, right?  And sure enough, while they were at work, you took out the cart and you raced it down the hill.  Ms. Anderson [ph.] next door--unbeknownst to you, your mother had told Ms. Anderson, "He's not supposed to be racing the cart down the hill because he might be hit by a car."  So, Ms. Anderson would come out and say to you, "What are you doing out here"--this is our neighbor--"racing the cart down the hill?  'Cause you know your mother doesn't want you to do that."  And she'd smack you upside the head.  "Take the cart and get your butt back in the yard."  And you'd do that.  "And I'm telling your mother when she gets home--I'm gonna call her."  Well, that wait was the longest--it was like a prison sentence.  'Cause when you were at home, you know your mother.  For disobeying her, there were, there were punishments for that.  And so she taught you the boundaries.  You didn't talk back, you didn't suck your teeth (gesture) they'd say sucking your teeth, and you didn't look under your eyes or roll your eyes or--forget verbal.  There were gestures that you could be punished for--just gestures, gestures.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your mother do for a living? Did she, was she basically housewife, or did she have another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She--
Speaker 1: --vocation?
Speaker 2: She, she was a t- she worked in a mental institution, state hospital, as a nurse, nurse's aide. She cleaned houses. Those are the two basic things that she did: she was a domestic worker and she worked in a, as a nurse's aide in a mental institution.
Story_ID: 485922
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm junior, so it's William Henry Hudson Duke, Sr. [William Duke, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay now, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September the 23rd, 19- I think '11 [1911] or '12 [1912], I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in--
Speaker 2: Orange, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Orange, Virginia, okay.  Now, what do you know about the--your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Landowners, major landowners; they--large, large plots of land in Orange, Virginia, then when they moved to Poughkeepsie [New York], his father bought this gigantic piece of land with a lake on it, et cetera.  They raised foster kids, they, they were farmers, and very industrious, very--just industrious people.  I mean they, they were very smart, very business minded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't believe in working for anybody.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, but my grandfather died before I could know him.  And the unfortunate thing, when I was one years old, my, my Uncle Bill [William Douglas], my mother's favorite brother, my mother's father [Albert Douglas, Sr.], and my mother's mother [Virgie Douglas] all died within a nine-month period. So when I was--when--before I was one years old, they all died, and so I never got to really--I mean I--I'm sure I saw them, they held me and stuff, but cognition of their faces or who they really were, they were dying--they were dead by the time I was one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, di- did your father have any stories of growing up in--did he grow up in Orange, or did he grow- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Orange, Virginia, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and then they moved to Poughkeepsie later--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right? Okay.  Did he come around the same time as your mother's family, in the late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --exact time.
Speaker 1: And did they have relatives already in Poughkeepsie too, when they moved--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Story_ID: 485923
Speaker 1: What kind of things did your father [William Duke, Sr.] tell you about growing up in Orange [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: He didn't talk much about it because I think--see, the South in those days, you know, for black people, that was a very painful experience, that was an experience that--they didn't talk much about it, they were just--they tried their best to put that behind them because they were in the North and--but my father was a no-nonsense kind of guy, you know.  He didn't take no mess from nobody, and I'm sure it's what him and his family had been through in the South, and they were survivors, they were real workers.  My father worked sometimes seven days a week, three jobs.  So, I found that people who came from the South they didn't talk much about it, they just came up and said, we're gonna make a new life, and whatever it takes to make that life, we're gonna do it, and that's what they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you said your father worked for a--it's a corporation (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The De Laval Separator Company [Poughkeepsie, New York] before the war [World War II, WWII]--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, can you say that again?  I can't--
Speaker 2: De, De Laval, D-E L-A-V-A-L, De Laval--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Separator Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, milk separators from the, the milk from the cream?  They made the machinery that did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then when the war came, they made sh- bombing--the--you know, shells, they made the casings for shells and bombs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked for them his whole life?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He first was in the foundry.  I used to go down, look through the window and see him--sparks flying and pouring this molten metal into molds.  And then he worked his way up to the head of, the head of the machine shop, for a period of like fifteen years.
Story_ID: 485924
Speaker 1: Is there a story that's passed down about--from your mother [Ethel Douglas Duke], or father [William Duke, Sr.], or both, or some other relative, about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: I never really knew how they met, but I, but I think they (unclear) church because my father sang in a quartet and my mother went to church.  I think they met through, you know, their church, and they both liked to dance and so they would--they used to meet at the, the different clubs in Poughkeepsie [New York] to dance, and there's more of that, you know--a lot of people met in church in those days 'cause everybody--one thing you could--Saturday night you could cut your heels if you wanted to, but your butt was on a pew--on a pew in a church on Sunday morning.  That was like, that was like a rule, I mean, there was no options.  You could stay out 'til four o'clock in the morning as long as you were in church by eight (laughter) or nine.  So, most social gatherings occurred initially at church, then it went to the rest of the community in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you suspect they met in church.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was the name of their church?
Speaker 2: Ebenezer Baptist Church [Poughkeepsie, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  There are a lot of those around the country.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of Ebenezers.
Speaker 1: Ebenezer Baptist is popular name.
Story_ID: 485925
Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' [Ethel Douglas Duke and William Duke, Sr.] personalities, and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's a good question.  I think I'm mixed with both of them.  My mother was a very creative person, very, you know, fiery sometimes, you know, impatient, let's just do it now, let's not wait.  My father was more of a planner; he was very plotting, he was a Virgo.  He was very punctual, very exacting, you know.  It, it was like--he was anal in terms of just--that it had to be right, not, not--. I used to have to mow the lawn every Saturday morning--it was like a half acre of lawn--dreaded it.  I hated doing it, but my father made me do it every Saturday morning.  And after I finished--he would sit in the front porch.  I said, "Dad, I'm finished."  And then he'd do the inspection, which means he'd go over the entire lawn, every single blade of grass.  If there were any skips, which means I've gone too fast so I'd skipped over a chunk of grass, I had to take the mower out and re-mow the entire lawn again.
Speaker 1: The whole thing again, not just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The entire lawn, not the skip, the entire lawn.  So it taught me a sense of discipline, perfectionism, I guess if you wanna say it, and exactness in terms of execution of things.  I hated him for doing it at the time, but as I grew older, I understood what he was doing for me--not to me, but for me. But I, I think I'm, I'm, I'm--of a creative mind but I'm also, I have a business mind; I have a very clear, precise vision of things.  I don't like skips--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in my lawn, let's put it that way.
Story_ID: 485926
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory of, of, of the family?
Speaker 2: I remember my sister [Yvonne Duke Hampton] and I running away because they had done something we didn't like and we made the mistake of running away into the attic.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you did that?
Speaker 2: I think we were like f- six and seven years old. (Laughter) And the mistake we made was taking the dog Rex [ph.] with us.  My mother [Ethel Douglas Duke] and father [William Duke, Sr.] came home and--looking for us.  "Where are the kids?"  And they asked the neighbors, no one had seen us; dinner came and passed, no kids.  My mother was panicking, hysterical by now, and we had taken food up in the attic with us, of course, like some Wonder Bread and some peanut butter, I think, 'cause we were so angry with them.  And the cops came to the house and Rex made the mistake of barking, and my mother and father came up to the attic and, "Oh, my god--," so relieved, "How--you kids, what are you doing?  You're crazy.  What is wrong with you?"  Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  The cops left and everything--when the cops left, they looked at us.  First they beat me, beat my sister, then they beat the dog (laughter).  I mean you got whippings in those days. The dog's looking like, (laughter) what did I have to do with it?  Why?  But that's the way it happened.
Speaker 1: Did they ever ask you why you did it, or--?
Speaker 2: No.  We never did it again, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, in those days, there weren't any intellectual conversations, there were no time outs, you know.  You knew that you did something, you knew you stepped across a line, and when you stepped across the line, you knew there were gonna be punishments. But somehow, when you're young, there's not a, a connecting of the severity of things.  Somehow I'm, I'm smarter than them and I'm gonna get away with it somehow, and so that's what you do.
Story_ID: 485927
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Sights, (pause) countryside, lived in the Town of Poughkeepsie [New York], mowing grass, church ladies with gigantic hats, funerals, pulling bodies out of coffins and screaming and trying to get in the coffin with the bodies, and dinners and going to the garden and actually picking the food you were gonna eat that night from the garden, fresh carrots or potatoes or cabbage--planted gardens.  In those days, they, they, they had skills that we've lost, and I think we're gonna be sorry for.  My father [William Duke, Sr.] raised pigs, and my uncle raised cows.
Speaker 1: So Poughkeepsie's kind of a rural kind of town but a lot of space I would, I take it.
Speaker 2: It, it, there's a City of Poughkeepsie and there's a Town of Poughkeepsie--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we lived in the Town of Poughkeepsie.
Speaker 1: The town- okay. Now this is--
Speaker 2: Then it's Norbrook [ph.] that's not far.
Speaker 1: Poughkeepsie's like Upstate New York, or--?
Speaker 2: It's right in the middle between Albany [New York] and New York City [New York, New York], right in the center.  It's like equidistant almost, like in an hour and a half you can get to Albany, hour and a half you can get to, to New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's right on the Hudson River.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Hudson River, the, the bridge, the, the bridge crossed there too, so. It's quite a, it's, it's really scenic and when you, when you go up, during the, the Taconic Parkway [Taconic State Parkway] in the fall, it's one of the most beautiful rides.  The trees are like, gods painted these tr- just, oranges and reds and greens and yellows, and it's just incr- it's, it's really breathtaking, it's wonderful.
Speaker 1: So this is like Washington Irving country sort of, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, nature really shows off there, kind of like, you know, shakes her skirts at you, you know. And so in the wintertime, oh no, in the fall you see butchering and, of the pigs, and, and my father used to give a pig or and a half to my uncles, then give 'em a half a side of beef, they'd put the beef in the, in the freezer and pig, you, what you call curing, you had the, they put them in barrels with, with mu- first they, they just put it with this salt, this brine, and then, these are like big chunks of legs, which are like what they call, you know, the back of the pig for hams and stuff and, and they would be in barrels and then liquid would come off of that over a period of maybe four to six weeks. And then they'd put brown sugar, black pepper, and salt, and that would cure for another few weeks, and then you hang it up, put a piece of wire through the shank, hang 'em all along a beam in the cellar, and mold would come around them.  And, after a few weeks of that mold, they would just cut a piece and test it, and it'd be ready to bake or broil or eat, or whatever.  And then the ladies would do what they call canning.  Canning is when you take the vegetables from the garden or the fruits from the trees, or whatever it is, and they had this pressurized kind of cooker, canning cookers, and you put the vegetables or the fruit in there with some salt and water, or whatever, and put the top on, and it'd (makes sound).  Cook it for a certain period of time, pressurize, and get fifty, forty or fifty of those, you put 'em in the cellar.
Story_ID: 485928
Speaker 1: Then you go to the garden and you cut up vegetables, wash 'em off, put 'em in these plastic bags, or whatever, and put 'em in the freezer.  So, you didn't, the--in the wintertime, they would bake the bread, so you, you went nowhere for food.  You didn't have to go out to, outside the house for food, only thing you went out was for sugar or some flour.  But they were self-contained; they came from the South and they know how to, how to survive. We've lost those skills today.
Speaker 2: So, when you, your family went shopping and shopped for dry goods?  I mean, I mean, things to wear, or, or, you know, in addition to sugar or something like that--
Speaker 1: Clo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or coffee maybe?
Speaker 1: Maybe coffee, sugar, soda pop.  We made our own ice cream, my mother [Ethel Douglas Duke]--they had these ice cream makers, these, these, tin I guess you'd call it, and they turn the thing around and put some, so you didn't really--they were, they were efficient to me, they were brilliant.  I mean they were really brilliant.  They, you didn't, you didn't have to go to the store for anything.  Anything you, come from the store, they called it store bought.  Said, (unclear) going for that store bought. You need some store bought?  Just--got the food right here.
Speaker 2: Now, were most of your clothes made in those days, or did you buy 'em in a store?
Speaker 1: The clothes you bought from the store, but you'd have to wear that thing out until it could fall off you (laughter).  I mean that thing just patched and sown and put a suit, you know, your shirt.  I mean you didn't, there's like fashion thing, statement, you just wore everything 'til it wore out.  Can't wear it no more?  Goes to my pants, go get another shirt, go get--. But a lot of times it was mismatched 'cause if the, if the jacket was still good, all you needed was another pair of pants, you didn't need another whole another jacket.  They made everything work efficiently.
Story_ID: 485929
Speaker 1: What were your favorite activities growing up?  I mean what did you like to do or, or, you know--?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well when I was very young, you know, I guess, I had a little dog and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that Rex [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Rex, we had another dog, too, and the dogs, and I guess the, the race carts 'cause they used to have races on these homemade carts.  Listened to music on the radio 'cause there were no TVs then; TVs didn't come until 1950--I forgot the exact year, but--. Going for rides every Sunday because we'd get in the car, and we'd go for a ride.  Sometimes just go ride around, look at the scenery and then end up getting ice cream.  Or you'd go to Uncle Charlie's [ph.] house or Uncle Lee's [ph.] house, and they'd have dinner there or lunch there, and you could eat lunch, and everybody pass out in the, in the, on, on a big bed or on the lawn or something, and you wake up, get in the car and go back home to get ready for school that Monday.  It was an incredible time of family, and we had a very difficult time, my sister [Yvonne Duke Hampton] and I, my mother [Ethel Douglas Duke] and father [William Duke, Sr.] weren't, they didn't like each other many times, and we saw many arguments and those kinds of things.  But also it was a time of gathering of family in, in, in Thanksgivings and Christmases, and New Year's, and holidays, and vacation times, and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: So was it--so, what did your neighborhood look like?  Was there like a lot of space between the houses, I guess in the town?  Was that, would you say that's true?
Speaker 2: We had a half-acre, the person who was next door, they had no land at all, next person had no land at all, next person had a big backyard, big front yard.  Across the street, (unclear) Mr. Anderson [ph.], gigantic backyard, and so it, it varied. It was but--my father, I'll tell this story.  My father, and, but when he bought our house, said to me and my sister, "You want, you know why I'm buying this house?"  We said--.  He said, "For two reasons, one, to put a roof over my family's head, and two, to be able to tell whoever I want to get the hell out my yard."  And he talked about the importance of having your own yard, and how ridiculous, after a certain age, having to go next door to Mr. Jones [ph.] and saying, can my kids play on your swing, Mr. Jones?  "See, you gotta have your own yard."  And that has stuck with me and lives with me today.
Speaker 1: Now, what were race relations like in Poughkeepsie [New York]?  Were there very many other black folks there, or did they all live in the same part of town, or--?
Speaker 2: No, it was varied, all over the place there, 'course with the ghetto section, but most of the people (unclear)--there was like really poor people in the city than are people, poor people in the country, and they lived pretty hard conditions.  Then there was lower middle class like we were; people who worked hard six--five, six, seven days a week, owned their own house, sent their kids to school.
Story_ID: 485930
Speaker 1: Church was the core, central thing.  Church was the place where, no matter what your social situation was, that's where you came.
Speaker 2: What are your earliest memories of religion?
Speaker 1: (Pause) Well, my sister [Yvonne Duke Hampton] and I--my, my parents [Ethel Douglas Duke and William Duke, Sr.] were determined to raise us, say raise us right, they said, so, so we were, we were in church a lot, not only on Sunday, young deacons' club, choi- young c- young peoples' choir, the (unclear) club, you name it, we had to go be there in the church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Poughkeepsie, New York].  So, it was, it was Sunday and, again, these colorful sermons, and women with big hats, and watching you all the time that if you did it the most, somebody would snatch you and take you outside.  And Sunday school, you learned about God and Jesus and the history of the Bible and all those things.  It was, you know, really powerful sermons, and the pastor was like a god.  Reverend Byrd [Charles E. Byrd], and Reverend Matthews [Verner R. Matthew], and Reverend Jenkins [ph.] and all those people, they weren't human, they were gods, and you didn't question them, you didn't, it's two people you didn't question, Dr. Price [Garrett A.H. Price], you never questioned Dr. Price 'cause he was a god, you never questioned the pastor.
Speaker 2: Now, Dr. Price was an M.D., or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Black?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: With needles like this (gesture).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And he, and the thing with Dr. Price, no matter what you had, he'd give you the same pills.  For everything, you could have pneumonia, you could have polio, you could have a headache. "Take these pills." And a lot of 'em, I mean, pink, I can see 'em now, pink and green.  It was like, it was like, but you never questioned him because that, he was, that was the one that, you know.
Speaker 2: You have your suspicions now about what (laughter), do you have any suspicions now about what--
Speaker 1: I think those pills were a candy or something, I don't know what they were.  I think it was some penicillin and stuff that helped, but I mean most of 'em were, I don't think they were, they weren't that much.
Story_ID: 485931
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to, what was the name of your first school, we'll start you with the first school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Violet Avenue Elementary School [Poughkeepsie, New York].
Speaker 1: Violet Avenue Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went, did, did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have an earliest memory of school?
Speaker 2: It's not a good one.  Well, the second, second or third grade, I think it was, and our history teacher was celebrating America's, you know--day of great Americans, and so she pulled out a picture of [President] George Washington, [President] Thomas Jefferson, [President] Abraham Lincoln, Thomas Edison, the list just went on and on, (unclear) she put a picture around so we could see these people.  And she pointed to my sister [Yvonne Duke Hampton] and I and said, "We haven't gotten you, little colored kids either. We got something for you."  And she pulled out two pictures, and she said--the first one was George Washington Carver, the second one was Little Black Sambo, and she wasn't being a racist.  She wasn't trying to be racist.  In her mind, these were the same.
Speaker 1: Now, well Little Black Sambo, to my knowledge, is a fictional character and not a historical one, so how did she justify, I mean, I don't know.
Speaker 2: She made no distinction, you see what I'm saying?  George Washington Carver was no more important than Little Black Sambo, and Little Black Sambo was no more important than George Washington Carver, those were the only two figures in her mental framework that she could point to to say, you should be proud of this.
Speaker 1: So, well, did you, did you say anything, you know, to, about it, or ask any questions about it?
Speaker 2: Seven, eight years old, you, you don't know, you know, you just look (unclear).  The kids, when the kids laugh at Little Black Sambo, you know something's wrong, and the white kids laugh at Little Black Sambo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I take it that you all were really the extreme minority, I guess, in the, in the school.  I mean that's such a, it's just you and your sister in that class, or--?
Speaker 2: My sister and myself, and maybe four or five other kids out of several hundred.  That was all the way from kindergarten all the way up to high school [Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School, Hyde Park, New York].  In my high school graduating class of five hundred people, I think maybe nine or ten were black, at the most, it wasn't a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I can't really say that.  You're talking about elementary school now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I can't really say that.  I mean I, not really at that age I'm just trying to pass grades.
Story_ID: 485932
Speaker 1: At the time, it was a very embarrassing time for me 'cause at the time I was not a good reader, and when I was thirty-some years old, or my early forties, I discovered that I had dyslexia.  But in those days, they had, they didn't know what dyslexia was, they had, they had no idea what, they had no name for it, they didn't know what it was, so they used to have categories of, of readers.  The best readers were eagles; the medium readers were bears; the slow readers were donkeys. I was a donkey.
Speaker 2: That seems like, well, you know, of course today that would be considered wrong by everybody, but in those days they could get away with that.
Speaker 1: Well, they were trying--see, here's the thing.  They were trying to encourage you if you were a donkey to be an eagle, so they were saying that, you know, if you applied yourself, you could be an eagle.  But they had no references in terms of examining why you did not read well, they just thought you were lazy or stupid.  And so, based upon their understanding at that time, you could be an eagle if you want, but the thing you understand is once you're called a donkey, you're always a donkey 'cause the kids who were eagles and bears reinforced that fact for you.
Speaker 2: So was school a struggle for you when you were coming up?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  Dyslexia, you know, you know about dyslexia at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, but what form, yeah, I've got a close friend that's dyslexic, and [HistoryMaker] Antwone Fisher, this morning, is, too--he, he's told us that so, we got two in one day.  So, but what form does it take with you?
Speaker 1: Reading, very difficult, very difficult because it, it's a synoptic, you know it's like, it's hard to sometimes cognize in your mind what you're reading.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Does the mind like turning letters backwards, or upside or something?
Speaker 1: Letters, sometimes numbers.  When you're dialing the phone sometimes, you'll look at the number and it says 5-1, you'll keep dialing 1-5, 1-5, 1-5 (laughter), and wonder what the hell's wrong, what's wrong with this, and you--oh, it's 5-1.  Or, but my way of compensating for it, when I was in high school [Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School, Hyde Park, New York] and, and junior college [Dutchess Community College, Poughkeepsie, New York], because I wanted to sound more literate--one thing with dyslexia, one part of the brain gets, something happens to it, but another part of the brain is enhanced, so those days I must have like a photographic memory, and so I, I memorized 'Roget's Thesaurus' [Peter Mark Roget].
Speaker 2: You memorized the whole thing?
Speaker 1: 'Roget's Thesaurus.'
Speaker 2: Now, how old were you, you say?
Speaker 1: Seventeen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen years old.  And then I would use words (laughter) to impress people.  Matter of fact, I was a great reader, you know I would just use a simple word, I would use a bigger word because that would make people think that I was smarter than I was because if you're called dumb all your life, and slow all your life, you're challenged to either continue to be slow, or to prove that you're not.
Story_ID: 485933
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers, or, or mentors along the way that kind of helped you out, or gave your some confidence?
Speaker 2: There were two that I can tell you about that's, I would say literally saved my life in so many ways.  One was an English teacher, white female named Jean Walker, she was my English teacher, I think, in tenth grade or eleventh grade [at Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School, Hyde Park, New York].  And I had discovered that I was a nerdy, kind of introverted, s- tall kid without a lot of friends, and so, as a result, I started writing my thoughts down 'cause I didn't have people to talk to, so I wrote my thoughts down, and those thoughts turned into poems, and those poems turned into little dramatic ideas, and so on.  I used to write constantly because that was the only, only freedom I had, I thought, just writing these ideas I had.  And I used to write in the--I'd sit in the back of the English class and she used to catch me and I, she caught me several times, she says, "Don't do that anymore, pay attention."  I was hardheaded, and so one day I was writing in my journal and she came back and took the journal from me.  I said, "What are you doing?"  She says, "I told you to stop." She kept it, she took it.  And I, I just hated her.  I came in the class and I'd sit in the back angry, I wouldn't take notes or anything, just tolerating being in the class.  The last day of the class for the semester, I'm in the class angry, and she's, she goes, "See you guys, see you guys next--see you in the fall."  And she comes up to me with this book and my journal, and she puts it on my desk and she, she, she says, "Oh, Duke [HistoryMaker Bill Duke]," she said, "You wait behind" (unclear) and she (gesture).  I said, "What is this?"  She had entered my poems in the national poetry contest, and I'd won a, a place in the poetry contest.
Speaker 1: This is about the eleventh grade, you said?
Speaker 2: It's like the eleventh, the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for the first time in my life, it was re-affirmed that what I was writing had some value other than just to me.
Story_ID: 485934
Speaker 1: My first year, my freshman year at Boston Univer- Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], I was, had a Martin Luther King Scholarship [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Scholarship], but I was, I didn't have any money, you know, for tuit- for books and various stuff.  I had some money for books, but for living, it's really rough the first year, so I decided I was gonna come back.  I was gonna take a couple years off, then go back to school.  The president of the--James Hall of, of, of Dutchess Community College [Poughkeepsie, New York] heard about this, so I went to visit a friend of mine there, and he called, and Dr. Hall was a, he was an admiral in the [U.S.] Navy, and very military and cold, very to the point person.  No one really liked him, he was just strict, and he used to call you Duke, or Johnson, or, like you're in the [U.S.] military.  And so, I came back and--to see a friend of mine, and he saw me in the hall, he says, "Duke [HistoryMaker Bill Duke], come here."  I said, oh, man, what does he want?  That day, in that day, I was a militant, you know--
Speaker 2: Really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) did not like white people.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did not like white people, they were the devil, and we were the saints, and democracy--no democracy, and down with the pig.  Those, remember those days?
Speaker 2: So this, this is what, like nineteen sixty--
Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: --three [1963] or so?
Speaker 1: --early '60s [1960s], yeah, something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I came and I says, I says, what does this, what does this cracker want?  You know?  So I said, he said, "Come to my office."  I sit down, I said, "Dr. Hall, I'm in a hurry.  What's the problem here?"  "I hear you're going to BU and that you're thinking about dropping out for a year."  "Well, yes, I'm thinking about it."  He said, "I hear you're having some trouble with your tuition, not only with your book, with your books and your living expenses, and what are you dropping out for?"  I said, "Well 'cause I can't afford to go to school and study and do that at the same time."  Looked at me, goes in his pocket, hands me an envelope.  I said, what is this cracker doing?  Look at the envelope.  He says, "Open it."  I open it (gesture), it was a check for all my books and my room for two years.
Speaker 2: From, from--
Speaker 1: Dr. Hall--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) personal check.  I looked at him I, I, see, when you hate white folks and he does that, it confuses you a little bit.  And so I, I was speechless, and I said, "Well, thank--." "Okay, you can go, you can go." Those two people saved my life.  But I come back to Poughkeepsie [New York] to work for my tuition for Dutchess--for, for BU, I'd be there now.  He knew that.  Saved my life.
Speaker 2: So this is just before high school graduation?  This is--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: This is, right at your senior year in high school [Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School, Hyde Park, New York] I guess.
Speaker 1: No, this is my first year at Boston University (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, first year, oh, first year, okay.
Speaker 1: I, I, I'd come back home--
Speaker 2: Oh, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: --and I was gonna drop out for two years and make some money, then go back to Boston University.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I never would have made it back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I would have been on the street.  And, and, and I--now I know that.
Speaker 2: This was the, 1960, '59 [1959] or '60 [1960], I guess.
Speaker 1: That was the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: 'Cause you, you would have came out in '59 [1959] then--
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: --of high school, you came out in '59 [1959]?
Speaker 1: Oh, man.
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm sorry, '61 [1961] 'cause you were born in '43 [1943], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, '61 [1961] you would have come out at--
Speaker 1: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so, right, '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that.
Story_ID: 485935
Speaker 1: What were you majoring in in college?
Speaker 2: In those days you, you, you, you di- you did not make choices; your parents made choices for you. And my father [William Duke, Sr.] always said, "You're not gonna be a bum; you're gonna, you're gonna be a doctor."  'Cause my mother, my mother had a fifth grade education, my father had, mother had fourth grade, my father had fifth grade education.  They knew a lack of education would have--so they, they insisted that you went to school.  "You're going to be a doctor."  I said, "Why?"  "Because, you know, you gotta make money, be successful, raise your family."  I said, "Okay."  So I took courses in biology, and anatomy and physiology cutting up squalus acanthias in f- in cats, being in--home with (unclear) smell in my room.  It was, it was, it was the worst, I, I had no interest in it, and it was the worst thing.  So once they saw that, they said, "Well, you like writing so much, you're going to be an English teacher," so I majored in English.  And then by happenchance, Ms. Constance Kuene [ph.] saw me, she said, "I'm doing a play called 'The Emperor Jones' [Eugene O'Neill] and you're big, I want you to play Emperor Jones."  I'd never been to a play in my life. So I played Emperor Jones.  Wow.  Something hit, something, hm, this is my second year in college, my junior college.  And once I got that bug, you know, it felt, I felt something, but I didn't have the courage to follow it through because it was not practical.  So I got a scholarship to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], Martin Luther King Scholarship [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Scholarship], I went there for English.  And I'd fallen asleep for the third time in my Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer] class, Old English, and the teacher kicked me out.
Speaker 1: Okay so, I'm sorry, it says they had a Dr. King Scholarship in the, at Boston U.  This is like while he was still alive, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is around the time he won the Nobel Prize [Nobel Peace Prize], I guess, '64 [1964] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all right.  So, you, you fell asleep in the class and they kicked you out?
Speaker 2: My Chaucer class.
Speaker 1: Chaucer.
Speaker 2: Old English--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --for the third time.  He had warned me twice.  I used to snore, too, so he said, "Get out, and don't come back."  I always wanted to, I, I always dreamed about it.  I said, "Man, that, that--." My roommate is Earl Hicks [ph.].  "Oh, man, I, I think that I did it, man, I like that but, you know, but my parents said--." He said, "Man, grow up, man.  What are you gonna do with your life?  Do what you wanna do."  So [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, Lloyd Richards was, at that time, the first black director on Broadway, he was teaching at BU, and he had done 'A Raisin in the Sun' on Broadway, Lorraine Hansberry's 'A Raisin in the Sun.'  So he, (unclear) said, "Go audition, man, what do you got to lose?"  I went up there and auditioned, and sure enough, got in.  Next semester, I was dancing around in tights.
Story_ID: 485936
Speaker 1: You auditioned for [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards.  Now, what was Lloyd Richards like in those days?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pensive, just, he's, he's (pause) probably the most understated, focused people I've ever met in my life.  When I say focused, I mean, you know those, the, the still, the focus of stillness, I mean, totally observant.  He didn't, he didn't, he never talked very much and, and he, he's another person that saved my life.  From that audition--I got into BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], he was one of my teachers at BU, and he taught directing and acting.  And from there, I followed him to NYU School of the Arts [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York]. It was the first year the school was open, and I got in there, I followed him there.  After I graduated from NYU School of the Arts, he gave my first job at the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] in 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward].  After 'Day of Absence,' I floundered in New York [New York] for a few years.  He had faith in me and he said, "I'm going out to Los Angeles [California] to direct a film called 'Gold Watch' ['The Gold Watch'] with PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  I need an assistant.  I want you to come with me."  He didn't need an assistant, he just believed in me.  I came out, Los Angeles, got an apartment, stayed in L.A., and he went back.  He says, "You know something?  You should stay; I think you got a future here."  I said, "I don't know, Lloyd."  He said, "Just try it for a few months."  Got an apport- appointment, started auditioning through an agency in Los Angeles, got a job.  I used to call him and tell him--I'm talking about up until a year or two before he even died, he died a couple a years ago.  He was a very intro- you know, just very--didn't like emotions, doesn't like emotion, so I would say, "Hey, Lloyd."  "Oh, how you doing Bill [HistoryMaker Bill Duke]?"  "Hey, Lloyd, I love you."  "Hey, well, yeah, yeah," (laughter).  "Yeah, okay, yeah, well, take care, take care."  I was calling him to tell him I loved him because of what he had done.  He didn't have to do any of that, but because he--he was a special, special human being.
Story_ID: 485937
Speaker 1: I wanna take you back I mean to, I guess, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], I guess.  What--when you were there, were there very many other black--any--hardly any other black people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: --any other black--? No. Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe, I think, at the most, if I can remember, seven or eight, nine, ten out of the entire class of the School of the Arts [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Are there any other people in the School of the Arts we would--whose names we'd know now?
Speaker 2: Israel Hicks is a very well--he--I think he taught at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for a long time, he's also still directing plays and stuff like that. Great teacher, great director, Israel Hicks.  I can't remember anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but you got out of there all right.  I mean how were your grades?  You--did you have good grades in college?
Speaker 2: They were well enough to get into the NYU School of the Arts.  I wasn't an A student, I think a B, B plus. But it, you know, it was connected to stuff that I had a natural propensity for.  I mean, I mean, I always thought in terms of images anyway, you know, and oh (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you--when you were coming al- up, did you, did you get chance to see many movies or, you know, movies and television a lot?  You know, 'cause you were talking about how strict your parents [Ethel Douglas Duke and William Duke, Sr.] were, and how much time you spent in church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Poughkeepsie, New York].  Did you get a chance to really, you know, engage in popular culture, like music, movies, TV, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you something that's really interesting.  Not really--my parents were pretty poor, and s- we couldn't afford to go to movies we wanted to go to, I had gone to a couple from time to time.  But my father was a very ingenious man. He--to make up for it, he would take us on street, the st- street movies every single Saturday 'cause he couldn't afford to go into a movie house.  So, my mother bought some popcorn, we'd sit in the car, and we'd eat the popcorn, and my father would say, as people were passing, "Look at that man."  Says, "Yeah."  "What do you think he does for a living?"  Said, "Dad, I (unclear)--."  "Look at his shoes, look at the--did you see that hole in his jacket?  How much money you think he makes a week?"  "We don't know, Daddy."  "Look at that lady. How old do you think she is?"  So, so it was his way of--he couldn't afford to take us to the movies, but we were seeing movies of life.
Speaker 1: So you called 'em street movies, you just said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --street movies.
Speaker 1: It's, this is interesting.  Now, this, this morning we were talking about [HistoryMaker] Antwone Fisher, and we spent a lot of time talking about how you read people, you know.  He became very skilled at reading people by living on the street and such, but here you are, and your father's giving you an exercise--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on reading other people.
Speaker 2: I didn't know--at the time, we didn't know that.  Now, I'm not saying I knew it, but as I grew older, one of the reasons I think my directing skills flourished is because of human observation that he taught us through observation at that time.
Story_ID: 485938
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite movie or television show when you finally, you know, did see, or did any, any one of 'em make an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Television I would say 'Superman' ['Adventures of Superman'].  Movie, although it scared the heck out of us, I think it was 'Psycho' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's considered a masterpiece of directing, though, you know, in terms of--
Speaker 2: 'Psycho' was--it was a great movie for its timing, in terms of what it did and, and how it was done.  It was, it was brilliant.  Hitchcock [Alfred Hitchcock], well, Hitchcock was a great director in his own way, very, very wonderful director.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you listen to a lot of radio at home?  You said your parents [Ethel Douglas Duke and William Duke, Sr.] liked to dance and everything.  Was there music in the house a lot, or--?
Speaker 2: Sometimes yes. A lot of religious music, and dancing to, you know--my god, who was out in those days?  I can't remember even, but, you know, the--I guess--I don't know, those early groups, you know.  But we had, we had the first television in our neighborhood [in Poughkeepsie, New York], and a lot of that stopped soon as television came in.  It had this, it was a round screen, and it--we thought we were really great because it could make into a square screen, too.  If you just push a button, it became like square, but it was a round screen television.  Everybody used to come over our house and look at the programs and have food and stuff because we're the only ones that had a television in our neighborhood.  But a lot of the dancing stopped then because of television.  It was such a phenom- you couldn't believe it.  We said, we said, "How did they, how did they get in that little box?"  "No, they're not in the box, it's a trans--." We said, "What's a transmission?"  We thought they were--as kids, we thought they were actually living in the box.  We used to knock on it and see if they would wake up and come out, and--we didn't know any better.  It was a, it was a phenom- it was a, it was a phenomenal thing, a TV.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite family show that--?
Speaker 2: 'Ozzie and Harriet' ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet'].  Used to watch the Arthur Godfrey show ['Arthur Godfrey and His Friends'] that was a talent show, Arthur Godfrey.  Ted Mack's 'Original Amateur Hour' ['The Original Amateur Hour'], we used to watch that.  What else?
Speaker 1: 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show']?  Was that--was he--
Speaker 2: 'Ed Sullivan'--that was big.  'Ed Sullivan' was a big show for us.  Oh, oh, what's his name--the ukulele?  Was that Arthur Godfrey?
Speaker 1: Arthur Godfrey played the ukulele (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Godfrey, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, oh, 'The Millionaire.'
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: That was a big show.  Every day, week, somebody would win a million dollars and you see what happened to their lives after they win the money, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think in those days, I guess--do you remember 'The Nat King Cole Show'?  He had, he had one briefly, but--I think it ran (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember seeing that so much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it didn't stay on--
Speaker 2: 'Amos 'n' Andy.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was one of my favorite shows; we used to laugh.  'Amos 'n' Andy.' Yeah, I remember that one.
Story_ID: 485939
Speaker 1: Tisch School for the Arts [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York].  Now, was it, was that--was the school new when you started?
Speaker 2: The first year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, this is the school--Spike Lee graduated from Tisch School, I believe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No, he didn't?
Speaker 2: No.  Tisch School of the Arts was--there's two divisions: there was the theater division, which I was in, and the film division, which Spike was in.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So--but he did come out of that--the film division of that?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: He came out of the film division of that school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you're not studying film at this time at all--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --you're studying just--
Speaker 2: --theater--
Speaker 1: --theater.
Speaker 2: --acting, directing, writing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, had you--well, through Dr. Richards' [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], had you heard about the Negro Ensemble Company and the work of Amiri Baraka and other people in town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're right next door.  The school was here, and NEC was one block up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one block.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you spend a lot of time over there?  You know--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say a lot of time, but we went to the shows there, and they had these playwriting competitions, and so I wrote a play, and I directed and produced it, and put actors in it and it's over there. After Lloyd had gotten me, you know, a job over there, so I spent as much time as I could over there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were--would you consider yourself part of the, the black theater movement, or Black Arts Movement in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, (pause) that's kind of a big title.  I mean I was directing plays and producing plays, and I was at Gene Frankel's workshop [Gene Frankel Theatre and Film Workshop, New York, New York], and at the Negro Ensemble Company, and Ellen Stewart's [La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club, New York, New York], different places producing, directing, writing. Other people's plays, too, so I, I, I, I, I think that--oh, Joseph Papp, Public Theater [The Public Theater, New York, New York], directed something there with the great Arthur Burghardt and other people.
Speaker 1: Arthur Burghardt, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sam, Sam, Sam Jackson's [Samuel L. Jackson] wife [LaTanya Richardson]--it's like, it was an incredible time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Arthur Burghardt was famous for doing his impression of Frederick Douglass, you know--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on 'Tony Brown's Journal,' yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  He was a great actor; he's still, he's still around.  And he also was on 'One Life to Live,' or one of those shows, where he played a doctor. I forgot--it's one of the soap operas.
Speaker 1: So, so, when you went--was Woodie King--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr., yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the New Lafayette Theater [sic. New Federal Theatre, New York, New York] and all that, yeah--
Speaker 2: Lafayette Theater, pioneer.  I worked for him, too.  I directed something down here for Woodie. Woodie's still around.  He and I still talk sometimes.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Barbara Ann Teer just passed.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a great one.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. So these are all peop- I mean the themes of the plays and what was going on in those days I guess--especially around '68 [1968], is real, real, real nationalist tone to, to the work--
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was, we were dealing with, with themes and ideas that we faced as a people at that time, from racism to oppression, to our own identity, finding our own identity, from militancy to--I think they're called toms and pacifists and politics, a lot of stuff.  And enthusiastic, passionate audience. I mean, real passion, real powerful. I mean people would stand up and say something if, if they didn't agree with it in the theater.
Speaker 1: And forums after the shows, did you participate in those with--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Question and answer periods after the shows.  It was really a spectacular time, it really was, creatively speaking.
Story_ID: 485940
Speaker 1: You received an award from AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.], I believe at--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) some point, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's Hazel Joan Bryant I think, who is still alive [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Audience Development Committee--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's--stood for that?  Yeah.  Stood for Audience Development Committee.  Yeah, in '74 [1974], I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for 'Unfinished Women' ['Unfinished Women Cry in No Man's Land While a Bird Dies in a Gilded Cage,' Aishah Rahman] I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Joe Papp's theater [The Public Theater, New York, New York] was (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you were in 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' in '71 [1971] with [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Of course, 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward] you know.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A, a revival of 'Day of Absence' 'cause it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --first was done, I think, in '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], yeah.  So, all this happens before you go to, to Los Angeles [California] with, with [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, we had you--you were already out there and I made you backtrack, so now let's put you back in Los Angeles.  And what, what happened with Lloyd Richards in Los Angeles?  You were his assistant on a project?
Speaker 2: His assistant on a film called 'Gold Watch' ['The Gold Watch'] at the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  He did another piece over there, I was his assistant.  He left, I still stayed at PBS and worked a little bit, and then I looked for work and couldn't find work, and I started auditioning, and I got audition in--I got a part, I think it was 'Sergeant Matlovich vs. the U.S. Navy' [sic. 'Sergeant Matlovich vs. the U.S. Air Force'].  It's about a homosexual captain who came out, and the Navy [sic. U.S. Air Force] fought it, and I was like a--I think I played an attorney, I forgot what part I played.  And after that I stayed, and Michael Schultz [HistoryMaker Michael A. Schultz] was a friend of mine in Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]--great director, by the way. He was making a movie called the 'Car Wash,' and he cast me as the militant Abdullah.  And it was Richard Pryor, the Pointer Sisters, Ivan Dixon, Franklyn Ajaye, just won- Henry Kingi--just (laughter) wonderful, wonderful cast.
Speaker 1: This was all-star (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) George Carlin, George Carlin was in the film, and so was Danny DeVito.  Danny DeVito played the guy who owned the taco stand across the street from the, from the, from the car wash. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it always looked like the film was a lot of fun to make from the--yeah.
Speaker 2: It was incredible.  The great Jimmy Spinks [James Spinks] who passed.
Speaker 1: Right, right--from Chicago [Illinois], I know him--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, great man.
Speaker 1: He, he made a lot of--he would always, you know he was known as Jimmy "Car Wash" Spinks after the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Unfortunately, he didn't have a lot of other roles.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but how--which, which raises the question how tough was it to make it in Hollywood in those days?  I mean--and how did you do financially?  I mean what was your general condition?  Were you like living from day-to-day, or were you doing okay, or what, what was going on?
Speaker 2: It was living from day-to-day.  You'd work--and then--for two or three weeks, then you wouldn't work for six months to a year. So I, I, sort of had my--I, I had two--I had a master's degree, and so that helped me be a teacher, and so I sold my acting classes, and so people used to pay for my acting class, and I'd make money to pay my bills like that.
Speaker 1: How did you like the West Coast versus, you know, back East (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Strange.
Speaker 1: Was it?
Speaker 2: I loved the weather.  My first Christmas with a friend of mine's house, and we were having Christmas dinner--they lived in an apartment on the fifty-sixth floor. I looked down out the window, and it's Christmas Day, and this big Santa Claus with reindeers, right, is by a pool, and people are swimming in the pool (laughter).  I said, what's wrong with this picture?  'Cause it was, it was so strange, I mean, you know, it's like--I couldn't get it in my mind, you know?  But I loved, I loved everything out here until my first earthquake. And the first earthquake came, I said, what in the name of God--'cause it--so I, I ran outside 'cause I thought the building was shaking--no, the earth was shaking. And that's--made you re-think (unclear) things a little bit.
Speaker 1: Did you think about leaving?
Speaker 2: Yes, didn't like it at all.  No control over it, but business was here, so I stayed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you, did you get many roles in the, in the, the--a lot of black popular culture movies in those days with Jim Brown, Fred Williamson, that sort of thing.  Did you, did you get many roles in those, those movies, those (unclear) movies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --not really.  I was teaching, I was writing and doing theater, and got some roles in television, 'Charlie's Angle- Angels' ['Charlie's Angels'] and--what was his name?  Telly Savalas was his--that was called--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Kojak.'
Speaker 2: 'Kojak.'
Speaker 1: There's a lot of--you--I mean I, I have a list here like a, like a filmography, I guess, of just a lot of television roles, you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know how fast they came, you know; I mean they look--it looks like a lot when you look at all of 'em, but, as you said, you might go a period of time when you work, and then you don't work for a long period of time. I mean--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yep.
Story_ID: 485941
Speaker 1: Now you were in 'Car Wash' in '76 [1976], and '79 [1979]--now, this is a--the way this is stated I don't understand.  Did, did you receive an award from the American Film Institute in '79 [1979] for something?
Speaker 2: I forgot what it was for--what was it for?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says like for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) American Film Institute?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, I--
Speaker 1: Best young director, or something like that, was that--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you--okay.
Speaker 2: I made a film called 'The Hero.'
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, 'cause the way it's stated in here, it's a lifetime achievement.  I don't see how it could be lifetime achievement for (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No (laughter).
Speaker 1: --for first young director, but--. Okay, all right. 'The Hero.' Now, what was 'The Hero' about?
Speaker 2: It's about a, a Greek man who owned a little store. All, all he had was his cat; lonely, his wife had died. And one day this kid comes in, and he tries to rob the store. And the man says, "No, you're, you're ruining your life."  And the kid comes around and tries to hit him, and they struggle a little bit and the gun accidentally goes off and shoots the kid, and the kid dies.  Cops come, he says, "Oh, my God, I killed some--." Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  Two or three days pass, and the myth in the neighborhood grows and says "(Unclear) he just stood up to the enemy and he killed this--he killed him, he didn't take it."  And so all the older women come and bring him gifts, and the men come and say, "Great stuff, man, and (unclear)."  He becomes the hero of the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now this was a time in the country when the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration was--the message was law and order, I know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: --and there was a lot of law and order rhetoric.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so--comes in and--dah, dah, dah.  And for--he starts getting, "Wow," believing it, "I'm a hero."  "Yes, you're right."  "I'm the hero."  And so on, and so on, you know?  So, a few weeks pass, a month passes, he's on top.  Then another store is robbed two or three blocks away, except this time the man shot the guy with a shotgun and blew him away.  So everybody goes up to that store and say, "Oh, Mr. So-and-So, you're a--." And he's left alone. He's back with his cat, but he's--now he's used to having that attention, he's gotta get it back.  So, one day he goes to his store and a young man comes in and he says--the young man says, "I'd like to get some cold cuts."  He says, "How much?"  "A pound."  He says, "I'll be right back."  And he opens the cash register drawer, and he goes in the back, he looks through the window to see if--what the kid's gonna do.  And he watches and he watches, and the kid's looking around, and he's not coming out with the cold cuts.  He says, "How are my cold cuts coming?"  No answer, no answer.  The kid looks at the money, takes it, and he closes the cash register, "I gotta leave now, and you know you left your cash register drawer open."  And he starts heading out the door. And he comes--our guy comes out and says, "Halt! Halt! Thief!" Bang! bang! Shoots him in the back, kid falls into the street. He says, "I got another one! I got another one!" But the kid's grandmother is there; she had sent him in the store for the cold cuts.  The grandmother's holding him.  Said, "What have you done to my son?  What have you done to my son?"  It ends like that. It's called 'The Hero.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's something to make people think about some of the rhetoric--the, the popular rhetoric of the day.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) That was the intent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who wrote the piece?
Speaker 2: Oh, a wonderful guy, but I forgot his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember who was in it--who starred in it, or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  I just, I just thought you might remember.
Speaker 2: He became a friend of mine--of mine and my family, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What was his name?  I forgot.  He died.  Wonderful actor, wonderful.
Story_ID: 485942
Speaker 1: In '80 [1980], you co-starred with Richard Gere in 'American Gigolo.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was, I know, a big, mainstream movie, lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big, big.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: John Travolta was supposed to star in it.  And I, I was with his manager, Travolta's manager, but Travolta didn't wanna do it, and so Richard Gere did it, so I co-starred with Richard Gere in the movie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he got a chance to be the gigolo, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any, any, any stories about that, or any thoughts about that movie?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One of the most amazing things that happened--.  Well, first of all, just the professionalism of Gere and how precise he is and stuff, that was great, and--what was the director's name?
Speaker 1: Let's see.  I don't have a note about him.
Speaker 2: One of the great directors--Schrafer, Schrider, Schraf- he's (unclear) one of my favorite actors.  He also did--
Speaker 1: Paul Schrader?
Speaker 2: Paul Schrader.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: He also made one of my favorite movies called 'Blue Collar'--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --with Richard Pryor and Yaphet Kotto.  Remember that movie?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was an incredible movie.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He had a lot of great movies anyway, but watching him direct was wonderful. But, Jophery Brown was my stunt double--great guy, been around for years.  So when I fell off the balcony, he had to take the fall from like, I mean there were six or seven stories, into a bag.  When he first fell, the first fall, the wind was blowing and it blew him into the last balcony, so when he (unclear) his entire arm was split open, bleeding, and the medics were saying, "You gotta go to the hospital! You gotta go to the hospital!"  And they had a tourniquet and things.  He says, "No, no. I gotta jump again, I gotta jump again." 'Cause he knew if he didn't jump again, he'd never jump ever again. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Things were that tenuous for the job in Hollywood, that's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Well, and himself.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: See, other words, with an injury like that, if you don't jump right away--
Speaker 1: You won't have the courage--
Speaker 2: --you won't have the courage to do it again.  And I watched that, I said, my God.  So he bandaged his arm up, the blood was coming out, they put the jacket on him.  Said, "Ready?"  (Snaps fingers) Jumped again, and then he went to the hospital (laughter).  I was (laughter)--it was amazing.
Story_ID: 485943
Speaker 1: Here's a project in 1980 that--you know, I wasn't aware of this and I, I guess maybe I wasn't watching TV in those days, but a project called 'Kings of the Hill' [sic. 'King of the Hill'] produced by Norman Lear, about a black family in the--
Speaker 2: No, it was--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not called 'Kings of the Hill,' it was called--(makes sounds).
Speaker 1: It was based on Alex Haley's--
Speaker 2: 'Palmerstown, U.S.A.'
Speaker 1: 'Palmerstown, U.S.A.,' okay.
Speaker 2: Based on the kinds of--it was a, it was a Haley tat- Norman Lear and Alex Haley came together and put that project together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's got a black family and a white family in the South at the time.  It's one of my favorite projects, my favorite roles ever. I played the father [Luther Freeman], Jonelle- Jonelle Allen played my wife [Bessie Freeman]. Great kids, Beeson Carroll played the father [W.D. Hall] of the white family.  It's really a good show, went on for a couple a seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when my whole life changed after that.
Speaker 1: How so?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I was starring in a show, I mean everybody knew who I was, and great role, making a lot of money, bought a Lloyd Wright [Frank Lloyd Wright] house up in the Hills [Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles, California], and thought I'd made it, man. I'm, I'm, I'm on top, you know.  Show's stayed on for two seasons. I didn't work for two years. They call it TV-Q.  My TV-Q was too high; too many people knew who I was, so I couldn't get work in feature films and stuff.
Speaker 1: TV-Q, like TV--like IQ or something or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know what it meant.
Speaker 1: Your TV-Q--too, too much exposure?
Speaker 2: Too much exposure.  And so I went away, I was depressed, and I always wanted to direct, but I felt intimidated by the equipment and the camera, so I went away for--to a meditation retreat 'cause I'd been doing meditat- transcendental meditation since the '70s [1970s].  That's--meditation saved my life.  And so I was way--on retreat up in Napa Valley [California], my agent called and he says, "Come back! Come back!  David Jacobs at 'Knots Landing' wants to talk to you about possibly doing an episode."  I come up--I come from meditation, I fly back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], man, I--my car--next--that Monday I'm in Dave Jacobs' office and he says, "Well, you know, Bill [HistoryMaker Bill Duke], I wanna offer you an episode in 'Knots Landing.'"  I said, "Wow!"  I called my mother [Ethel Douglas Duke], father [William Duke, Sr.], everybody, man. 'Cause after I did 'The Hero,' I got awards for it, but I couldn't get a job.  People would give me a second job, but (unclear) my first one, so I was really frustrated, that's why I went away.  So, I was in prep, man, the prep went well.  The line producer came to me the last night of prep and said, "Bill, great prep, man. You're ready to shoot on Monday, but--," Joe Wallenstein [Joseph B. Wallenstein] was his name. "But, you know, we know you're gonna be great 'cause they could tell from your reel."  I said, "What reel?"  "Well, the reel that, you know, the shows you've done."  I said, "I--this is my first show."  He said, "Well, wait a minute."  He goes in Dave Jacobs' office.  David Jacobs had mixed up my boxes with somebody else's box.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Who did they get you mixed up with?
Speaker 2: Some other director--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I don't know who it was.  I said, "No, I'd only done the one film at AFI [American Film Institute]."  They said, "Oh, god."  And so, the first three days, they followed me around like--on my back.  After that, they left me alone, asked me to come back and do multiple episodes.
Story_ID: 485944
Speaker 1: We were talking about directing 'Knots Landing' I think in '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --getting your first directorial job in TV.  And so you directed--now, those are all similar shows--'Knots Landing,' 'Falcon Crest,' 'Flamingo Road,' produced by Lorimar [Lorimar Productions, Inc.]--stars, you know, I remember Morgan Fairchild, and that's when--
Speaker 2: What's his name--Morgan, Morgan Fairchild, Jane Wyman--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the--yeah.  Those are like nighttime soap operas.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's what they were calling 'em.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--yeah.  So, so that's how you cut your director's teeth.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So in eighty--'84 [1984]--now this, to me--now, I don't wanna skip over anything impor- really important, but this next pro- "The Killing Floor" ['American Playhouse'] in 1984.
Speaker 2: Yes, my first feature film [sic.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean it made a tremendous impact on people, people talked about it.  I remember discussing it with other people, now especially in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause it was about the stockyards, and I was living in Chicago at the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was shot in Chicago.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Well tell us about that.  How did that project come about?
Speaker 2: Elsa Rassbach, I think her name was, came to me with the project.  Yeah, it was my--and--it was a project that dealt with the unionization of the s- of the stockyards in the early 1900s, and it was--it w- it dealt with racial issues, it dealt with union issues, issues of equality, people fighting for basic human rights. And the great Moses Gunn and Alfre Woodard, and wonderful people just--you know, I got a great cast together, and shot in Chicago for--and actually shot on the--well, we shot on the butcher--what do you call 'em now?  The killing floor, the--
Speaker 1: In the stockyards?
Speaker 2: No, stockyards, but the butcher--the--slaughterhouse, and studied the whole science of that, and stopped eating meat shortly after that. But it dealt with one man attempting to just do the right thing, and an environment that was hostile to him doing that.  He could have capitulated, but he decided he didn't, and the price he paid for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was--says it was one of seven films chosen for Critics' Week at the Cannes Film Festival [Cannes, Frances] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in 1985.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you're getting some serious recognition now for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --directorial, you know, directorial abilities.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485945
Speaker 1: After that ['The Killing Floor'], 'A Raisin in the Sun' I think is the next big project.
Speaker 2: At PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, Esther Rolle--just some wonderful people in that one, I just--it was like homage to my mentor, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards. He, he, he directed that--the first black director on Broadway for a drama, and he directed that Lorraine Hansberry 'A Raisin in the Sun' on Broadway, with Sidney Poitier.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--and as we speak, they--a version of it was just completed that sh- that starred Sean Combs [P. Diddy] and some other people.
Speaker 2: That was a couple a years ago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just--yeah.  So, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, seems like a period classic, I guess, in some ways for people.
Speaker 2: It was a classic; it's a wonderful piece, just--oh, man, it just did so--it's a wonderful piece, I love it.  Great writer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories related to that production that you can--?
Speaker 2: Well, just the ultimate professionals, I mean the actors, particularly Danny Glover, just a totally wonderful spirit, actor, disciplinarian, I mean he's just, he's a guy who takes the work seriously, and you can see it.  We were friends for many years.
Story_ID: 485946
Speaker 1: Now, in eighty f- also in '85 [1985], you were featured in a Arnold Schwarzenegger film called 'Commando'--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which I saw on a Saturday--I mean, you know, on a weekday afternoon with my ex-wife.  Something happened in school, she didn't have to teach, and we went to the movies--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Rae Dawn Chong, Arnold Schwarzenegger--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: --and there you were, and I said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke's directing now, what's he doing in--?" (Laughter) But there you were.
Speaker 2: Right.  I did both acting and directing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, there you were.  And this--one of, I guess, a couple of--or maybe three films made with Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was actually two, I think--that one and, and Com- 'Predator' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'Predator'?
Speaker 2: --'Predator,' 'Predator.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Just two?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Well, how was that?  I mean you, you were--played, I think, one of his friends, right?  Another--
Speaker 2: 'Predator'?
Speaker 1: No, in 'Commando.'
Speaker 2: No, I was his adversary [Cooke].
Speaker 1: Oh, you were out to get him, okay, all right, 'cause it's been a long time (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ended up paying a bad price, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You don't win in those situations.
Speaker 1: They make you climb up to some high tower or something first--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --or a mountain peak, or--
Speaker 2: No, it's not that bad, but I--he and I had a fight and I was winning, and I fell and--back and impaled myself.  I told him that's the only reason that happened is because he was the star of the movie.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: In a real fight, I would have won.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  I'd like to think so, yeah.  But, you know, you know what they say the higher a villain runs, you know, in a movie, you know he's about to (laughter) die as, as soon as he reaches a high peak or something.  They always run up rather than down.  Okay, so next--well, 'Predator' in '87 [1987], that's another Arnold Schwarzenegger piece.  And you're still directing during this time as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm doing, directing assignments from time to time, but mostly--also acting at that time.
Speaker 1: Is it more lucrative to act or direct?
Speaker 2: Depends on where you are at that time.  If you, if you, if you had a hit movie as an actor, acting--hit record director, directing--depends on wh- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: It's all about--so it's just a business, you know, it's just wherever, wherever your agents can demand or command, based upon your performance at the box office. Not, not as an artist, box office.
Speaker 1: So these movies though, 'Commando' and 'Predator' were--I know 'Commando' did well at the box office--
Speaker 2: Very well.
Speaker 1: --but 'Predator' was big.
Speaker 2: Blew up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you a funny story that not pe- not many people know about this.  The predator that you saw, the creature, was not the original creature.  It was a much smaller creature, which had much more athletic skills and so on, and appeared and disappeared, and that kind of thing.  It--there were visual effects that were placed on the body so the actor who did this part had to wear a felt suit, and be on stilts and so on, and go in trees, and all that stuff.  And it was like a hundred and some degrees with humidity--(unclear) and Puerto Vallarta [Mexico], where we were making the film.  And so the actor who was playing the role of the original predator had passed out twice because he was dehydrated and just--. So Joel Silver came over to him one day and says, "Let me tell you something. We have a schedule to make here. Nothing personal, but if you pass out again, I'm firing you."  The guy says, "I wasn't passing out on purpose (unclear)."  "If you pass out again, you're fired."  Week goes by, week and a half goes by, (laughter) sure enough, guy's doing some flip--bam.  Falls out, passes out, Joel Silver goes over to him, "You're fired."  That actor was Jean-Claude Van Damme.
Speaker 1: Gee whiz, so he goes on to become a martial arts star, his own, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His first, his first movie in this country, really, of any significance, and--
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: True story.
Story_ID: 485947
Speaker 1: Now, the next big project--now, now this is a project that has a lot of intellectual and, and political significance for the black community.  "The Meeting" ['American Playhouse'] written by Jeff Stetson--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who's from the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] I believe--
Speaker 2: Yes, great writer.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you, you directed the television version of that, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was a play originally, and then I did the TV version for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].
Speaker 1: I think Dick--
Speaker 2: Anthony Williams [Dick Anthony Williams].
Speaker 1: Anthony Williams, yeah.
Speaker 2: And the great Paul Benjamin--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and the other actor, I forgot his name--I think--(unclear) the other actor, the other star of it--Jason [Jason Bernard]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can see him, but I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: Wonderful actor--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --he played Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I really enjoyed that piece a lot, it was one of my favorite pieces of all time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's--
Speaker 2: I really enjoyed that.  I have to get that from you when I, when you leave, I forgot a lot of stuff I've done.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: If I can get the copy of that, I'd appreciate it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay.  Now, I guess it brings us to 'A Rage in Harlem.'  This is 1990.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is a, a movie that was the precursor to the, the hit of the last year, 'American Gangster' with Denzel [Denzel Washington], it's kind of, was a precursor because it told the story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, that was 'Hoodlum.'   No, 'Hoodlum' was that.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  You're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm thinking about 'Hoodlum.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'A Rage in Harlem' was a Chester Himes piece.
Speaker 2: Chester Himes novel--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the great Chester Himes, and Forest Whitaker, Robin Givens.  What's the dancer's name?  Wonderful--
Speaker 1: Oh, Gregory Hines?
Speaker 2: Gregory Hines, [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, Badja Djola, wonderful actors (laughter).  Loved--I just loved that piece.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not because I just directed, but because of the experience of it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: John Toles-Bey.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's from Chicago [Illinois], I've known John Toles--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 485948
Speaker 1: 'Deep Cover' I guess would be the next one--'92 [1992].
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Now, that was a big hit, and it had a big song ['Deep Cover']--Snoop, Snoop Doggy Dogg [Snoop Dogg]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --did, did the song on BET [Black Entertainment Television] for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and Dr. Dre.
Speaker 1: Right, and Dr. Dre, right.  And so people knew the song before the movie even came out.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, "If you don't stop," "If you don't quit," you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, I used to admonish my kids with that, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --if you don't stop (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Laurence Fishburne--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --Jeff Goldblum.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Wonderful actors.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking that--correct me if I'm wrong.  Was Tracy Camilla Johns in this? The lady that played in 'She's Gotta Have It'?  Is she in, did she have a role in this?  It wasn't a big role.  But I think that's the last time I saw her in a movie, I think.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I may have it wrong, but--then you directed some--well, well, tell us about--now, 'Deep Cover' was a box office hit--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, especially in the black community, but it had a wider appeal--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) than just the black community.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I remember that.  So, how did it really do at the box office?  Was it--
Speaker 2: I think it did really well at the box office, and people loved the movie and what it was about, and so it was the first of its time in terms of the kind of subject matter and the style, and it was a very stylized piece.  My--one of my composers that I worked with for years, Michel Colombier, which--God rest his soul, passed now, but helped make the music really work for that, and I just had--you know.  Bojan Bazelli was my director of photography. It was a special piece and special effort. It was New Line [New Line Cinema] at the time.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Bob Shaye [Robert Shaye] and the guys over there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now New Line was kind of new on the scene then, right?
Speaker 2: Relatively.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I, I remember--you know I'm no film critic, but I would think that--I mean I was impressed by the atmosphere of it.  It was different from anything else you've e- the other thing is it was more realistic like--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this was, this was a real story, but it was--had a lot of ambience and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved that movie, and it's a lot, a lot to say, based on a book by a DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] agent who actually lived through that, a lot of it.
Story_ID: 485949
Speaker 1: I haven't asked this question up until now, but do you--but this is such an arts- artsy kind of to look at movie ['Deep Cover'].  Do, do you have directors that you idolize, or whose work you, you are inspired by that you, you know--?
Speaker 2: There's so many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Frank Capra's my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Antonioni [Michelangelo Antonioni]; Hitchcock [Alfred Hitchcock].  My favorite movie is 'Citizen Kane.' Fellini [Federico Fellini]; Japanese director (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Kurosawa [Akira Kurosawa]?
Speaker 2: Kurosawa.  Very stylistic, great chances visually.  A lot of different directors.  I mean I--mine is a con- (gesture) it's really a conglomerate of stealing from all of 'em (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and putting some of my stuff in there, too.
Speaker 1: But do, but do, do you have a directorial philosophy of your own that you, that you--I mean that you've--as such?
Speaker 2: Well, directing is really the, the science of two disciplines. One is vision.  (Unclear) see a script and, and, and from reading the pages, having a vision visually and a vision thematically that you can translate and communicate to like maybe a hundred people--heads of departments and actors, and all kinds of people that you have to relay this to clearly, succinctly. And it's just an idea, but you're--it's gonna be manifested on the screen based on what you think and feel, and your spirit.  That's the first science.  The second science is management. It's a very precise science 'cause it's the management of three things: time, people, and money.  And if you cannot manage time, people, and money--if you're a black director, particularly, you don't last long.  So combining those elements is what is mandatory for, I think, in my personal opinion, for a great director, to managing both of those things.  So a lot of directors who are really good imaginary people can't manage time, people, and money.
Speaker 1: I've heard stories about some of those, yeah.
Speaker 2: Can't do it; can't communicate their vision.  Then there are people who are great managers of time, people and money that cannot, in any way, communicate to people.  So, you see--you know what I'm saying?  It's--you gotta do both, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there's a story about Marlon Brando directing 'One-Eyed Jacks' where he, he--about three times as much film is shot than actually appeared on the screen (laughter), and--I don't know; they were very upset.  But he was a big star so they couldn't, you know--
Speaker 2: Get away with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, I, I respect the discipline, and I try to pass that on to people that I wor- that I teach, or whatever.  It's a discipline.
Story_ID: 485950
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a project where you, you were kind of like running over budget and had, you know, become kind of on edge about it?
Speaker 2: 'Sister Act 2' ['Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit'] we ran over budget, but it wasn't my fault.  'Hoodlum' ran over a little budget, but that wasn't my fault either, but I got blamed for it.  We didn't go over budget in 'Sister Act 2'--in 'Hoodlum,' in 'Hoodlum' we went over budget.  It was not my fault, but I got blamed for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you're a director, no matter what happens, it's your responsibility.
Speaker 1: So the buck stops at the director.
Speaker 2: The actor could be hanging out in a bar from--supposed to be on the set at seven A.M., and he's out in a bar from two o'clock in the morning to five in the afternoon, it's your fault. Actor could be irresponsible--it's your fault.  The studio could have hired an editor that has, that has no clue of what the film is really about, and you wanted to hire your editor.  They hire their editor, the picture comes out horrible--it's your fault (laughter).  That's the way it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a--is there any project that you worked on that you were really disappointed with the results (laughter)? And couldn't--?
Speaker 2: Not--to be honest with you and not--it's not ego, but all my films, I'm really proud of 'em.  I mean I like all my movies, I like everything I've ever done 'cause I'm such a, a disciplinarian, rigid type of, tenacious--I just go after it so tenaciously that it's, it's--I, I mean it's my vi- now, whether other people like it or not, that's different.  I can't, I can't say that people are gonna like what I do. But if something comes out of my editing room that's my final take on it, I'm happy with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wish I could have had more money to do a little better here, a little better there, more time to edit, better music or whatever, but there's not much that I've done that, directorially speaking, that I say, man, I don't like that at all. As an actor, it's a little different sometimes. Sometimes I just have to feed my face and do things that--nothing really horrible, but some stuff I look and say, (makes sound), I don't like that so much.
Speaker 1: So, so, part of your directorial philosophy has to do with reverberations of those days when you were cutting grass, right, I guess, you know--if you do it right the first time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now, now, now, now, now that you say it that way, yes.  Yeah, my father [William Duke, Sr.] comes back in the sense that--I'm pretty much a perfectionist.  It's not just--it can't just be kind of there.  It may not be s- a vision that you agree with or you like, but it's exactly what I wanted it to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you, do you like directing better than acting, or is there a--?
Speaker 2: Two to- two totally different disciplines that require similar kinds of commitments on certain levels, but they're not the same, and I appreciate at this age to be able to do either one of them.  But directing for me, there's something about getting a raw script to concept. It's just, it's just, it's just paper and, and, and you go through a process where it's on a screen, and it's actually manifested itself into a film, and people are responding to it.  There's something so incredibly wonderful about that. I can't explain it, it's just--. 'Cause when I go, when I, when I go to my screenings, I sit way in the back.  I don't want people to know I'm even there.  I just wanna see what the response is to the movie.  There's something about that that's really powerful to me.  The creative processing, bringing it to that point, and having maybe a hundred or more people involved in the process. There's something about that collaboration that's really exciting--
Story_ID: 485951
Speaker 1: --As an actor, it's a different kind of feeling. It's just--it's like writing.  I'm a writer, but I don't write much anymore; it's just like too isolated for me, you know?  If I get married, or I'm gonna be a writer again because I can--somebody's there, but writing is a desolate, desolate experience.  People don't understand, I don't think how--writing is like--just, just you and, as they say, the tabula rosa [sic. tabula rasa].  It's that blank piece of paper, and you're writing, and you go, what the hell?  What is that?  You try to make it better.  You don't, you don't even know if it's better; you feel it's better.  That's how acting is. Acting is like--[HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards used to say something like, it's falling into darkness backward; you just gotta trust. It's not because you're so bright or talented, but the degree of your research and preparation is important in the final analysis.  See, stage fright--they call it stage fright, which you've probably seen, is this (gesture).  You go on stage, and you're supposed to be John, but the actor is observing himself being John.  So who's onstage?  The actor and John.  The writer didn't write the, the, the part for Bill and John (laughter), he just wants John (laughter), so Bill has to surrender whatever he is to John.  That process of surrender is called trust, and if you cannot do that, you end up being a--kind of a mannequin-like version of John 'cause John's not there.  You watching John, or pretending to be John, is there.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, we still have like certain iconic actors, I guess, that people write for them to be them playing a role, you know, in a way.  I mean, I guess in the old days, like John Wayne really, you know, his parts were really written for a guy to--for John Wayne to be the, you know, the person, except for when he played Genghis Khan [in 'The Conqueror'] (laughter) (unclear) which didn't work out too well.  But they, you know, they kind of write 'em for him, you know, he's just (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well yeah.  And that--there's nothing wrong with that.  They're called personality actors, and that's okay, and I, you know, I don't put that down.  But the great actors of our time, the great actors of all time, you know, the great stage actors, the great--they play a spectrum of people from fathers to murderers, and every role they're in you believe it, you believe them. They have that facility, the ability to surrender to the craft in a way that's just phenomenal.
Story_ID: 485952
Speaker 1: Do you have favorite actors?  You know, either in a contemporary or the past that you really think were exceptional?
Speaker 2: Oh, I used to watch Laurence Olivier a lot. I like people like Yaphet Kotto, I like Charlize Theron when she did the--(makes sounds) what's it called, that film ['Monster']?
Speaker 1: Oh when she played the, the, the woman that murdered the people on the highway (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --oh. I think she was a monster, she was great in that movie.  I like some things that Denzel [Denzel Washington] has done. I like Sidney Poitier who is an underrated actor 'cause he's done some great stuff, and he played roles that were (unclear) just him.  He's done some stuff that was not so much him, too.  I liked De Niro [Robert De Niro] in the early years.  I think De Niro did the boxing movie--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Raging Bull.'
Speaker 2: 'Raging Bull,' I thought he was incredible in that movie.  I mean, I mean, he, he was really--. Marlon Brando--I loved Marlon Brando.  Bette Davis, I actually liked Bette Davis 'cause Bette Davis was not always her--one person, she played a lot of different kinds of things, and I believed her in everything she did. Jimmy Stewart [James Stewart], Jimmy Stewart's a really good actor.  I mean, 'Mr. Smith Goes to Washington' is one role. 'It's a Wonderful Life' it's another role.  Then he played darker roles, too, you know, as he got older.  You know those, those movies--those westerns he played in?  (Makes sound) He was hard, man.  He, he could play--he'd be cold blooded.  I mean it goes on.  I mean I, I just have a--some people which I admire their work, and there're some I'm not mentioning that I've forgotten.  I thought--Laurence Fishburne in his prime I thought was a wonderful actor--is, is still a good actor. Angela Bassett.  They, they did the thing together with--about--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I thought they both were brilliant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'What's Love Got to Do with It,' yeah.
Speaker 2: --they were brilliant in that movie.  Both of them were brilliant in that movie.  The, the guy now who I think is one of my favorites, Phillip Hayes Dean--no, that's--he played Capote, Capote, Truman Capote--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seymour Hoffman [Philip Seymour Hoffman].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Philip Seymour Hoffman, right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Hoffman--I think, I think Seymour Hoffman's an incredible actor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really wonderful actor.  So I, I, I have some favorites, you know, I--Johnny De- I think Johnny Depp's a good actor.  I mean I think Johnny Depps is a really good actor, a great actor.  Morgan Freeman's a wonderful actor.  I have some favorites, yeah.
Story_ID: 485953
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Wright's one of my favorite actors, and I hope to work with him someday.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ri- yeah.  I think you're right.  Well, let's see.  Now, you were involved--you, you appeared in 'Menace II Society'--I guess we, we can't name everything you were in but--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know. And in '54 [sic.] that's the, the brothers--the--now, I can't think of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hughes brothers [Allen Hughes and Albert Hughes]?
Speaker 2: No, 'Menace II Society.'  That wasn't the Hughes brothers, right?  That's the other brothers (unclear), the--
Speaker 1: What was that about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe it is the Hughes brothers.
Speaker 1: 'Menace II Society,' what's that about?  'Menace II Society.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a film about Los Angeles [California] gangs, wasn't it?  That, that was--I think that's the one.
Speaker 1: That's not the Hughes brothers?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe--
Speaker 1: I was in that, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you done f'ed up, don't you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the Hughes brothers.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right, Hughes brothers--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --all right.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--yeah.  Now, here's one.  Here's a project that I really know something about ['America's Dream'], is based on a short story by John Henrik Clarke, 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black.'
Speaker 1: I love that piece.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wesley Snipes and the actress [HistoryMaker Lorraine Toussaint]--I forgot her name, but she's a wonderful actress, too. Yeah, we did it in Texas.  I love that piece.
Speaker 2: It's based on a story that actually happened in Alabama, you know, in--
Speaker 1: I didn't know it was an actual story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it happened in Columbus, Georgia, actually but, yeah--Columbus, Georgia.  John Henrik Clarke wrote it based on his experience of actually painting a picture of Christ black as a kid--and all the trouble it caused with the black community, with the superintendent of schools and all that.
Speaker 1: I love that story.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Then 'Hoodlum' in '97 [1997].  Now, this is the one I was referring to before when I was talking about 'A Rage in Harlem,' I got 'em mixed up.  But this is the story of Bumpy Johnson--
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: --and shot in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We all knew it (laughter) in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --at least some us did.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But, well, tell us about that one.  I know you got again, Laurence Fishburne--
Speaker 1: Laurence Fishburne--(makes sound) help me here--Chi McBride, Vanessa Williams, Queen Latifah, Andy Garcia. T- what's his name?
Speaker 2: Got Tim Roth--
Speaker 1: Tim Roth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) playing Dutch Schultz, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean I, I, I--that was one of my--(makes sound) I loved it. I loved it, you know, it was like--such creative actors and brilliant actors.  We just had a good time, you know?
Speaker 2: Right.  And, as I mentioned before, the, the latest Denzel Washington vehicle 'American Gangster' was based on Frank Lucas, who was lieutenant for Bumpy Johnson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly right.
Speaker 2: --so it was a continuation of the story.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 485954
Speaker 1: You published a book called 'Black Light: The African American Hero' [Paul Carter Harrison, Danny Glover and Bill Duke].
Speaker 2: It's a collaboration between [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And now what were you trying to do in that book?
Speaker 2: Pray--pay homage to all the people who had made it possible for me to be here, all the sacrifices they had made, all the deaths, all the, the limbs that had been cut off, all of the--coming over on this middle passage. All the not being able to go in the same bathroom, at the same water fountain, standing up for who you were and are, and--so that we could be here talking now.
Speaker 1: So it was like a photo essay type of book, right?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's, it's photographs, but also it's writing about the history and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it's read at--that directors write history and stuff, but you, you see--you don't see yourself just as a director, I guess, in the generic sense, right?
Speaker 2: Well, directing--in order to direct successfully, I really think that you have to be dabbling in everything from writing to painting.  I mean directorially, you're creating composition, and it's moving motion pictures.  If you study the composition of still pictures, then you get an understanding of what balance is in a frame, and so you try your best to study the greatest painters of all time, which I tried to do, and to borrow from them in terms of understanding composition. 'Cause composition is not only where you place people, but composition also has to do with texture and color because someone that's way in the back can be the center of focus of the, of the frame if they have red on and everybody in the front has on white. You learn things from painting and sculpture and great writers from T.S. Eliot to, I mean to, name them, I mean you know.  You, you set yourself to a standard.  If you're, if you're your only standard it's kind of convoluted, but if your standard is to be as--if someone has set a mark for you and you say, I would like to be able to tell a story as well as Lorraine Hansberry or T.S. Eliot in his poetry, or whoever it is, that's, that's to me is part of it.
Story_ID: 485955
Speaker 1: You had to dig deep for this one.  Now, just tell me how this project came, came about.  The 'Deacons for Defense.'  This is a little-known story, but a powerful story from the Civil Rights Movement days.
Speaker 2: Right.  It was a Showtime project, and what fascinated me about the--was the fact that I didn't know anything about it.  I mean, you know, when the civil rights story was told to me, it was about, you know, really these cowering kind of black folks, you know, that were pacifistic, and kind of relied upon the good auspices of brave white folks to save us, you know.  No one ever told me these guys that came from World War II [WWII] and the Korean War, or whatever, with guns came (unclear) put their guns back, and they had tasted victory, and they had tasted what it meant to stand up for themselves and fight for themselves. And when the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], or racists, tried to threaten them on any level, they step in their face, said, "You know something, I'm going to shoot you" (laughter).  "I don't wanna shoot you. If you threaten my family, if you threaten this community that I live in, it's on."  So, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went from different places, you know, the Deacons for Defense [Deacons for Defense and Justice] were there to protect Dr. King, too, sometimes.  And I, I, I, I was so impressed by that I wanted to make a movie about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This group started in Louisiana.  It says here Earnest "Chilly Willy" Thomas--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and Frederick Douglass Kirkpatrick founded the group in November of 1964 to protect civil rights workers against the violence of the Klan.  And there was another group that came out of Bogalusa [Louisiana], you know, so, so what, what--did your film cover the whole history of the Deacons of Defense from--or, or--?
Speaker 2: No, not the entire history.  It d- it, it, it really dealt with an incident in a town, and it dealt with a man [Marcus Clay] just trying to stand up for his rights and his family, and was seen as Palin [Sarah Palin] and McCain [John McCain] call Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--uppity.  And as an example, they decided that they had to put him in his place. But the mistake they made was that they humiliated him in front of his daughter [Lucille Clay] and his son [Brooks Clay] and his wife [Rose Clay].  They took him to a bar and beat him almost half to death.  And he had been this, yes sir, yes sir, righteous black man who didn't step outta place, never broke a law, never been to jail, and everybody talked to him, and so he did all the right stuff.  In the final analysis, they still treat him like a nigger.  And when he realized that, he said, well, you know something?  If they're gonna treat me like that, I might as well do something to deserve it (laughter), and that's what he did.  Stood up for himself and his family, but also the community, and said, I will die now for what I believe in.  A true story.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did this project come to you?  Who--
Speaker 2: Showtime--
Speaker 1: Showtime.
Speaker 2: --brought it to me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So someone--
Speaker 2: --through my agency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Uh-huh.  And--I mean--well, I guess what I'm getting at further is like who, who generated this idea, you know--as--'cause it's such an obscure chapter in history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nick [Nick Grillo], Nick--I forgot his last name--Nick's last name, but he's a wonderful producer who came to me with this, and he thought I was right for it and we collaborated on it, and met with the writers and stuff, and came out, I think, with what was a decent script.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And filmed it.  It was, it was, it was, it was a--it was a--a, a really very rewarding project and (unclear) Forest Whitaker, as usual, is just brilliant in it, you know.  And I got to work with the great [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what kind of feedback did you get from it, you know, 'cause so many people have an idea that the Civil Rights Movement was all nonviolence.  You know the movie 'Mississippi Burning' they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --they had Gene Hackman having to go down on behalf of the government--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and beat up the Klan--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because they were victimizing all the poor black people in this country--
Speaker 2: People couldn't, people couldn't believe it; they said, "This story--this is fiction."  Said, "No, it's real."  "Well, I never heard of these guys before."  They couldn't believe that black men stood up for themselves.  I said, "No, it's real."  "Yeah, well, I never heard it." They, they kind of doubted the fact that it really happens.  What can you do?
Speaker 1: It's interesting 'cause I think, I think maybe in--most people in real life know that black people will stand up for themselves, you know, at least in today's world. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there's no historical proof.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Document it on film.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, it's hard--you know our history's been lost.  There are some young girls a few years ago down at the Martin Luther King parade [Kingdom Day Parade] in, on Crenshaw [Crenshaw Boulevard, Los Angeles, California].  They were like--I think they were fourteen or fifteen years old, or something like that.  A reporter asked them, "Are you here for Dr. King's par- for the King Parade?"  "Yes."  Said, "Well, do you know who Dr. King was?"  "Yeah, wasn't he--he was that actor."
Speaker 1: I see the nature of the problem now, so. Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so, so, ask 'em who Medgar Evers was (laughter) then you got a real problem there. Or Philip Randolph [A. Philip Randolph], or Thurgood Marshall, or Rosa Parks.  I mean we have a problem here (laughter).
Story_ID: 485956
Speaker 1: In 2004, you were appointed to Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger's California Film Commission.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it--I was in--I was--in 2004 I think to 2005 or '6 [2006] or was it '3 [2003] to '6 [2006], something like that, I was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I was the chair of the Department of Radio, Television and Film [Department of Media, Journalism and Film].  And when I was in Washington [D.C.], Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had put me on the--oh, you want the film commission, now you're talking about--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --not the national endowment.
Speaker 1: Oh, tell us about national endowment.  So you were at Howard for two years, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two or three, two or three, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you worked on the board of the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA]?
Speaker 2: National Endowment for the Arts, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something we didn't know.  I don't even have a note about that, so that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'Sister Act 2' ['Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit'] was in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's in--
Speaker 2: I directed 'Sister Act 2.'
Speaker 1: --in the '90s [1990s] when--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I don't remember the exact date that I directed that, but I think it was in the '90s [1990s] sometime, but--
Speaker 1: That, that's during the Clinton administration.
Speaker 2: During the Clinton administration, I was on the National Endowment for the Arts.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: And then, Arnold Schwarzenegger, I forgot the year--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but he put me on the film commission.  And, and it's a bit--it's frustrating because I haven't been able to pass legislation to get a film-centered bill here; they're only--and many, many other states have a film-centered bill to get film here, but we don't have one.
Speaker 1: Is it that, you know, that, that politicians kind of take it for granted the film is gonna be made here because it's California?
Speaker 2: I think that's one thing, but also there's--where--we have a debt, and the--they see film as a luxury, I think, you know.  They think, we're not gonna help--we're not gonna help make Tom Cruise another million dollars, but it's not about Tom Cruise, but the people at the end of the credits.  All those hundreds of people that helped make this--the average--the prop people, the, the drivers, and everything.  And the film commission they, they, they let--the legislator doesn't understand that; they have no comprehension of it.  They're very frustrating.
Speaker 1: So, you're saying that the politicians here in California have very little understanding of the, the importance of the film industry to the state?
Speaker 2: Very little understanding.  It's been very frustrating.
Speaker 1: So, are things, are things still like that, basically? I mean they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Right. Today?
Speaker 2: Today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Al right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know in other states--I mean in Illinois, I know they're competing, you know, to try to get films to come to--
Speaker 2: Not here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: We're going out of state and out of the country, rather than doing it here. Shame.
Story_ID: 485957
Speaker 1: What are the other volunteer activities you're involved in?  I mean on boards and such?
Speaker 2: I'm on a board in the American Film Institute.  I attended there, that's my second master's degree, I got it from there [Center for Advanced Film Studies at Greystone; American Film Institute Conservatory, Los Angeles, California].  I'm on the board of Educating Young Minds [Los Angeles, California], which is--in twenty-five years it's been in existence.  [HistoryMaker] Angeles Echols is the head of it, it's an incredible--.  My two passions are AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and education, and Ms. Echols has--started in her one-bedroom apartment with like ten kids or seven kids; now I have a few hundred kids.  We take kids from--it's an after-school program, six days a week sometimes--five and six days a week, and we take kids who are--seem uneducable, homeless children out of shelters, and instead of teaching, we teach them (unclear) being one teacher for twenty-five or thirty students, it's one teacher per five to seven students, eight students, and you should see the difference.  Just by paying attention to a child, and not allowing a child to leave that classroom until they understand the lesson.  Having that much time to be able to put into a child, a, a child comes there looking like this and feel they're a failure, 'til they come out and look you in your eye and say, "I wanna go to college."  That's, that's, that's big.  It's important to me.  And AIDS--I made two films in the last couple of years; one's called, 'The Faces of HIV,' which deals with AIDS in America, and the second one is called, 'Cover,' which deals with the whole D.L. [down-low], and AIDS and stuff in our community.  One out of seven black men in Washington, D.C. is HIV [human immunodeficiency virus]-infected. Out of all the newly reported AIDS cases in America with women, 70 percent are black women, the majority of those women are infected by men who know they have a disease. So, I'm not an activist or a politician, but I'm a filmmaker; I wanna use my craft to bring attention to these issues.  And I have a--I want a--I just started Duke Media Foundation [Los Angeles, California], and through that foundation I'm gonna create films that edu- that educate entertainment so to speak.  And so, I'm trying my best to give back and contribute and give--not have amnesia and forget, and try to do my best to do some good.
Story_ID: 485958
Speaker 1: You think that that attitude prevails today?  Do most successful black directors or actors feel a need to give something back?
Speaker 2: No, some, some.
Speaker 1: Some do?
Speaker 2: Some, but too few.  You know, the--a lot of us, not just in this business, but as a culture--many of us who become relatively successful are inflicted with a disease called blamnesia [ph.], it's the black man's amnesia: forget where we came from, forgot how we got here, and forget how many sacrifices have been made so that we could be here talking today.  Forget the obligations we have to the future, and that we must leave something better for our children than that we inherited--not just monetarily, but in terms of a larger scope of things--generational annuity of some kind so that our--the kids in the future.  I'm not even focusing on the kids now.  In certain schools, 50 percent of the kids drop out before they graduate, there's a 26 percent illiteracy rate in this nation, STD [sexually transmitted disease] rate with young girls is one out of four young girls--that's STD in our community.  Grandma they're projecting will be thirty-two in two years--grandma in our community.  Foster homes are filling up, 'cause of our, as black men, being irresponsible donors of sperm without being responsible for the--what that means, and using excuses that are far out worn for not taking responsibility that we should have for our families, our community, our women, our children.  We have no respect in this country because in many instances, we don't deserve it.  And I have this big argument because for many intellectuals, which I will not name 'cause I don't wanna get into a fight, that justify the behavior of young black men because, well, they dropped out of school and the white man has put us down, and our great-grandfather was a slave, and there was no dad in the house, and they had difficult childhoods, and it's a list that goes on and on and on and on and on and on.  Yes, there are some valid reasons why we do not do better, but my father [William Duke, Sr.] had a horrible childhood.  Some of my uncles were abused. Some of the women in my family were sexually abused, physically abused, emotionally abused; they didn't use no excuses.  I wonder why (laughter).  I mean we were taught if a man has his foot on your neck, you have one or two choices.  You can ask the person who has their foot in your neck, or beg them, or let them be the reason you're not getting up because they got a big boot on, or you die trying to get up.  You live or die trying to get up.  You live or die getting up; you don't use the f-well, he's got spikes in his boots and the boots stink, and the boots got a thick sole.  And he's big; he's a heavy man in the boot.  And our ancestors--and the greatest amongst us are alchemists; we're the ultimate alchemists.  Jesus was the original alchemist.  Jesus turned water into wine, but your grandfather and your great-grandfather, and your grandmother and my great-grandmother and grandmothers were alchemists, too because everythi- the scraps of life they threw at us we turned into things.  They threw bones at us from carcasses, we turned 'em into spare ribs. They threw the useless guts away, we turned 'em to chitlins.  See, we have a history of alchemy; we have not passed that on to our children.  We allow them to wallow in the suffering of, wow, you know, woe is me, and yeah, they were bad, and the white man is horrible and the system is blah, blah, blah, and so you can--you're gonna be on welfare for the rest of your life, and you can have eight kids by eight different women because that's being a man.  You got kids, and all that crap.  It's crap.
Story_ID: 485959
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: I'd be a better businessman 'cause I was an artist and I just fought being a businessman.  I should have been a better businessman earlier.  In fact I should have learned more about the stock market and more about, you know, business things, I would--I think it'd been better off for me.  I wish I'd been a better boyfriend, a better--I wish I'd been not such a womanizer. I regret some of that, you know.  Great, great times, but I didn't really--I kind of didn't do good things to some women.
Story_ID: 485960
Speaker 1: Are you working on a particularly important project right now?  I mean I know everything should be important, but what are you--what's the next big thing for you right now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Makes sound) You never know, but I'm working on a project that--we'll see what they say.  And, for like a few months with HBO, a television series that I'll know in the next two weeks whether they wanna do it or not.  A couple of feature film projects that I'd love, you know, that are at the studios now; I'll know about them in the next month or so.  I just started Duke Media [Duke Media Foundation, Los Angeles, California], non-profit, it has 911 Media [911 Media, Inc., Los Angeles, California], which is going to be a company that creates content, entertainment for our community.  In high school and junior high school, they have the--you know, your health classes, they give you these tapes and stuff you play by (unclear); it's gonna--the tape's gonna talk about everything from AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] to obesity, to diabetes, to the globalization of our economy, and the tools you have to have for the student to survive over the next hundred years.  I talk about--there are young men in our community who have never had a man in the house, and literally do not know how to tie a tie. It's gonna talk about grandma being thirty-two in a couple a years; it's gonna, gonna talk about, you know, STDs [sexually transmitted disease] and that you're not invincible, and how to protect yourself, and parenting, and a lot of things.  I wanna create a number of these--a series of DVDs that address these issues through 911 Media.  It's called 911 Media 'cause it's urgent.
Story_ID: 485961
Speaker 1: Now, again, when you look back at everything that you've done to this point, is--what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't--I'm not so sure I have a legacy.  I'm not seen in the film community as an important director necessarily because I'm not a s- I mean most of my stuff is eclectic; I'm not a--like a Spike Lee just does that certain kind of thing (unclear).  I, I mean I don't wanna be a black director.  I'm not--I'm a, I'm a black human being, but I'm a director who had--Steven Spielberg is a Jewish man, but he's not considered a Jewish director; he's a director.  He did 'Amistad,' he did 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple'] then he did his other pictures.  The fact that I insist on that makes me eclectic and difficult to work with, so--I think I'm never gonna have a legacy, ever.  I'll be a director I think that's made some good films, and I, I like the films I've made, and I think they have something to say (unclear) black films, but they're films, and I'm the artist and that's what I am.  I'm not special, I'm just--I think I'm good at what I do because I believe in it and I'm a perfectionist and I work like a dog.  But in terms of a legacy, I don't think you'll ever see me as ever having a legacy, never.
Story_ID: 485962
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Now, do, do you have any children?
Speaker 2: Godchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have several, and just took on another one, and I've--Natalie [ph.], who's now at business college--I think it's international business--known her since she was three years old; we talk almost every day now.  She calls me Big Bill [HistoryMaker Bill Duke] 'cause when she was little, she was so small and I was big, and I just love her like a daughter, and she loves me like a father.  Her father left her, I took that responsibility on, and I have another goddaughter Angela [ph.], and godson Manny [ph.], and another godkid, a child of (unclear)--I just adopted a family that--whose mother is, is a victim of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in our community, and the family's suffering; I took on the whole family now, and trying to help or raise the daughter. So it's like, you know, I'm trying my best to--and I want children of my own but--I have children, but I never had children of my own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is, now is your sister [Yvonne Duke Hampton] still alive?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a niece [Nola Hampton] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you just had the one sib- one sister.
Speaker 2: One sister--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Cousins and aunts.  Most of my family's gone, but I still have some left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are they basically in New York?
Speaker 2: Poughkeepsie [New York], some are out here.  Cousins in different parts of California, Atlanta [Georgia], another cousin, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] George Duke was saying you all might be related, but they haven't figured it out--you all haven't figured it out.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Probably someplace, man, along that line.  We know somebody was in that wood pile, don't know who it was (laugher).
Story_ID: 485963
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked that, that I need--we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: 'Sister Act 2' ['Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit'], [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Oh, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was a great project we worked on.  And a project I worked on recently on--called 'Cover,' which is HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and all that stuff, and then 'The Faces of HIV' and 'Cover,' which I'm proud of those projects also, and nothing really more.
Speaker 1: I think 'Miracle Boys' [sic. 'Miracle's Boys'] I think that--we didn't mention that, but that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and also I did 'New York Undercover,' which is a--which is for--it was on--Dick Wolf, and 'Miracle's Boys,' which I was really proud of, part of, Spike Lee produced that, and his wife [HistoryMaker Tonya Lewis Lee].  So--done a few things.
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) As a human being that had integrity and cared about more than--more--cared about more than himself only.  As a, a person who believed in the craft of his artistry and the integrity of his artistry, that gave 100 percent to everything he did.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
