Story_ID: 78278
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to start out by slating it. My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle initial--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --middle names.
Speaker 2: My name is Roselyn Elizabeth Payne Epps, R-O-S-E-L-Y-N, Elizabeth Payne, P-A-Y-N-E, Epps, E-P-P-S.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is December 11, 1930.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 16, 2003.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physician.
Story_ID: 78279
Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone, and they're little "People" Magazine-ish.  They're short, short answers.  I just would like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: I don't have one.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have one (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Dr. Epps would (unclear). Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: All seasons, all seasons.
Speaker 1: That's good, okay.
Speaker 2: I love them all--beautiful, really.  We, we live here in the, near the park.  And when the winter comes and the ice and the snow, I say, oh, this is the most beautiful time of the year.  And then in the spring when the flowers are blooming, the trees are blooming, it's so beautiful.  I say, oh, this is the most beautiful time of the year.  And the fall when the leaves turn red, I say, this is the most beautiful time of the year.  So I enjoy all seasons.
Speaker 1: And favorite vacation, place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, here, lately, it's to go to our place in Florida on the ocean and watch the, walk the beach, and watch the ocean, and watch the sun rise.  And that's where I'd like to go now.
Speaker 1: And, and favorite, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I may have a lot of them, but perhaps they'll come to me later on.  But I hadn't thought, thought of them but, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I do have a lot of quotes I give a lot of times.
Speaker 1: Don't worry, yeah, 'cause I, I have a hard time with that myself.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 78280
Speaker 1: I want to start by asking you about your mother--if you could state her name, and tell us what you know about her background and her growing up.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mattie Elizabeth Beverly Payne.  And my mother and I were very close and we were really good friends.  She was a wonderful, inspiring person who was a bright, very smart woman, a very beautiful, I thought as a child, with hazel eyes and dark hair.  And she was very forward thinking.  She was a woman who felt that she could make a change.  When I was a child, and didn't have a Girl Scout troop I could go to, because I had been going to this scouting troop with my brother [William Kenneth Payne II], she went down to the Girl Scouts headquarters and says, I want to have a troop for my daughter to join.  And she created the first Girl Scout troop for black girls in Georgia.  And I was the first black Girl Scout in the state.  But she felt there was nothing, nothing that could not be accomplished and challenged.  She challenged herself.  She challenged us.  And she was, she was a wonderful, kind woman.  She taught school in every level and was a counselor.  She really cared about people.  And from her, I learned about caring about people.  I could remember as a child her going over to a place for children who were, were homeless under the care of the state.  And we would go over there and take things to children.  And children in the neighborhood, when kids didn't come to school, she would--we would go out and go to their homes to find out what the problem was, and bring them into the school.  And she thought there was a value and worth in everybody.  She thought people were beautiful.  She was a beautiful person herself, but she thought everybody was beautiful, that they had talent.  And every child was potentially a wonderful person, so she was a marvelous mother, a loving person.
Speaker 1: Did she talk any about her growing up?  Do you know much about her--
Speaker 2: Well, she was from a family of educators.  Her father [John W. Beverly] was President of Alabama State College [now Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And her mother [Mattie E. Beverly], I think, probably wasn't much like her because she was a widow for about 20 years.  And then she went to work as an administrator, as for the Mount Meigs School for Girls, which is another correctional institution anyway.  But she was the director of the girls' division there in Alabama.  And she didn't talk a great deal about her growing up, but she went to college.  She went to boarding school in Virginia Union.  And then after that, she continued to go to school.  When she went into elementary education after teaching in college, she went to, back to Alabama State where her roots had been and spent a semester, and got a degree in that.  And then when she became a guidance counselor, she went to Alabama, over to Alabama University [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and got a Master in, in guidance counsel.  And that was after I was an adult.  In fact, I was in medical school, and I went over there with her for part of the summer.  So she was always learning, always educating, stimulating others.  She found it--but as a young person, I don't recall her talking a great deal about it.  Her family was comfortable, and she had several brothers and sisters, and so I think she had a, a nice childhood.
Story_ID: 78281
Speaker 1: Now your, your father, can you give his name and also talk about his background?
Speaker 2: Right.  My father's name is William Kenneth Payne and he was senior.  And he's, he was from rural Alabama.  And there were seven boys and one girl in the family.  The girl was the oldest one.  His father [Rev. Robert Payne] had been a teacher, a minister, and farmer.  And his mother [Mary Payne] was a teacher and, and homemaker primarily with seven children, seven sons and one daughter.  All of them went to college.  He went to boarding school and high school in Morehouse.  And the three of them were right behind each other--three of the boys were close to each.  The older two went to Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia], and one of them didn't go to school.  He went--and had cerebral palsy, and he worked there at home on the farm.  But my father had a very fine career there.  He was in a class of '23, 1923 from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he was a classmate of--roommate really, really of Jim Naboritz (ph.), and Pollard (ph.) Thurmond was in his class.  And so, really, a lot of people whom I know--very outstanding people were classmates.  He went there in boarding school and high school, and then on to college there, and postgraduate work in New York, and what-not.  He was a very--he was a somewhat quieter person, but more reserved, but very bright.  I remember Jim Naboritz saying one time--said he was the smartest man he'd ever known.  Now, he, he was not, he wasn't very talkative or flamboyant, but he was a very determined person in terms of goal oriented and what-not.  He encouraged us and he never let us say, was there anything we couldn't do.  I can recall one time--I said to him, I said, I don't think that, you know, a person--light complexion, could wear black or brown.  I don't remember what the color was.  And he says, you can wear any color you want to, he says.  He never let us say anything that would mean put any limits to what, what I could do or want to do.  He, he wouldn't, he wouldn't be, he wouldn't belabor it, but he would just make a point, and he would say it.  He was a very ethical person, a very principled person, well respected.  He did a lot to help the students on campus.  A lot of the times, people didn't know he was a quietly behind-the-scenes person who helped bring institutions together--bring a peacemaker.  He brought the [Alpha Lambda] Boule, I remember, to, to the (unclear), to, to Savannah and Augusta [Georgia].  He was a founder of that, and he was very active in the Boy Scouts and got an award for that, but in a quiet, non-assuming way, confidante, a person people would call on--really a fine person.
Story_ID: 78282
Speaker 1: You know, I've been wondering, have you ever thought why in a time where people have limits around them, why they instinctively, you know, were able to teach their kids about no limits?
Speaker 2: Because I think, I think, they, they believed it, they felt it.  We came from generations of people who knew that education was the key.  And my grandfather [John William Beverly] had--my mother's father had attended Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].  And he finished in 1894 in the first class that had African Americans in it.  And, in fact, he was the treasurer of his class, the class that had John D. Rockefeller in it, no less, and he was the treasurer.  But they--he believed that, that education was really the key, and that being a part of mainstream education, and talking and speaking traditional English, and learning traditional English was really the way to go.  And I could tell you some things about him if you like.
Speaker 1: His name first, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  His name was John William Beverly, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y.  And following his term in Brown University, he came back and became the first African American teacher at Alabama State College [Montgomery, Alabama]--Alabama Normal, it might have been then.  And then became the--subsequently became the president, their first African American president.  But I met people who knew him, even though I never knew him.  But I met, some years ago, people who had known him in their youth.  And he was superintendent of the Sunday School at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, which became now Dexter King Baptist Church, and also treasurer of the church.  But he was so--such an advocate for standard English and proper English that he would hold courses.  The children would come in a little early on Sunday morning for Sunday School, and he would teach them English before Sunday School class.  He wrote three books.  He wrote a history of Alabama, which was--he went county by county and, and chronicled all of the African Americans and their descendants from when they were in slavery--I mean where they came from.  And I have a copy of the book, but I have in a safe deposit box really because I don't want anything to happen to it.  And then he had common errors of English corrected, which is--you would think shrunk and white, copied his, his style in terms of the way he did it.  But, anyway, he had three books which he published himself.  And he was part, part Native American really of, of descent.  And he, people would say they would see him walking to--from his home to the campus.  He was very erect and he would walk to his--boys had all white collar, but very stiff, and he'd walk back and forth to his campus.  He was a--my mother said a lot older than his wife, and so he died in early 1924.
Story_ID: 78283
Speaker 1: I went back--I had a distant cousin-in-law, who was celebrating her 90th birthday in Montgomery [Alabama] last month in the month of February 2003.  And I went to Montgomery.  I hadn't been back there in years and years.  The year my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] went there for part of the year to get a second Bachelor's degree in elementary education, my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] and I went to the campus laboratory school.  She took us with her and we lived in the family home.  And so, I went back there.  I went--in fact, the celebration for her birthday was held in the Dexter Avenue King Church 'cause I have some pictures of that.  And then I went to the campus.  The building was named for my grandfather [John W. Beverly], and it really was quite a sentimental journey to go back and walk the halls, and so forth where they had been.  But they were very--now my mother's family, my mother's, mother's family were the Dales.  She [Mattie Dale Payne] had been a Dale originally, D-A-L-E.  And she was the only girl with about eleven brothers.  They were descendants, which I have never gone on a trip to look for, but my mother said that they were descendants of the Governor [Thomas] Dale of Virginia, and that that was their ancestral roots.  And she was a Dale.  And she had a brother--my grandmother had a brother, Ellis Dale, who was the first African American physician in, in Cleveland [Ohio].  And I met him and we stayed with him once when my mother went up to do some studying at Case Western Reserve as well, so I met him.  Then, he was quite old and had lost his vision to glaucoma.  And I had a cousin, Dale Beverly, an uncle rather, Dale Beverly, who practiced in Chicago [Illinois]--pediatrics, finished Rush Medical School [Chicago, Illinois] in the early 20s [1920s] when there were very few.  Went back for (unclear) 60th reunion.  Well, a few people who could get back to it, but he's no, he's no longer living either.  But so the Dale family, the Dale name ran, ran through our family as well.
Story_ID: 78284
Speaker 1: Do you know how your grandfather [John W.] Beverly--how he ended up going to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]?  Do you know that story?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I hear of late--interestingly, our daughter, Roselyn [Epps], went to Brown University, and she graduated ninety years after he did.  And she went in the archives of the school and looked him up.  She brought a picture of him that we had never seen as a young man.  She brought back papers, forms he'd filled out for the alumni directory.  It showed, you know, where he was and what he was doing.  In talking with the people at Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] when we were there last month, we had an opportunity to--they have a little more history because he had been the president there.  And, seemingly, he was from--I think my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne], grandmother [Mattie Dale Beverly] as well, they were from that part of Alabama originally where the American Missionary Association had gone and set up schooling after slavery, and where a lot of people like Julian--Horace Mann Bond and people like that, all came from that.  And I think, Andrew Billingsley, in his book, "Blacks in White America", speaks to that part of Alabama where so many people came from, and who were educated.  And the reason was American Missionary.  And so, according to this history that they have at Alabama State, he had gone to finish the normal school at that particular area.  And then I don't know whether the American Missionary Association or people like that sponsored them or not.  But he went from there to Brown and graduated from there.
Story_ID: 78285
Speaker 1: The other thing, do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met at Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University, Montgomery Alabama].  My mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] had finished college and she came back to teach.  And my father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] was a teacher, and really was a dean at the school there.  So they met at Alabama State and were married in Montgomery [Alabama], and were there for two years before they moved from there to Arkansas where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when he, when they moved to Arkansas, was that to take over--were they--was he also head of a college there, or do you know what the move--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, he had a General Education Board Fellowship to set up a junior college in Little Rock [Arkansas], the Dunbar Junior College.  And so, he was just twenty-eight years old at the time, I think.  And they went there to establish--become the first being Dunbar Junior College.  And so that was why they moved there.  And they were there, I guess, for six or eight years in, in Little Rock.  And then he had an opportunity to go to a larger college, a four, four-year college and what-not.  And so he left there and went to Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia], first as a professor and teaching at the extension program.  And then my mother, the two of them, would go and teach extension program in--out of the county.  And I would go with my mother to Sylvania.  And my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] would go with my dad to Waynesboro on Saturdays, and they would teach college courses there.  And then, we would go in the summers up to a log cabin.  They had an extension in Sparta, Georgia, and we would go up there and live, and lived a wonderful time.  We had a wonderful time.  And later, when she started Girl Scouts, she organized a camp of girls, and we would go up there for Girl Scout camp as well.
Story_ID: 78286
Speaker 1: Now, with, with--your, your brother, was he actually, was he born in Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: He was born in Montgomery, okay.
Speaker 2: Before they left in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: Is William Kenneth Payne II.
Speaker 1: And so he's the oldest and then, in the meantime, then you were--
Speaker 2: Were born two years later.
Speaker 1: --born, were born two years later.
Story_ID: 78287
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your memories of Little Rock [Arkansas], what memories you have?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember we lived in a house, 1516 Ringo Street.  I can remember the address now because we had memorized all those things.  And we had a big front yard and a backyard, and it was a white house, a big two-story white house.  And I remember we could play down to the corner and we had to come back.  We couldn't go beyond, beyond the corner.  I can recall going to see movies, Betty Boop movie at Dunbar Auditorium.  They would have their own entertainment and so we would go to the movies so.  And we had a couple of dogs.  My brother [William Kenneth Payne II] had a dog, a dasher, named Bruno.  And I had a little white, every dog, I guess.  He was named Nippy--looked, he looked like the dog in the, the, with the RCA dog, and so his name was Nippy.  And so we, we had a wonderful time.  I can recall that having school--my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] would teach.  She had been a teacher, but because they didn't permit women who were pregnant at that time or people with children to teach--when she became pregnant with me, she came home.  And then when my brother started school, I--and she said I insisted on having school.  And so I had a table and a chair, and I had school every day.  And I can remember her asking me every day, what would you like for lunch, Roselyn?  And every day, I'd say, tuna fish.  And to this day, I love tuna fish.  I think I said at least two or three times a week.  It's--I think it's my comfort food (laughter), uh-hum.  So I'd want every day--I'd say, I'd like a tuna fish sandwich.  So, so it was a very--and I had a little friend, a little boy, who lived across the street with his grandmother, William Andrew.  And we would play together 'cause I don't think his grandmother would let him play with the real rough kids, and he was my age.  And my brother would climb the (unclear) tree, and I remember he fell out of the tree off the second floor.  But I guess it was branches that must have caught him.  We, we were talking about that recently when I talked to my brother.  He says, you know when I fell out of the tree?  I said, I sure do.  It was a lot of big excite-, and a lot of--I can recall we sat there.  And we would--we had a porch, and we'd see people riding back and forth.  And I can remember seeing these little white kids riding in the back of this pickup truck, you know, probably off some farm or something.  And I said, oh, that looks so much fun.  And my parents would say, oh, no, we, we have a car, you know.  We don't need to ride like that.  They always--and still, they knew that what we had was always--been good or better.  I mean it wasn't that we were better than anybody, but we were fine, you know.  And that, and I think that the self-confidence and worth that our parents built into us--the things that really sustained us.  We never felt inferior to anybody--separate but never inferior.
Story_ID: 78288
Speaker 1: Now, did you and your brother [William Kenneth Payne II] get along?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-hum.  We fought.  We had our, we had our sibling fights, but we've always been very close.  And our parents, because there were just two of us, always kept us close.  And when we went to--we would go places to, you know, we'd go usually together.  And when we went off to boarding school, I can remember he was--they were thinking about sending him off to boarding school 'cause the junior high and the high school were not on the campus [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  We, we went to the campus elementary school, so it meant we had a long way to travel, and so forth.  And so they had--we went, I remember, we went to a trip to a place in Georgia somewhere.  And I just thought it was a routine visit to a school.  And then I got the idea--over-, kind of overheard, and gathered that they were thinking about sending him there to boarding school.  Well, I was so distressed.  I just cried and really carried on so badly that they said no, well, we won't do that.  And so, he went on to this junior high school.  And then when I became in ninth grade, I still was just twelve years old.  We both went off to school together and went to this Palmer [Memorial Institute] in Sedalia, North Carolina, and spent a wonderful time there with Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown.
Story_ID: 78289
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, oh, yes.  Now, but I want to go back, so you, you started school in, in Little Rock [Arkansas], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  I just, just one, one year.
Speaker 1: Just one year?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: But tell, you--that you were actually, can you tell the whole thing about the--you had started to say, I was educated at home but--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, uh-hum.  Well, I, I went to--so my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] taught me.  And I really learned, you know, I was serious about it.  And so by the time I was five, and I was going to turn six during that school year, they took me to register for me for school.  And I can recall--I remember them handing me a book to read which was the end of the first year book.  And I just breezed right through it.  So they said, well, there's no point in her being in the first grade, so they sent me to the second grade.  So then, when we moved to Savannah, I had, I was really six.  I was entering the third grade.  And so, I was six, but I entered the first grade, but it wasn't difficult.  I was, I was a perfectionist as a student, and I, I used to be very sensitive.  And I, if I didn't get 100 each time, I would cry.  I was so upset.  And, oh, if someone says, oh, Roselyn, now, I don't like the way your hair look, whatever.  I just cried.  This is when I was about six, seven years old.  And then I decided, I said, you cannot go through life crying about everything.  And practically nothing makes me cry now.  You know, if people say things or whatever, you know, maybe I don't like it or I feel bad, but I never, never again.  I just said, I cannot do this for all my life, and I just stopped.
Story_ID: 78290
Speaker 1: Do you remember the move to Savannah [Georgia] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was, it was, you know, it was, you were in Arkansas--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which is what you knew, and so--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  Oh, yes, I remember the move.  I remember our going.  I remember getting in the car and driving, driving there and getting--when we got there at first, the president [of Savannah State University] had a really big house there on the, on the marsh.  Well, it's a--(unclear) beautiful campus, big trees, oak trees, and moss hanging on them in the circular drive.  It's a lot of the campus.  And I can recall the president, and his home had a large home which he lived in by himself.  And he wasn't married, and so we stayed there for a couple of years, but it wasn't ideal growing up--very insulated community.  We had a free run of the campus and we just rolled all over it.  And they had all these activities, and we looked forward every year to the coming of the--its new students, then we had big sisters, and we would go to the dorm.  And my parents were a young couple, and they would take--they were frequently the chaperones.  And so, they would take us along, so we went on trips to Hilton Head [Island, South Carolina], boat rides.  And when Hilton Head was nothing, but marshlands and woodlands, and before it became developed, the way it is now.  And we would go the campus dances and all the football games.  And we, when the team would come, we'd get there and practice with the football team.  And my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] had a football uniform with shoulder pads, head helmet, all of it.  And so the other boys didn't have that kind of gear, so he wouldn't wear it.  And so, I said--so my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] said, if you're not going to wear it, and my parents were very disappointed 'cause they bought him this suit.  But he didn't want to be the only one.  So I put it on, and I would go out there.  And we would do the jumping jacks with, with the football team.  And we would exercise, and do the runaround the track and, and what-not.  And the campus had a--it, it was sort of the technical part in the University of Georgia system for African American education--had three schools.  One was Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and then there was Fort Valley State [University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And at that time, it was Georgia State, but they took that name and gave it, said we don't need that.  And it, it be Savannah State and then, of course, it created Georgia State [University] as a majority institution in Atlanta [Georgia], but anyway, at that--it was really the technical school there--
Story_ID: 78291
Speaker 1: My mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] had--both my parents died suddenly.  And when my mother passed, she was--she had a group of women in a club she--one of the clubs she had founded in Savannah [Georgia] called Le Tressium Tres [Les Treize Chaises?], Thirteen Chairs.  And it was a card group, I think.  And then there were--the thirteenth chair was always the hostess so that, that person didn't play.  So when I went there, not having any relatives there, those people turned out.  They had food for all our meals--wasn't anything that wasn't done for us when we were there.  So I told them and I said, when I said, I'm gonna have the meeting when you, when--and have you all come to Washington [D.C.].  And so they said, okay, all right, so I did that.  And, oh, they came from everywhere.  I arranged--I had a whole schedule of events for a weekend that began with a tour of the White House, a private tour, morning tour of the White House.  I was on the board at Ford's Theater, and we had front row seats at one of the theaters.  And we went to church, and then they came by here for brunch.  And this friend of mine, Frank Staley (ph.), that was my age, somehow was in town and heard, heard that they were coming over, so he came over as well.  That was the last time, the only time I've seen him really since then.  But I had forgotten about that occasion when I had all of the members of the club come up and they came.  They flew in.  They came by train.  They came overnight, and we started with this 7:30 morning private tour of the White House.  And then we had all sorts of sightseeing and had tours and, and theater at Ford's Theater.  I was on the board at that time so had a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 78292
Speaker 1: Now I want to take you back to the time that Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia] and--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and I want to just have you sort of recount or talk about what, like sights, smells, and sounds remind you of, of growing up during that period--
Speaker 2: Well, they had lovely pine trees, tall, tall pine trees, big oak trees.  And so I, you know, in pine, you smell the pine, you think about, about growing up.  It was also the water.  And the tides would come in and the marshlands, and, and it was near an area, a city, a little town, really.  It wasn't a town with stores in it.  I think really it was a town called Thunderbolt.  And Thunderbolt was a fishing, shrimping town.  And a lot of the families in the area were very poor who worked there shelling fish and packing it for the various pick places.  A lot of these children were my classmates at elementary school.  My mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] taught me in the sixth grade.  And I can recall that after her mother [Mattie Dale Beverly] passed, my mother was so broken up.  She just--you'd just mention the word--her eyes--she would just tear up, you know, but and the children were just so sweet.  They just were so consoling her.  And I--when she'd start teaching, I didn't know what--I said, well, maybe I should call her Mrs. Payne, you know, like everybody else.  And the kids would say, don't call her Mrs. Payne.  That's your mother--call her mom, you know.  And they were just so--and she cared about them.  And we would go to their homes.  And odors, a lot of them in the clothes, they smelled like the shrimp factory, you know, and what-not.  But, you know, they were kids in the community, and we played with them and what-not.  So those, and then we had, they had a cannery, as I told you, they had, they had a big farm.  The campus did.  And students learned.  And so, they, they had a cannery.  When they can, pick pears and, and different fruits, peaches.  And I remember as the little children was, we got a job paying ten, ten cents a day or something (laughter), go back to the cannery, back to help them to peel the pears and things like that.  It was right there on the campus.  But so I think about that and the cheering and sounds of the football games and the dances, and all that sort of thing so.
Story_ID: 78293
Speaker 1: And at the time that your father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] was there, was it--he held different positions, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, when he first went there, he was, you know, a teacher and teaching philosophy, and he--and my mother [Mattie Daly Beverly] was teaching English.  She was an English teacher.  She was an English major in fact.  And so, they taught, and then they went to this extension program that the college had in the communities out in towns where people were teaching, but weren't necessarily certified.  And so, they weren't, sort of, to get their credentials so they could teach and be accredited, so they would go out and teach at these campuses.  And then he became--moved over into administration and became dean.  And an interesting thing is because when, when he became dean, my mother was professor and teaching English.  And, of course, they said, well, nepotism, you cannot report to, to your husband.  And so, then she left college teaching, and that was when she went into elementary education and became the principal.  Now the school was on the campus and it was a training lab school for training, but it also was a part of the public school system for this, for the Savannah public school system.  And so, she could work there because she was really reporting to the public, public school system.  So then he was dean for a number of years, and then he was president for 15 years.  And so, he sort of moved up the ranks.  Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now while you were growing up there on the campus, he was primarily, he went to dean, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when I went to--when I was in high school, he became president.
Speaker 1: In Oakland, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 78294
Speaker 1: Now tell me, tell me--the, the schooling I just want to get--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, straight, so you were-- when you came there, you went to this public school that your mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] was teaching with, with the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: She wasn't teaching there at that time.  She wasn't teaching there until about two or three years later.  She was not the principal when I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then, but you went--did you go to the lab school [Powell Laboratory School]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the school.
Speaker 1: So that was the lab school?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And, you know, and can you talk a little bit about lab schools 'cause I didn't know they were all over--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so they were in the schools that were associated with the university?
Speaker 2: It's, it's on the campus and the teachers, you know, were accredited as--we had practice teachers who came there who were from, from education majors who came there and taught at the school and taught us and they supervised, but the curriculum was part of it.  And it really was a wonderful schooling experience because we would go on--I can remember my mother taking us on nature hikes.  And we would go outdoors sometime and have classes and it was a very stimulating, and not a structured type of environment at all.  And, of course, we were exposed to the music and dance, and all of the things that the campus could afford, so it was a very rich experience.  And we, you know, we went all day and they had, because there were so many community children there and children who, who were in need, were part of the lunch programs.  And we had nice hot lunches every day, and were fixed in the dining hall and brought over to us on the campus so.  It was quite a, quite a nice experience, very happy and we learned, you know, we started--I can remember the third grade.  I loved my third grade teacher, Ms. Pollock (ph.), and we studied Africa and all about it, and all about the places there and learned, you know, about really about Africa.  That was probably the only foreign place we really learned about, but we learned the different countries and we learned about the coconut palm, and all--how it sustained the people and all of those kinds of things, and the different cultural dances and we would have costumes.  And one of the professors, in fact, the minister on campus who was also a professor, Reverend Peacock (ph.) was from Africa.  And so, he talked about Africa and he would--so we knew him as an African who was a professor on the campus there.  So it was just a really rich, rich experience.  And we loved our practice teachers and we looked forward to seeing them, new ones, and when they came and so forth.
Story_ID: 78295
Speaker 1: Now what were, what were you like as a young, young person?  Were you quiet?  Were you shy?  Were you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was quiet, I was very quiet.
Speaker 1: Very, but did you--
Speaker 2: I liked to read, I liked to read.  My brother [William Kenneth Payne II] was outdoors.  He was going all the time.  But I liked to read.  I liked to stay and read and listen and, yeah, at--well, I guess when I was younger, I used to like to go out and ride the bicycle and skate and so forth.  But I can recall my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] saying go outside, go outside, you know, 'cause I just, I loved being at home.  I like to be at home now.  I enjoy home.  I really do.  I enjoy myself and amuse myself.  I'm never bored.  I, I always find something interesting.
Speaker 1: What would you dream of at that time in those points?  Would you dream of things or, you know, or what you wanted to be or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had decided when I was ten years old that I would go into--be a pediatrician.  And I just set my sights on it.  So everything that I did from then on was in preparation for that.  In other words, it's taking the science courses and, you know, studying, whatever it was, it was all geared toward that.
Speaker 1: What pediatrician did you know?
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle [Dale Beverly] in Chicago [Illinois] was one, and so I knew that he was (unclear).  I loved children and I wanted to work with children.  I--if I hadn't been a pediatrician, I would have been a nursery school teacher.  But I guess, there was--I knew that this was something was possible.  There was a pharmacist in Savannah [Georgia] who had a daughter whom I didn't know.  She was a lot older than I was, but I knew about her.  I knew she was a physician.  So I knew this was something that could, could be done.  I mean it wasn't like a foreign thing that women could become physicians and so, and that African American women could be become physicians.  And so, I felt that would give me an opportunity to be challenged academically and still work with children.  And so, I told my parents that was what I wanted to do and they said, well, then you can do it, you know, if that's what you want to do, go right ahead.
Story_ID: 78296
Speaker 1: Now you went, you went to the lab school [Powell Laboratory School] up till what age?
Speaker 2: Until I was, I say, I guess it was ten.
Speaker 1: Ten?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then that's when you went to--
Speaker 2: To junior high school.  I went to the junior high school in Savannah [Georgia], (unclear) Junior High School.  I went on the bus until I was twelve and then I went to Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And, can you talk about the Palmer experience?
Speaker 2: Ohh--
Speaker 1: Because it's clear, it's what--I did, okay, I mean that's a well-known--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is.
Speaker 1: --the whole well-known school with a well-known person [Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown]--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was just wonderful.  I had a marvelous time at Palmer.  And--
Speaker 1: Now how was the decision made that you would go to Palmer?
Speaker 2: Well, they wanted to send--remember I said that my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] was--they would look to the terms that we had to travel on a bus all the way into the city which was five miles away twice a day to go to school.  We were younger than most of the children in our class and we weren't very sophisticated.  I can remember my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne] making me wear short dresses, long beyond time.  Anybody else was, and I was believing in Santa Claus beyond the time everybody else in the class was believing, and they all looked at me as strange.  But they knew I was young and so they just kind of tolerated it.  But I was--but when I went to Palmer, there were a lot of other children my age.  And so that was--there were a lot of children from all over the country.  And they were--Dr. Brown had planned everything.  I mean, we were in the dormitory which wasn't foreign to me because I had grown up on a college campus.  And we, we played in dorms, so being in a dormitory was like being really grown up.  And we had--she had all kinds of--it's, the school is in Sedalia, North Carolina, ten miles from Greensboro [North Carolina].  So she had every activity planned for you.  So I had a lot of things that I was not doing at home.  And we had dances and, you know, even for the little kids, 'cause it started at seventh grade, so they had seventh and grade school social events.  We had teas.  We had movies.  Well, we had formal dinners for our band and we had, you know, long dresses and formal dinners for our--once a month.  And everybody who had a birthday that month sat at the birthday table.  And we'd have candle lights, and then she would teach us the correct thing to do, to say, and to wear.  She has a book that she published.  I still have a copy of it.  And they had sports (unclear), tennis courts, and the basketball team.  And--and so, we--it was just wonderful.  We ate together.  There were only 200 students.  And so they--
Speaker 1: What--from seventh to twelveth?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, that's right, uh-hum.  And they had a little cottage for kids, for the little boys and girls, seventh and eighth grade, graders.  They didn't live in the dorm.  And then we had a dorm and, and we had supervisors at our dorm and what-not.  And, and it was very, and a very challenging environment, too.
Story_ID: 78297
Speaker 1: Can you talk--
Speaker 2: --academic and--
Speaker 1: --can you talk about her [Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown] and the school [Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]?  I mean just for people who don't know about it and put it in some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --historical context?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting that we talk about this at this time because 2002 was the 100th anniversary of the school.  And so, I went back.  [Dr.] Charles [H. Epps, HM] and I just came back from Palmer and, in fact, they had an all class reunion in Las Vegas [Nevada] in December of 2001.  And since my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] now lives in that area and he'd also gone to Palmer, well, we went out and participated in that.  But Dr. [Brown], the campus had boys' dorm, girls' dorm, a cottage for little children.  We had a tea house for kids to go get their snacks.  And then across the street was this (unclear) store, and we never could go across the street to the store.  Dr. [Brown], oh, yes, and now said that about once a month, we would go to Greensboro [North Carolina] to shop.  And we would wear our hats and gloves and, and can you imagine all these little children, teenagers coming into the city and they knew the merchants.  I think Dr. Brown notified them that we were coming and everybody was so nice to us.  And we'd all go get our pictures taken, and then we'd go shopping.  And, and we'd go by bus, and she had us--we would always dress in hats and gloves each time we went.  But, it was Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown was really from New England.  She had, she was from Boston [Massachusetts], had attended the Boston Latin School and she was originally, though, from North Carolina.  And she decided that she was going to start a school for the development and college preparatory school for African American boys and girls.  So it was a coeducational school.  And we, you know, she--well, I can recall when she said it was a list of clothing we had to have when we came to Palmer, you know, like everybody had to have a black dress.  We had to have an evening gown.  We had to have a certain number of skirts, certain number of sweaters or suits, whatever.  And on every Friday, we had assembly at which time we wore blue skirts and white blouses.  And, and Dr. Brown would talk to us.  And she spoke to us as if she was speaking--she was a very serious and formal lady.  I mean she wasn't a joker, you know, she was business--excellent speaker.  And but she talked to us as if she were talking to her family.  She would say, I'm going to Boston now.  I'm going to be speaking to so and so, and we're going to meet with some people who can give some money to the school.  I mean, you know, she would talk to us just like that.  And we'd say, yes, Dr. Brown, we always said.  When teachers came into the room, we stood up and what-not.  And she insisted on, you know, proper decorum.  I remember she sent all the boys home one year because they laughed when somebody who came there to perform and, and it was kind of funny, but it, the performance was.  But, and then, you know, she said if anybody doesn't want to be here, you can leave, and she would send you home in a minute.  But it was very well organized.  They told us what time to arrive and what trains, and the train would start in Florida and come up the coast.  We'd get on the Atlantic Coast Line and get on at each place.  And we'd all be on the train, and we'd get up there in Charlotte [North Carolina].  We'd transferred, meet the group coming from Atlanta [Georgia] and Arkansas, and we'd all arrive then on the campus at the same time.  We celebrated all of the holidays and traditions.
Story_ID: 78298
Speaker 1: But I'll tell you a really interesting story.  Her [Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown] niece was--is Maria Cole, married [Nat] King Cole, and she used to tell--talk to us about her family and her relatives.  Rev. [John] Brice, her, her uncle was, was the campus minister.  And it was so funny 'cause he used to make--I think it's peach wine or something.  And every now and then the boys used to think he was--had a little--morbid--but anyway, he was the minister and his daughter was Carol Brice, the singer.  And then, I can--she had these nieces, Carol and Charlotte.  Her name was Charlotte, and I remember when we were little children, she said, her daughter, her niece, Maria, was an entertainer.  She says, you know, I don't think much of this entertainment life, you know.  And we would listen, and so forth and so on, and she'd say yes, she sing with a band.  And I don't know whether this, you know, is the best thing, you know, she talked to us just as if we were family members.  And so, and then one day, she said, well, Maria is coming.  And Maria Hawkins was her name--said she's coming, and she's bringing this man that she wants to get married to, and she says and she wants me to meet him.  And so, she says, I--he's an entertainer.  I don't know too much about that.  And she said, but his--and I don't know, have you all ever heard of a Nat King Cole?  And so, we were about ready to (unclear).  I mean it was so exciting.  And so, he came.  They came together, and he played and put on a concert for us in the dining room and played and then 'cause we couldn't be too animated.  But we, you know, we were obviously appreciative and, and in awe that he had come to the campus and sang for us in the dining room.  And so then when she--after they left, she said, well, I know this had nothing with--she says, well, if you all think it's all right, I guess I'll tell her it's okay to get married.
Story_ID: 78299
Speaker 1: Isn't that a fascinating story?
Speaker 2: It's a fasci-, you know, the significance--there was only one school like this, right?  I mean--
Speaker 1: No, there were others.
Speaker 2: There were others?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  There was Mary Potter [School] which was also in [Oxford] North Carolina.  There was Mather [Academy] which was in [Beaufort] South Carolina.  And these school--I don't--oh, I guess one of them also was the one that Kathy Hoosers' (ph.) ancestor, which is still operational, I think--Piney Woods [Country Life School] in, in [Piney Woods] Mississippi.  But this was really felt--well, after Dr. [Charlotte Hawkins] Brown died, of course, she was--she was the school, but they--people continued to send the children and, and, you know, it was--wasn't with the same obviously.  But once schools became integrated, families kept the children home.  And then, they could find good schools and good education, and so that a lot of people either didn't come who would have come, or people who came and then didn't-- And if you imagine people putting children on a train or a plane and sending them to school, and not send the tuition.  And as a boarding school, they'd really, you know, became very difficult.  And so, in fact, I was on the board of trustees when it closed.  I was on the board and Benjamin Mays was on the board as well.  But we, you know, it was very difficult, but the thing that has happened since then is--but it has been designated by the State of North Carolina as a historic site.  And so, it is a part now the state of North Carolina's budget so that it'll be there.  And then they had a major fire that burned down the main classroom building.  And that really was the death knell because there was no way they could raise enough money in today's economy to build a new structure for the academics.  So they have been in the process of--we went there, as I said last June 2002.  And in a process of restore--first, they restored her home which was there on the--there was a little yellow house and they called it canary cottage.  She used to have us over for tea sometime.  It was quite a big thing if you were invited over to Dr. Brown's house.  But that's been restored, and they're working on the dormitories, Stone Hall, where I lived, and some of the other buildings, the dining hall.
Speaker 2: But, essentially, this was, these schools were for the, the elite, the--of black society in many ways.  It was a boarding--I mean (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yes, well, it, well, it was--you had to pay to go there.
Speaker 2: You had to pay to go there, right.
Speaker 1: But there were students, I think, that had scholarships.  Or now I think there were students probably who were paid for by communities or people like that, so it wasn't--you weren't, you didn't feel elite in any way.
Story_ID: 78300
Speaker 1: Maybe, as I look back on it, it was a privilege, but an opportunity and but--
Speaker 2: Now who were some of your classmates or people that, you know, people might know or--
Speaker 1: At Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]?  I don't know that, I don't know that you'd know any of them.
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you--
Speaker 1: But I've, I've maintained friends with--one of my closest friends here in Washington [D.C.] was a classmate of mine at Palmer, as well as I have a friend who was really from Savannah [Georgia], and I roomed with her.  We had about four in the room by then, but and when I was thirteen, she gave me a birthday card.  That was the first year.  My birthday is in December, so I always had big celebrations at school 'cause everybody's getting ready to go home and they were happy to celebrate my birthday.  But, anyway, she gave me a card, and she has given me a card every year since I was thirteen, including now, this past December.  She lives, she lives in Cleveland [Ohio].  I've only seen her two or three times.  And then we call--then I'll send her a plant of poinsettia or something for Christmas.  And we get on the phone and talk and get brought up to date from the year before.
Story_ID: 78301
Speaker 1: Now was your--did you, did she [Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown] have an overall curriculum?  Did you take anymore, you know, science courses or math?
Speaker 2: Well, we had--yes, she had a general curriculum and then, there were electives as well.  So then I took more--what's that--physics.  I took physics in high school.  I took chemistry, two grades of chemistry in high school.  And then they had languages.  And I took Latin because my parents said everybody should learn Latin, but I also took French simultaneously.  So one time, I was, I took two years of French, four years of Latin, so they were electives within the core curriculum that people could take.
Speaker 1: And you were always a good student?
Speaker 2: I wasn't as--I was conscious--I, I enjoyed learning, enjoyed learning and then applying oneself makes you a good student.
Speaker 1: And did you--how do you think this, this experience at Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] changed you and formed you?  I mean you're out of your parents' household, but in a protective environment, but still you're on your own and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how many years did you spend at Palmer?
Speaker 2: Four, uh-hum.  Well, I, I really think it made you grow up and gave you independence, made--even with them, this structured environment, there were decisions that had to be made.  And it really--well, my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] was there so that was good.  That was very helpful, I guess, but, you know, we didn't have, we didn't call home.  She told you, don't call home, you know, if there's a reason to call.  Well, we had no way to call.  We had no phones, but as far as, I learned to write, and I learned to write home.  And I wrote every week.  And I can recall my father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] coming back to campus.  And I'm sure he just came to see how things were going, but he had been to a meeting or something in Greensboro [North Carolina].  And he's--and they didn't tell us and I didn't know he was coming.  And I remember I was on a school bus and I looked out and I saw him, and I just charged off the bus.  I was so glad to see him.  But I think he just probably stopped by to see how we were doing.  But I wrote letters every week and I, you know, they knew that I was having such a wonderful time.  So many new friends, new experiences, people from all over, so it was, but it really did make you grow up because you learned to--emotionally, you know, developed on just, developed some steel 'cause, you know, teenagers are teenagers, no matter where you are.  And with the ups and downs of friendships and the falling outs, and all those things that go on every round, but then you don't have anybody to go home and talk about it with.  Although they had counselors and if you really had concerns, you could, you know, go and talk with them with one of the counselors about, you know, what was on your mind.  But it did--I think it did make you, give you a sense of independence.  And, and I think it probably has given me the ability to go into strange and different situations and not feel threatened or at all.  And when I came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know, it's a lot of people working.  It's a big city, but we didn't know it was a big city 'cause we were confined to the campus.  And you couldn't go across to Georgia Avenue even which was the main street but I didn't feel intimidated at all.  It was very much like what I--they did stories on Palmer.  There's a story in "Ebony" was done.  And there's a story about Palmer--a book really.  It includes a lot of photographs--Griff Davis took, and he came there when I was in my senior year.  His sister was a student there, Darby (ph.) Davis.
Story_ID: 78302
Speaker 1: So when you graduate, is it assumed that you're going to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, by, by whom?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm just saying, okay (laughter).  It's like, no, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  In fact, you see, my parents--all, you know, were educated, of course, but they had gone to smaller schools.  And I never thought I would come to a school that was in a large city or university that was this large.  And when we were in high school, and people said, well, where are you going to college, where are you going to college, and one thing and another.  I said, well, I don't know, but I know I'm not going to any very large school.  I really didn't think I would be coming here [Howard University].  But my parents, I think, knew that they had a strong science program, and a medical school.  And so, they suggested that we, we both--my brother [William Kenneth Payne II], he was going to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] for two years.  And he transferred and came to Howard when I came, so that we could be together.  And he went on to Howard Med School [Howard University College of Medicine] as well.  And so, I--it was, you know, we had no, we had Morehouse and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]--were all the schools that my family members had gone to.  So we would, although I had an uncle who had finished medical school here in 1930, finished Howard.  But we were the only ones who had come here first to go to undergraduate school so.
Speaker 1: So when, so, so, then they're the ones who actually suggested it then?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then was your brother--do you think he, he was, he wanted to get out of Morehouse or was--
Speaker 2: No, they wanted to keep us together.  And he was premed as well.  And at that time, they didn't really have a good record in terms of students from Morehouse getting into medical school.  And so, they wanted to put us in the position where we could apply.  And then my father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] had classmates here--Nabrit, Jim Nabrit was here.  Dean of the graduate school had been a classmate of his, Charlie Thompson [Charles Henry Thompson].  And so, these were people, I guess, who could look over us without looking at us, and without our knowing that we were, were being sort of a protective oversight if that, if you will.  I suspect they--I never got, you know, he would say, get in touch with Matt Glam (ph.).  I never got in touch with anybody.  But it doesn't mean they didn't know where we were and what, what we were doing, I suspect.
Story_ID: 78303
Speaker 1: What did you do between the summer of, you know, graduation from Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] and, you know, coming to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  Did you go back?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I always went home every summer, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always went home every summer.  When I was younger, even when at Palmer, we would go--I would take courses at camp on Savannah State's [University, Savannah, Georgia] campus, I would.  We always went to school.  I loved school so much that once I stopped going to school, I just missed it every fall.  I would just get nostalgic.  I--you, you know, and leaves would turn, I'd feel--but since I finished medical school, I've gotten two more degrees, and I've had enough.  I don't get nostalgic (laughter) anymore.  I don't, I don't feel it anymore.  But I loved--I, I would take courses, I remember, when my mother went to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to teach and study, and I went over there with her.  I, I took a course, the "History of the English language".  So it would be, you know, things like that that were stimulating and enriching and what-not.  Then I would go to school.  And then, I'd go to camp.  Sometimes it was camp counselor for the Girl Scout camps and things like that.  We were always busy.  I mean there was never a time when we were just doing nothing.  Parents taught usually in summer school.  And one of the things I did at--I used to take dance lessons at the camp.  That's when I was a child.  In fact, my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] and I used to dance when we were little, you know, perform.  And we were living in Little Rock [Arkansas]--I do remember that.  We would, you know, be on the stage and I can remember we'd do a little Dutch dance or whatever.  And I think he doesn't like to dance today, but I love to dance and I enjoy dancing.  And I took interpretative dancing when I was in--at home.  In elementary school, I took dance in high school.  I took dance in college, and I took tap dancing and, and modern dance.  And, but the dance teacher at--when I was a child, who couldn't dance herself, but she could tell me what to do.  And I would, I would enjoy, and every evening, they had a 4-H camp when the dorm was empty, the 4-H kids would come from all over the state.  And we always looked forward to that, and they would stay for a week at a time.  We'd go to that and enjoy those activities and participate, but they always had a welcoming program.  And she would--my dance teacher would always have me dancing at the welcoming program.  And these children--I guess a lot of them were rural areas--probably never seen anything like--I would make my costume and I would get a record, and I would practice and what-not.  Then I would get up there and perform.  And even as a teenager, she still had me doing.  And I said, please, don't, but she said, oh, you must come, you must come, and do the dance, you know.  They always looked forward to it, so those were 4-H days. H days.
Speaker 1: Did you ever--(unclear) with the 4-H, did you ever hear of something called the Ham and Egg Show?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 78304
Speaker 1: I just asked--with your father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] and your mother [Mattie Beverly Payne], did you ever have a sense of the, you know, the challenges of running a college or, you know, would that ever come into the sort of a mix within the family discussions?
Speaker 2: Not, not that would include me, but, you know, I think it's probably one of the most challenging environments that there is, not only from the--and I'm sure my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] will tell you that, from his being vice-president for health affairs at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], it's a very challenging environment because you not only have the faculty and all of their issues, but then you have your staff issues, and then the students who are under your protection.  And so, I know of times and intervention when my father really had to come really to the rescue of students, and on the campus [of Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and faculty members, and things of that nature.  But not really in terms of the academic performance of it, but it's more the people and issues that would come that sometimes I would just sort of hear about.
Story_ID: 78305
Speaker 1: One time I was really was in-, involved in, I was--in the summer, they had a campus post office [at Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  And my father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] was officially the post off-, postmaster of this campus post office.  And he had a woman [Eloria S. Gilbert] who was the director of the post office who, who was the wife of one of the ministers in Savannah [Georgia], a very outstanding minister, Rev. [Ralph Mark] Gilbert.  And she was a very proper lady.  And each--I think about twice a year they tell--the post office auditors would come, and she would always take her vacation in the summer when they were gone, when they coming because you had to add up all of the stamps,  and this was all before computers, you had all these different categories of stamps and everything.  You had to add it up, and they would total it up.  And if you were short, you had to add the money.  If it were more, they'd take it, you know, like a profit.  And I always wanted to be sure I had the right--oh, so, I'm getting ahead of myself.  So, Mrs. Gilbert would always take her vacation.  In summers, my father asked me if I would go over there and be the director of the post office for that week or so.  So I did and it, it was interesting.  You'd put the mail--the mail would come in from the city post office.  You'd put it in the different mailboxes.  You'd open the windows, sell stamps, and certified mail, and that sort of thing.  And so, and the auditors would come, and I was just adding up all of these stamps--how many ones I have, tens, you know.  And if I thought I was short, I'd ask somebody, and they'd come and they'd find out I had more, and they'd take it away.  But, anyway, that--the--we all-, always had a student to work with us because they would carry these bags.  I probably was in medical school then.  And they would carry this mail, mail bags, you know, the heavy bags, and open them and so forth.  And so, people used to come, and this nice guy, Brown--his last name was Brown.  And he worked, and he was really a nice guy and dressed well and pleasant.  He'd go next door and buy me something to drink, you know, a really nice guy, a little younger than I was, but not that much.  And so, once, some of the people were just complaining about the fact the mail was being--they didn't get this, or somebody sent some money or something.  And these were a lot of summer school people and from rural areas where people didn't have money orders or, you know, that kind of thing.  They would just put cash and, and they would complain about those kind of things.  And so I said, well, something's, you know, that has to be going on between that, including what they're mailing downtown.  I said because, you know, this is the post office.  And I was, you know, standing by that.  So we had a system by which we--when a letter comes, if you stamp the back of the letter when it's sealed, like a certified letter, if it's open, you can never reapproximate.  You will not--there's nothing you can do to make it go back and be, and not show that it's been opened.  That's why they stamped it back up like that.  So, one morning I was in there, and I looked at it, and I saw that this letter seemed to have had been opened.  And I think the postmaster inspector had told me, be on the lookout, you know, for this kind of thing.  And so I called him at the office.  And so he said, well, you deliver the letter, and ask the person to open it in your presence, and find out whether everything is all right.  So I did that, and the person opened the letter and they always said, yes, everything, you know, it was fine.  So I called him back and told him.  So he said, okay, we're gonna send a test letter through, and said, don't you be there.  My father said, I guess they told him, because the postman said, tell your daughter not to open the post office tomorrow.  So I said, okay.  And so, I called the fellow--I said, listen, I'm going to be a little late in the morning.  I said, would you mind opening the post office?  And so he said, okay, I'll, I'll open the post office.  And so then, I guess it was about two hours later.  And my father said to me--said well, they picked up Brown.  He had been opening the mail and stealing out of the mail.  I was sick.  I, I can still feel the hurt and the pain.  And I just, I never would have thought it, you know.  It just--I, I just felt so betrayed, so hurt, just, it was just--it was so terrible.
Story_ID: 78306
Speaker 1: And so, and my father [Dr. William Kenneth Epps] said, well, I'm going to go downtown, and said they picking up the man, they picked him up on the other side of town.  He had some of the marked money and everything.  He says, I'm going to go downtown and see what I can to help him.  And he went down there, and he talked with him, and said this young man is being raised by his grandmother, and she's up in the, you know, in the rural area.  And this is going to be heartbreaking for her, and he hasn't done anything like this before.  And he just, you know, he, he really pleaded for him.  And so they said, well, okay, professor--they all called him professor--say, well, we won't put him in jail.  He, he needs to go and, and register for the [U.S.] Army and go into the military.  If he does that, we won't, we won't do that.  And so, those are the kind of things that my father did, but I was just--I never went back to--after that.  And so, I just couldn't go back to the post office again.  I said, you have to find somebody else to, to fill in for me.  I can't do this.  But I, you know, in a way, I solved the problem, and but it wasn't the solution I thought I'd find.  I thought it would be somebody up further, up the pipeline--not nothing into the (unclear).  So I don't know what happened to him, but there were other cases like that.  Faculty members were getting difficult, my father would, knowing thieves, so these are the kind of things he would do behind the scenes as part of, you know, university and the people don't know about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, uh-hum.  And, you know, getting accreditations.  It's a lot, a lot of things like that.  So when I went into medicine, I was, you know, wasn't particularly planning to teach, or universities didn't that much fascination for me.  I knew both sides of them.  But I did and I have, you know, been a teacher and professor--in fact, started out really teaching and doing research.  And then they tell me it was nepotism.  I couldn't--we both couldn't be in there.  So that's when I went into public health.
Story_ID: 78307
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and those early years.  Were you like official with (unclear) at that point?
Speaker 2: Was I what?
Speaker 1: Were you like official with (unclear) when you were at Howard then studying, you know, during those early years before medical, you know, as an undergraduate?
Speaker 2: No, Howard was a very--it was post-World War II.  A lot of the veterans had come back, and so there were two really groups of Howard students.  There were the veterans, and then there were those of who were sixteen, very young, coming in.  There were five men to every woman on campus.  You always had a date (laughter).  They always had a dance.  There were all-, you know, always, always had a boyfriend, always, you know, it was, was quite a--it was a different situation totally, from what I was accustomed to.  But these older students, these veterans, came there with a mission.  And I think that they sort of drove everybody to have a mission, so they appreciated it.  They were there on the GI bill, that they had come there to get an education.  And so, it was a serious place.  Academically, people did--and they didn't tolerate students who weren't producing.  There was a phrase around Howard.  I mean, we had--will you look to your left and look to your right 'cause one of you won't be here when the grass grows green.  And that was the big measure.  You can hardly put anybody out of school now.  You will keep going as long as you can keep paying, but then if you didn't have a B average or whatever, a C+, whatever, I don't know what it was.  But by the spring quarter, you were dismissed.  And so, it was a serious academic place.  And there were a lot, you know, they had social events.  Every Friday and Saturday night, it was some dance or something, and a little orchestra and what-not.  So it was, it was a different environment.  We lived in a quadrangle in the dorms.  And we couldn't go out to the city at all until spring.  We couldn't go to even to the store to buy something.  So it was, even though we were in the city, it was a very sheltered environment.  Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 78308
Speaker 1: Now who was the president at the time?
Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  Those were really--this was the years when Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was growing on to be (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (unclear).
Speaker 1: And the faculty, some of them (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) say who they were (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, Alain [LeRoy] Locke and Frank Snowden and Beanie Bouchard (ph.), art department, Lois [Mailou] Jones, and all of--I think in medicine, we had lots of people, but on the hill, I think Ralph Bunche had been there.  [Howard] Thurmond had just gone, so it was sorta like the golden, the golden years of how--we were very fortunate that to have been there and taught by those professors, who were--of course, all extremely bright people with graduate degrees and research and training.  And so, Lloyd [N.] Ferguson [HM] in chemistry, and Friendly (ph.) in zoology.  We--marvelous, marvelous faculty.  And we took the, what they called survey courses, so everybody had to take basic social sciences, basic literature, English.  We had English 1, 2, and 3.  You had to take an entrance exam in English and then you were placed according to where you finished.  And everybody took public speaking.  And we had to take writing courses and so it was, it was a wonderful experience, a very rigorous education.
Story_ID: 78309
Speaker 1: Were you challenged any more than you had been at, at--
Speaker 2: Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]?  At--when I first, when I first came, got there [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the freshman year, I felt very comfortable.  I mean it was no challenge at all.  And, of course, as the courses went on, they became more challenging because as, you know, college preparatory school, we were perhaps advanced placed anyway, but the freshman year was quite--but as it went on to, you know, trigonometry and college algebra, and physics, and biochemistry had really--these were not subjects I'd had before (laughter) so they were quite challenging.
Speaker 1: Which one did you find most challenging?  A lot of people find biochemistry--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was quite challenging.  And in fact, my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM], that's where we'd really gotten, really dating.  He was a chemistry major and that was his--it wasn't biochemistry in college, it was organic.
Speaker 1: Organic, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Organic, uh-hum.  Yeah, organic chemistry.  By the whole, he loved it.  He was a breeze through with the A's and what-not, so we used to study together (laughter) although we met in philosophy class, so, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then, you were a double major--was a double major in zoology and--
Speaker 2: No, a minor in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Minor in chemistry and zoology.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, no.
Speaker 1: Now why did you choose zoo-, zoology?
Speaker 2: Well, because it's premed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a premed student.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Those--those was the courses.
Speaker 1: Those, those were the courses so (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  You either majored, majored in chemistry and minor in zoology, which my husband did, but I majored in zoology, minors in chemistry, uh-hum.
Story_ID: 78310
Speaker 1: Now, so when you and your husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] met, or got together even in philosophy--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --was it--so was he--he was encouraging of you and your interest in, you know, in being--
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all (laughter), not at all.  In fact, we were in a philosophy class, and he said--it was a required course.  And he sat in front of us so, and he used to turn around and tease the girl next to me.  I didn't know who he was.  I was--we were in junior year.  And he had taken a year as a chemistry major with a lot of pharmacy students.  So I didn't know any--and I asked this girl, Jennifer, I said, who is that, you know, he turns around and teasing you and everything?  She said, oh, don't you know Charles Epps?  So I said, no, I don't know him.  She said, well, he's the vice president of the class.  I said, well, I haven't been to class meetings, so I don't know him.  But, and then we started taking chemistry together, and we'd study--and a group of us.  It was down in the valley, as they used to call it, 'cause the chemistry building was down there.  And we would be late in the evening because we had lab courses, and so we never finished until about 5.  And then we'd go--as a group, we'd go to dinner.  And I, I was dating somebody else.  I guess he was, too.  And we would sit around and talk about what we planned to do.  And I said, oh, I'm going to medical school.  And so, then they would all--so these guys were also, but one thing I know, I'd never marry a woman doctor.  And I--he was such a nice, kind person.  I was--I was really kind of amazed that he would even make a statement like that.  And then, he said, oh, no, I ain't going to (unclear).  But he's been my most avid, ardent supporter who really has encouraged me--has really become in a way of a champion to women and women's rights and been able to recognize when women not being given their equal.  And you know, he was the first to take women into orthopedic surgery.  But no at the beginning, he never thought it.  He thought that, I guess, women would--woman, wife, and physician would not have the time to be a physician, wife, and mother.  But I don't know what I would have done with all my time if I hadn't done all of it.
Speaker 1: Oh, I mean it's amazing.
Story_ID: 78311
Speaker 1: So now, when you, you do very well in school though--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --as which is a continuation of how you, but you, you mastered Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know.  I mean--remember how you said the courses, they were easy at the beginning--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then, you know, but, but you graduated cum laude?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then, was there any decision and, you know, at that point, was the--were there other medical schools?
Speaker 2: Primarily Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was the only other one.
Speaker 1: Meharry, that's right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But let me just say that about women and going into medicine.  When I came into medical school, I mean, when I came to college, there was only 50 percent of the class, girls, said they were interested in medicine--only 50 percent.  And then, as the years went on, they didn't, didn't want to apply themselves or the ones that said, oh, you don't have to go to medical school.  I cannot tell you how many people discouraged women from things.  And I think that's why I've been very involved in women's issues and Girls Inc., and things like that because people are turned off at various stages for whatever reason.  And I meet people now, but anyway, at least half of the women in the class said they weren't interested in medicine.  One by one, they left.  They would change their major and this and--well, some of them was academically, too challenging, I admit that.  And as they said, organic [chemistry], but in the end, I think out of a class of--there were about 1,100 in our class, I think.  But, anyway, there were three of us actually were admitted into medical school.  And two of us went, and one of them who was admitted, decided she didn't think she wanted to do that, and even after she was admitted, and didn't go to medical school.  So, it--women have been turned away so many times and discouraged.  And I think that was the thing that I--my family gave me that--to encourage me.  And, sure, there are sacrifices.  There are times that you're up all night studying.  Now there were two medical schools as you were asking.  And I was accepted at Meharry and at Howard.  And at that time, we were dating and, but I, and then Meharry didn't have--they didn't have a dormitory.  They didn't have places to stay and Nashville [Tennesse] didn't have any, any resource.  I knew from Washington [D.C.] and what-not, and so my parents--although I couldn't decide, I kept acceptances at both.  And I said, well, I don't know.  Maybe I'll go to Meharry, so they kept insisting that I had to decide myself that they were going to help me.  Then, finally, they started giving, end of the summer, giving me the sort of advantages and disadvantages of them both.  And I said, okay, I'm going back to Howard.  I'd been in Washington four years.  I thought it might be nice to change, but I'm glad I did.
Speaker 1: Do you think--I want to ask one thing about the culture, the environment at Howard, and whether that was any different for you though you had, you know, had gone to what--I think you want to call, but, you know, but the Palmer School, sort of like a finishing school.  But this, this is--was there any part of the society factor 'cause I, you know, something about the way you were raised was, you know, there was a lot of egalitarian.  And your parents seemed to be, you know, very committed to education, but not necessarily distinguishing in some cases.  So I'm wondering if, you know, because a lot of Howard was, you know, get them, (unclear), get a man (laughter), but, you know, that--but you were career-oriented.  And I'm wondering if that, you know, within your circle of women, whether, you know, people said, why do you have to be so driven--none of that.
Speaker 2: No, I think about it.  I think (coughing), excuse me.  I think my peers, you mean, were they?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No, they recognized that, as I said, many of us started out there on that way.  And so, as they fell by the wayside, they didn't criticize the fact that I kept going because that was where a lot of them, you know, had wanted to do, too, so.
Speaker 1: And your brother [William Kenneth Payne II] is still two years ahead of you, right?
Speaker 2: Right, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So he had already gone on to--
Speaker 2: To medical school--when I finished, uh-hum.
Story_ID: 78312
Speaker 1: So I want to go to--
Speaker 2: Go back--
Speaker 1: --your first year, you know, and how that was.
Speaker 2: In medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: In medical school.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that in some ways, some of the courses were similar and some were--it was really an adjustment because we had students, predominantly male, although I was accustomed to male, predominantly male, but professors who were not necessarily that I don't-- I won't say--appreciate, but there were women on the faculty at Howard.  There were faculty women, so we had people that we could emulate.  And Howard always has had women in this medical school, always had--
Speaker 1: And they weren't teaching just nurses--the courses--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  We had a woman OB-GYN, pediatrics, we had women who were faculty members.  So it wasn't as though we were just alone out there.  And these were colleagues of these individuals who were our teachers.  We had pre-clinical teachers who were in the--the chairman of biochemistry was a woman, Mel Moore (ph.), and she had you in that--we had to be in there at 8:00.  And anybody who was late, she'd lock the door.  And so there, there were women there.  So that was--you didn't feel isolated from that standpoint.
Story_ID: 78313
Speaker 1: But I can recall, this is a funny story.  In fact, the, the professor of neuroanatomy who had quite a reputation. Well, I, I think the first day of school, I had the flu or something.  Anyway, I didn't go to class.  And so, when I went to class and we had a laboratory, and had everything in neuro, neurology, neuro--what was it called?  Anyway, it wasn't neurology 'cause that's the clinical portion.  But anyway, we--neuroanatomy, thank you.  And so, I--we had microscopes and so forth.  And so, I had moved my microscope over by the light.  Well, you know, I came from college, very informal situation.  And everybody had an assigned place, but I didn't know that.  And so, he walked by with his head up and he says, where is this young lady?  Is she here today?  So I said, well, here I am, Dr. [Moses Wharton] Young, I'm over here.  And he says, your place is over here.  He said what are you doing over there?  I said, well, I moved my microscope over here so I could see the light, so that I could see the light.  So he said, young lady, some people look down that microscope and never see the light.  Oh, I was so, I was--everybody, of course, laughed.  And I was so embarrassed and I didn't know that he was like that.  And I, I--tears came in my eyes.  And he never called on me again.  And interesting enough, he was a very good friend of my uncle and had been a classmate of his in medical school.  They had both finished Howard in 1930 but he was a character.  He said sometimes students would leave the lab a little early and he would say, where are you going, where are you going?  And so, they said, well, I finished.  So you're finished--he says, men have been looking down that microscope for 200 years, and they haven't finished.  And you come in here and after two hours, you think you're finished?  And so, whoo, we had some characters, but he was an excellent teacher, excellent teacher.  And, in fact, when I took a board examination, that was the course that just was a breeze because he had, he was such a good teacher.  But so, yes, we had some you know, and then, you know, in certain courses, people would say things, but it didn't matter to me because I knew I was goal oriented.  And I knew that--I think you had that--but it didn't mean I didn't know what, what was happening, but, you know, I didn't have time to waste, say, for instance, going to complain about a professor or somebody--I had my work to do.  Take care of business.
Story_ID: 78314
Speaker 1: Now, when you first saw your first--I want to say corpse, but it's not--
Speaker 2: A cadaver.
Speaker 1: Cadaver, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did that unnerve you at all?
Speaker 2: Well, I had never seen anything like it--I'll tell you that much.  But it was--I knew that was part of it, that it was part of the process, and that it was there to learn and, and, you know, I just went on about doing it.  But, and we had a woman, Dr. Ruth Lloyd, who was the chief of anatomy and a laboratory, and she was there.  And, you know, five of us were assigned, and we just went about our work.
Speaker 1: Because you hear about people throwing up or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --you know, getting ill, and none of that?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, no.  Formaldehyde is, you know, the odor is not good, but you can see.  You see, everything was a means to get to the goal and so, if other people had done it and this is what's required, then that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Now would your, your husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM], was he sort of--did you guys study together during that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we studied, yeah, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And had you sort of committed--did you know you would end up together at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were, we were serious, we were serious at that time, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And now, the first--so anything to do with pediatrics, was that sort of handled--the, you know, not the first two years but like during the--
Speaker 2: The clinical, doing the clinical rotation, but you had a general clinical rotation and so, you took everything.  You took surgery.  You took obstetrics, you know, we took all of that.  And we also had rotating internships which they don't do now.  They do specialty with internships.  And so, you know, I would--if I would want to, but I could deliver a baby.  I could remove an appendix now, even if I, you know, in an emergency if I were in some remote area, I could, I could do it.  I wouldn't want to but I--
Speaker 1: I was wondering if you had ever been interested in OB-GYN, you know--they're not, not, not at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  No, I wanted them after they were here.
Story_ID: 78315
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other things, you know, significant, any teachers that particularly influenced you or you liked.  Can you talk some about the, you know, the faculty that was there?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I certainly admired the women faculty members.  Not only were they bright and good but they looked good.  They looked like woman and, you know, they, they, particularly Dr. Blanche Bourne, who was pediatrics.  And they said--showed that you didn't have to look like, and be like a man in order to be--that you could be feminine.  And they were, were good role models and were good teachers, and everybody liked them.  And my advisor, in fact, she was also my brother [William Kenneth Payne II]'s advisor.  They had to advise us, assigned alphabetically, and so my brother's and my advisor was Dr. [Ruth Ella] Moore, this woman who was chairman of biochemistry, I mean bacteriology.  And she would invite us to her home and had the best Thanksgiving dinner.  She would invite us to her home--and wonderful.  And I remember she gave us a wedding present, a pressure cooker, which I still use today, twenty something years later.  She died about a year ago, a few years ago, I guess, she was ninety-nine.
Story_ID: 78316
Speaker 1: But there were a lot of people who were kind and, you know, took in, and... Now when I became a resident in pediatrics, my chairman, Dr. Roland Scott, really was a person who had great influence on me.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Roland Scott was the chairman of the department, and he also was the first African American, certified in pediatrics, and also the first to become a member of the Academy of Pediatrics.  He died last year and he was about ninety-four, I think, but I learned a lot from him.  This was a man who really came along at a time when there was no one else out front, you know.  And he would go to all the meetings.  He would take--he wrote publications.  He had research.  He had a private practice.  And he--when he would go to conferences and meetings, he'd raise his hand, and he'd get up and make a comment or ask a question.  Everyone knew he had been there.  And no matter where we'd go out of the country and met somebody, they would say, well, do you know Dr. Roland?  You're from Howard [University School of Medicine]--do you know Dr. Roland Scott?  He's in sickle cell research.  And I did research with him and practiced with him in his office for a year after I finished.  And he taught me that you needed to take time.  He says, publish new research and publish.  He says if you don't do it while you don't have time--he said, but if you don't do it while you're a resident, you won't do when you finish.  You just won't never be able to figure it out.  And so, I wrote papers with him and did some research projects.  And he had, had tremendous influence in terms of professional development and how one can just go.  I mean he went to things, and he would get money for the residents to go to the pediatric meetings.  And we would always have an exhibit and he would go to the sessions, and we would man the exhibit.  But we got an opportunity to meet people.  I remember the Academy of Pediatrics met in Chicago [Illinois] every year so we used to go.  I forget the (unclear).  I was the chief resident and we would go, and we would--and I would, in fact, it was so funny because one time I remember we were going to the meeting.  And I think it was the first one, and I think he thought that--I know I probably would be tagging along looking for him.  I'm talking about in the car--look for me, you know, help me or something.  And so, when we got there to the airport, I went and got my bag and got on that bus and went into the Palmer House.  I didn't--and so the next--when we were setting up the exhibit, he said, well, what happened to you?  He said--I said, well, you know, we had arrived.  I didn't want him to think that I was there and would be dependent on him to guide me around, you know.  You didn't say, well, you know, let's share a cab or let's do this.  So, I said, well, if we're on our own, I know how to do that, too.  So, so I did but he--but he did, and then when my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps] came back to be chief of orthopedics and they said, well, we got nepotism here [Freedman's Hospital, now Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  So I talked to him, and he says, well, why don't you go to look into public health?  He said, but if you go into public health, he says, you get the degree that people in public health have got.  And so, he called them [D.C. Department of Public Health] up and asked them if they had an opening.  And I went down and interviewed and what-not and was hired, and as a well-baby clinic doctor.
Speaker 2: So he, he was a very good mentor.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 78317
Speaker 1: Now what did--you said you did research on sickle cell when you were still with him [Dr. Roland Scott].
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, with him, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And what was--how far along was the whole study of sickle cell at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, listen.  It was very little funding.  In fact, he did--he really brought it to the limelight.  He did most of the testimony in Congress and pushed for the passage of the Sickle Cell Act [1972] and getting money for research and sickle cell disease.  And what--he had a lab there with one other pediatrician who really--Dr. Angella Ferguson, and one lab tech, and that was essentially it.  And he had a lot of patients with sickle cell disease.
Speaker 1: You know, why--this is in 19-, what, '55 [1955], '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: Rather, well, '55, '56 was an internship so this was '57 [957] to '60 [1960] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And did he--can you just talk about how sickle cell was even first discovered?
Speaker 2: Oh, it had been discovered sometime before.  So really, the issue was mostly the paying for crises that people had and the children had, and early diagnosis and infections and things like that.  So we had a lot of the patients who came in the outpatient clinic, too.  But many of them, it was diagnosis, it was treatment, it was transfusions, it was pain medicine.  And so, it isn't that much further now, but it, but it's the progress, it's now that they've looked and more--but they knew about the sickling of the cell 'cause it was easy to diagnose and what-not.  But this--it was very little that could be done--hydration, give them fluids and, and pain medicine.
Speaker 1: And what did cause it?  I mean what--I know it's indicative to, you know, African Americans, but was it something that was traced back to--
Speaker 2: Well, it really has its origins around the, really the Sub-Saharan Mediterranean part of the country, world, and so it's not only African Americans predominantly, but there are some people from some other Asiatic countries that have it.  And it, it's really a protective device, and people who had sickle cell disease did not have the problems with malaria.  So it, in some, some environments, it's been a protective environment--has been a protective mechanism for malaria, which was--killed a lot of people, too, in the world.  So a, a lot is known and, of course, now that they've found the genetic code and things like that.  There are a lot of other kinds of things that are being done.  I saw just recently that they were doing a bone marrow transplant.  And I can remember asking Dr. Scott when I--that was thirty-something years ago.  I says, why don't they do bone marrow transplants if this is the problem?  So he said, oh, well, you know, bone marrow transplants are not a simple procedure, and people, you know, die from that.  It's very serious and have a lot of complications.  So I guess now that some of the technology in medicines and so forth have come forward to not only identify matches, but also identify ways to prevent rejection of--that some of these things that seemed illogical at--at one time are now being able to be done.  So I did the--just recently, read about bone marrow transplant being tried for a patient with sickle cell disease.
Story_ID: 78318
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the other issues that were prevalent during that time as it relates to, you know, to, to children?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  Well, of course, they had vitamin D deficiency and things, vitamin deficiency, malnutrition issues.  Diarrhea was a big issue, TB.  We had a lot of children with tuberculosis before the INH medication that enabled the children to stay at home.  So we had infections and scarlet fever.  I even saw a child with diphtheria.  The child had not been immunized.  I take immunizations very seriously.  And, in fact, I'm on the board of the Betty Carter--no, Rosalynn Carter, Betty Bumpers immunization campaign.  And I've worked with them through the years since Rosalynn Carter was here in the White House, but I'm on the advisory committee--board, really.  And but I, I've seen children with these diseases.  A little boy came up from North Carolina--had not had his immunizations, and he was a big boy, 13 years, 12, 13 years old--terrible cough and diphtheria film all over his throat.  And there was no treatment actually--just cough, so you could just see the rings of his trachea.  And these are serious illnesses.  So immunizations and raising immunizations has been an issue.  It's been important to me.  And in--I've been--I made it my, my initiative, the year I was President, Medical Society of D.C., I made that my initiative--was to immunize.  So that as you go into these different positions, you can use the information you have and, and do something to help further the cause.  We went to every ward in the city and held immunization campaigns and so forth.  So I dote this, so immunization always is an issue, primarily because children are constantly being born.  And so if you don't continue the process, it's not that it ever ends, and there are a lot more vaccines now than there, than there were then, too.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause it's still a vac--the vaccines were still in the process of being created or was it mandatory at schools?
Speaker 2: Not then, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Not then, okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't mandatory then, and that was one of the things that--when I went to work that we were able to do was to get it mandatory for infants.  And, of course, most children didn't go to school then until five or six, so that was pretty late, and you really need to be immunized much earlier.  But then the schools began to develop the early school programs, then that brought age down, so that made it better for them.  But even enforcing it had become an issue, and it's just in recent years that the schools have been serious about--now they're really enforcing it.
Story_ID: 78319
Speaker 1: Now when you went to get your master's of public health and you know it was because, you know--
Speaker 2: I go--
Speaker 1: Nepotism.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, oh, I'm--nepotism (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Right 'cause nepotism sent you into a--but you know, but let me--when, when you went there, were you thinking public health at that time or was it--
Speaker 2: Well, when?
Speaker 1: When you went to get your, your master's and help--
Speaker 2: Well, see I went--I got my master's in public health while I was working, while I had children.  You see, immediately I went over there [D.C. Department of Public Health] at, at his [Dr. Roland Scott] recommendation.  And I was, I was told, they didn't have Highway 95, and they didn't, you know, they had a train.  I had a couple of kids and so I was interviewed, and admitted to Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And then I said, my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] was doing his residency and, you know, we had a housekeeper and what-not.  She couldn't stay until I got home at 9:00 at night.  And so, and so I said, well, I really can't go and do this now.  And so, I stayed and worked in pub- in public health, beginning in the--well, maybe the clinic doctor and moving every three years, being promoted.  And then, the director of health that had been over there at Hopkins, and he developed a program when which they would bring courses to Washington part-time.  And then you go in there a couple days a week or so.  And so they asked people to apply in either class in order to have this program.  And so I didn't apply.  I said, well, I'm up as chief of the bureau, chief of internal job health--I don't really, you know, I moved up.  I don't need this especially.  And so, he came to me and said, well, they need some physicians, and he said, really need, say, we really need to--I want you.  So I kinda got the message that, you know, maybe I should do this.  It was very important.  So I put my name on the list and then, and Hopkins had kept, kept the original application, and I was the first one admitted because I had already been admitted.  And so, it was a wonderful experience.  I was working every day.  I had four kids.  I--but they brought courses over here and we were on the weekends.  And, and then we were able to use our day-to-day experiences, which I think was good for Hopkins, 'cause it helped them out of their ivory tower, but it also helped us because we could have a project or, or whatever, that dealt with the real issues of going on in terms of federal funding, about the urban migration.  And I was able to use that experience when I was asked to chair a task force to help the comprehensive care planned for the children, in addition to Columbia.  And so it really gave a solid foundation for, for my work.  And so I moved on in my interests in maternal and child help.  And it gave me the perspectives to do some international consultations and visits to Liberia and rural evaluating, learned about evaluating systems in, in the Caribbean looking at the family for the United Nations and World Bank and things like that and so.  So no knowledge is wasted.  Everything that, you know, can build on something else and builds on something else.
Story_ID: 78320
Speaker 1: Now, with--what, I didn't ask what Freedmen's microchip like--I mean Freedmen's Hospital [forerunner of Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But with this whole thing, was this an interesting time, though, in the area of public health and also with you moving to, you know, Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] in that way, was that sort of a trans--
Speaker 2: I didn't leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean not leave, I'm sorry, only--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I mean, but was that opening the world to what was happening more in the white medical community and sort of outside in the international community, or were you aware of those, you know, 'cause these--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was aware.
Speaker 1: You were aware?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, in terms of professional organizations and things, were you--okay, you were already--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were already?
Speaker 2: I was already very much involved.  In fact, for instance--
Speaker 1: 'Cause this was 19--was it 1973 that--
Speaker 2: When I finished, '71 [1971] and '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: --'73 [1973], okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  So I was already involved in a lot of things that were going on.
Speaker 1: But there hadn't been in the larger community sensitive to a lot of issues in terms of urban black America.  That's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: True, true--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was changing because they had this big migration when it occurred and people coming in from the rural areas, looking for jobs and, and the swelling of the welfare rolls, and the shortages of teachers.  I mean everything was just happening at once and, and but, you know, the, the kind of idyllic childhood I talked about in which everybody looked after everybody's kids.  There was nobody looking after the kids, you know, many of them on the street and children without homes, and being shunted from foster parents, the other things.  I mean, a lot of social underpinnings that really have a great impact on health.
Story_ID: 78321
Speaker 1: So where, was--was Freedmen's Hospital having to deal with a lot of these issues?  I'm just saying was--
Speaker 2: They always had.
Speaker 1: It had always been (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's the way it was created--
Speaker 1: --from the beginning.
Speaker 2: --that was the way it was created from--
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about it, you know, just its background?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, Freedmen's Hospital was founded back in '18 [1918]--shortly after the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I think, but and it was primarily--my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] has done a history on this.  You really ought to get him to tell you more about it in his interview.  But, but from my interview, let me just say it was the predominant institution where most specialists, particularly African American specialists--I'll talk about from the standpoint of a professional.  And so, we had really wonderful, bright--not only faculty, but the residents, too, who all liked to teach and wanted to teach us.  And it was located in my day in the building, the Freedmen's Hospital building, which is now C.B. Powell [Building], and it had these wings.  It had been originally an army barracks, and so had all these wings.  So we had large open wards and with 30, 40 patients in a ward.  And we'd walk, do rounds, and go up and down the wards and so forth.  And the emergency room was busy all the time with people coming in.  They didn't have a lot of the issues related to payment and care.  And people came, and they were seen and they were taken care of--a lot of indigent patients.  And so, it was a (unclear).  And not only for the Washington [D.C.] area, but people came from other parts of the country--came to Freedmen's.  I can remember a child that I diagnosed, that had not been diagnosed, who had what we call Hurler syndrome, which was the lipochondrodystrophy, a genetic disease.  And when I was a resident, this patient came in and had been sent from South Carolina to be diagnosed.  No one knew what was wrong with the child.  And they, they used to call it gargoylism 'cause this kid is a large kid, and sort of short limbs and what-not.  And so I kept--they said we know it must have some syndrome, but we just can't figure now what it is.  And I was a resident, and so I would study at night and look at the books and, well, my husband's books.  And it was characteristic--X-ray of the spine, that could tell you it was a (unclear), so I ordered that.  And, sure enough, and then the diagnosis, I made any and all the characteristic symptoms.  So I was able--oh, I was quite a star to make that diagnosis as a resident that had not been made before.  But and then the little brother came up, and then we reported the case in the literature because it had not been reported in blacks.  And so when people came from all over the country, particularly for diagnosis, and, and for surgery and for, for treatment.  So it really was a, you know, an outstanding place, not only for training, but for service.  And I can--at nights when we were on call, we worked very hard.  And we worked 36 hours, off 12, and my husband and I were rotating.  They thought they were being very helpful.  They put us, put us on the same program, like pediatrics and together.  And then he would work, but we were on call every other night, which meant that one of us was always on call.  And so, that wasn't too good and so, but we were there, and then they and we'd come back at night.  And so he would have to drive 'cause I didn't have my driver's license yet.  So he says, we got to do something about this.  And but the professors would be there at midnight, 1:00 in the morning, and, you know, you say, well, come Dr. Brown, Kelly Brown, I want you to look at a case that I have.  And they'd come, and they'd teach, and they enjoyed teaching.  And, and we enjoyed learning, you know, they just gave out pearls, and it was a very rich environment, very caring.  And it was a long hall with these wards on it, and so everybody knew everybody, and you saw everybody all the time.  And, of course, the new hospital, Howard University Hospital replacement, as you saw the wings and sections and so, you don't really get out and guess you get to know them (unclear) there, but it's not the same.  You walk up and down the hallways and you see everybody you knew, so it was a collegiality and a friendship, and a very wonderful environment.
Story_ID: 78322
Speaker 1: --environment that actually existed, you know, there and that being a very sort of positive supportive environment.  And it, and it goes back to probably even what you had, maybe had envisioned about medicine and the service orientation and all of that.
Speaker 2: Right, very much so.  And in fact, the class of interns and residents that were there [at Freedman's Hospital, now Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] when we were there, we're still close, even though people are all over the country.  You know, you shared the meals together.  You shared patients.  You retired together.  You supported each other in terms of on call and changing and so forth.  And so, those people are still quite close to us now, even years later.  Whenever we see each other, it's sort of like an old classmate.  You just pick up where you left off, and you don't have to feel that you have to prove anything or get to know them, you know, you know them very well.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates that people might know their names, you know, that were part of this group?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, who were some of our classmates?  Well, let me just say this.  To begin with, there were classmates, there were, of course, I said eight women, five Jewish people.  And there were a number of people from Africa, the Caribbean, and what, so we had quite a, quite a mixture of people.  And all the classes did have, had quite a mixture.  One of our classmates is a Jewish fellow, Richard Scher, who has just finished the term as the national President of American College of Derma-, American Academy of Dermatology.  And, of course, my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM].  And then we had Lorenzo Mile, excuse me, [Manuel] Lorenzo Walker, who was a classmate of ours, who practiced up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, and now is practicing associated with Penn, the University of Pennsylvania, although he's semi-retired with another couple that married in class, and our classmates, Bill and Eleanor Miles.  And they went to New York where he's, he's in radiology and she's an anesthesiologist.  She's, she was the number 1 in the class.  And I'm trying to think of other people who might have--we have some classmates who are in this area, Reginald Bennett who's with the Food & Drug Administration, and get about great deal on the phone, work on hormonal replacement, really for birth control in terms of lowering the, the dosage of estrogen so that women would not have subsequent side effects.  And we have Dr. Lawrence Dunmore who's here, who's been very involved in not only--he's with the director of health service hospital for the employee health.  And I don't know that we had anybody made any big discoveries or anything like that but--.
Story_ID: 78323
Speaker 1: Now when you--did you learn though about the ethics of, of being a medical doctor and what, you know, things that have stayed with you at, you know, you talked about the research aspect--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --that, that, you know, in the publishing aspect.  Were there other things that have stayed with you throughout your career?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  And by that, we--it was a part of--there is, 'cause every field has a culture, every field has, every field has a culture, a way in which one behaves.  And we learned about--
Speaker 1: (Brief Interruption)
Speaker 2: We learned certain ethical behaviors in terms of caring for one's patient.  It was a part of integrated--it wasn't a separate course in ethics, the way it has now.  But we learned it as an ongoing part of medical education.  It was integrated into it, so that you learned things such as that you don't, you know, take someone else's patient, that you're responsive to patients--the, the ethics of privacy that, you know, patient/doctor confidentiality, that you don't talk about what people have or treat, or any of those kinds of things.  My daughter [Roselyn E. Epps] asked me once when she first started practice.  She says, what, what do I do about people that come into the office that you know?  I said, well, you don't tell me anything about it.  If the person sends me hello, then you can tell me that.  I said, otherwise, don't tell me who has been in your office, and she doesn't.  And so, you learn that that kind of thing.  And so, I have a lot of patients.  She's in dermatology and she's also a pediatrician, but a lot of people's friends said, oh, I was by your daughter's office.  I said, oh, were you?  They said, didn't she tell you?  I said, did you ask her to tell me?  I said, 'cause if you didn't, she doesn't, she doesn't tell me who's by her office.  And so, you learn those kinds of things--how you treat a collegial way with your, with your colleagues and, you know, things of that nature, that you're honest, and that you're not abusive to your patients, and how one behaves within the community.  That is a responsible position.  It's an opportunity to become a physician.  Not that many people become it.  And so that you have an obligation to, in the community, not only to do what is important in medicine, but to do more.
Story_ID: 78324
Speaker 1: I have always been involved in other activities from, you know, the time I was in college and medical school.  We used to organize the women.  There were a few, maybe 15 or more, 20 women in medical school.  We used to--had a ladies' lounge and we used to go in there and sit and chat, and talk at lunch times sometime.  So the year I became the senior, I found out that there was a national organization of women who were in medicine.  And I said, well, gee, it would be nice for our group to affiliate with a larger body to experience some of those things.  And so, I contacted the--the other thing is, I think I might have mentioned it, my senior year in medical school, I was the doctor in the infirmary, so-called doctor on call in the infirmary, in the dormitory at night.  So I sort of ran the dormitory at night on call, sick call for the students and what-not who lived in dorms.  And Dr. Dorothy Ferebee, Dorothy Boulding Ferebee, was the director of the health service.  And I think she, more than anybody, really showed me--there were women in medicine who showed, showed me that you could--didn't have to look like a man, and you could be bright and smart and competent, and be a woman physician.  But Dr. Ferebee showed me that you really could be involved in larger issues.  She was a national ambassador of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha].  She had been founder of the Mississippi project for health, project for Mississippi [Mississippi Health Project].  And so, she had been very much involved.  And so, she was the director of the health service when I was in the student health service.  So I think she really showed me that there was a broader application--that medicine didn't just the individuals.  And so, as a senior in medical school, I said, well, let's affiliate with the larger body.  So that's what I wrote.  And they said, well, you have to have an advisor who has to be a member of the organization [American Academy of Pediatrics], and there was none at Howard [University Medical College, Washington, D.C.].  I didn't know at the time Dr. Ferebee, who was very outstanding, had applied, but had been denied admission because she was an African American.  So they appointed a woman who was Dr. Kahler (ph.) who was local, who was a member to be our advisor.  And so, we became a branch of the, of the national group.  And after we finished, of course, I was kind of busy.  I was doing an internship and residency, and so, well, didn't do too much.
Story_ID: 78325
Speaker 1: The graduate chapter here contacted me and asked me if I would be coming and join that graduate chapter.  So I said, well, I don't know, I got all these little children.  I'm working and what-not.  I don't know about--they said, well, come on, we'd like for you to join.  And so I did.  And it wasn't long after that--I went to a number of their activities, I guess as a student, that they, the men, but they didn't elect me secretary, and then the resident, and of the branch one, which is what, the local branch.  And, and I--they wanted me to get, you know, program, program chairman.  I guess that's what they did it at first and 'cause I had been very involved in the city and volunteer work, and on the board of the "Y" [YMCA], and on Children's International, some were religious.  So there were sorts of children's and women's things in the city.  And so, they asked me.  So I said, I already got these people.  I even asked Dr. [Dorothy Boulding] Ferebee to come and speak to the group.  Well, she did, and she was a dynamic speaker.  And never once did she mention that she had been denied--mentioned that to that time.  So, but shortly after I joined, I found out that--this was just about the time of integration, and that there had been a great deal of discussion about whether this branch would admit African Americans.  Now I think that was a misconception among a lot of white people that all African Americans are just waiting to be with them when in fact, they were very surprised that they really didn't care.  They had, you know, worlds of their own and were very quite--but anyway, at the time that they, they used to meet at homes and this thing.  And so, when they apparently finally decided to invite someone to join, like 50 percent of the women left, resigned in protest.  Well, I didn't know that at the time, and I was just so annoyed and really kind of hurt, you know, that--and then I said, I said, why do I need to belong to a group like that?  But then on the other hand, I said, the ones that were having a problem left.  And the ones that are here are the ones who took a stand, and it wouldn't really be right not to affiliate.  After, these are the people who said yes, we think it's not right.  We need to have, to integrate this body.  And so, I did and interestingly, years later, when I became national president, I told that story at the end of my term.  I never, never told anybody that story.  And it just brought tears to their eyes, brought tears to their eyes, but, but anyway--
Speaker 2: What, what year was that?
Speaker 1: Let's see, that was about '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 78326
Speaker 1: So that's what I want to know.  In the, like the years from '55 [1955], 'cause, you know, you graduated with honors once again from Howard Medical School [Howard University Medical College, Washington, D.C.], but '55 [1955] to like '71 [1971], those were--you were busy raising your kids, but you were also--talk about just the little, you know, some of the things you were also active in.  You said, 'cause this is--
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  It's--so many things I've been involved in through the years.  I'd have to try to figure out that period of time in which I could think in terms of what I really made back in the, back where it says community, and they look up in this, in the front, in the index that tells you which page is community organizations and years of involvement right at the--it's tabbed near the bottom in this (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  I can see that, you know, when you belong to things--
Speaker 1: Junior Village was part of the--
Speaker 2: Okay.  That--Junior Village was the large--
Speaker 1: Palmer Memorial and, well, that's--
Speaker 2: That's alumni--
Speaker 1: That's--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You got--you weren't active with AKA and--
Speaker 1: Uhmm.
Speaker 2: Scott was just saying, you know, the things you were thinking about last night?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: International Summerville--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what year was that?  What was that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous).  Huh?
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Children at--1968--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '69 [1969]--
Speaker 1: That's a good one, that's a good one.
Speaker 2: Civic League of North (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), you know, the--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  But Children's International sent (unclear) villages--were something that really, I sort of got drawn into by the children.  They had--it's an international program in which they take 11-year-old children, and four children from each country from about twelve countries come together.  And at that time, all of a sudden, [Dr.] Charles [H. Epps, HM] had said--I--and someone sent a flyer around, saying they having an international camp in Leeds, England, and that he said, I'd like to try it.  And so, we went.  He was interviewed and selected and, and I became the active with the group and, subsequently, all the children went to villages, different parts of the world.  Some went to Sweden, and our daughter [Roselyn E. Epps] went to Sweden.  My youngest son [Howard R. Epps] went to Turkey.  But we had a village, and shortly after I became--I guess because I go to meetings and try to participate, I, I found myself as being elected to president of this local body.  And then they told us, well, you owe $12,000 in dues, nationally, and we're having a village and 60 kids are coming to Washington [D.C.].  And so we had to raise all this money and not only pay our national dues, which hadn't been paid, and also to get ready to have this village.  And so, I got some of my friends and people who know how to get things done or work, and don't mind doing it.  And we were able to--one of them got a linen company to donate all the linens, come by, clean them up, free of charge.  We got people who would donate food.  I went to the Department of Agriculture and I asked them if they would give us the food.  I said, these children are coming from all over the world.  We need food for them and so they said, well, go to the school lunch program in D.C.  And so, we went there.  We picked out all the food.  The dietician donated her time.  All the staff members donated their time.  And I think I have a book in there.  The kids came from all over, from 12 countries.  Beautiful camp.  We got Sanders Spring (ph.) School, Friend School, and they donated all the rooms and the dormitory.  And the headmaster decided he would drive the bus and he drove them around and the kids came.  And so then, from there, I went on the national board and then became the national president.  And we celebrated the 25th anniversary.  And the people came from all over the world.  So everything--I didn't ever start to, to do things.  Things sort of evolved and yet, it involved in things and incorporated everybody that I can with me as I go along and include as many people and families, always been very supportive and things like that so.
Story_ID: 78327
Speaker 1: Now how did you also come--I'm going back to the work with the D.C. Department of Public Health.  How did that sort of come about?
Speaker 2: Well, it was when I left Howard [University School of Medicine].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to--in the well-baby clinic.  I started in the well-baby clinic, and then moved on up through the ranks.  And during that time, I got the master's in public health, and then at the end, near the end anyway, I got the public administration and higher education from American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now why did you go and get that degree from American University?  You already had, okay.
Speaker 2: They were--I know, they were offering--
Speaker 1: (unclear) MPH [master of public health] and--
Speaker 2: --they were offering the program for D.C. government workers.  You could either go to University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] or to American University.  They had all these training programs for people in management and what-not.  And so, I said, well, public administration, there's a lot--was relatively a new field.  We were doing a lot of things, and I moved up into administration and management by objectives, and all of the new thoughts and theories and so forth.  And so, I said, okay, well, I would go to the one, American University, because if the program folded, which it did, USC would be kind of far even though they have a D.C. campus.  You, you have to spend one semester there, so it was going to be American University.  It was very close.  So it was a part of it, and then I did my training in the--got my degree in interdisciplinary studies combining public administration and higher education, and really looking at health services for blacks and higher education, which worked out fine, because when I went back to Howard, that was, that was where I could use it really.
Story_ID: 78328
Speaker 1: Can you talk before--can you talk about some of the issues that were sort of burgeoning in the public health arena?  You said, you know, you were grabbling (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, I think the main issues were, were their financing of healthcare and the structure of healthcare.  And whereas more and more people were now dependent on public health system than they had been before.  And then with the drug issues and all of those kinds of things that were having a tremendous impact, so that when I became acting commissioner of health and had to pull all of these, I had alcohol and drug abuse, mental health services.  Care of the aging became a problem.  The Medicaid program and Medicare program were newly introduced so that the public Federal and financing and health programs had changed largely the way the healthcare was being delivered.  So, really, it was a very dynamic period and not only were we learning, we were teaching as well, in terms of public health delivery.  Because at one time, public health was largely inspecting food and water and things of that nature, really a (unclear).  But at this point, public health became personal health which had not been before.  And we, you know, you immunize kids and after they became school age, they usually went off, but we, you know, developed school programs.  And we had developed neighborhood health centers where families came and parents who didn't have--so it was a great transition in terms of health delivery and health financing in this country.
Story_ID: 78329
Speaker 1: So what were some of the models that you looked at, or were being looked at in terms of financing because this was usually people relied at that time on the charity of the hospital, right--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --or charity, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: So, but what were some of the things looked at in terms of this?  Is it possible that, who were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, well, most of it came out of the federal programs and out of Congress.  It was congressionally mandated programs that were actually designed.  I was active in the Association of Maternal and Child Health [MCH] at that time but (unclear) I was the MCH director.  And we did a lot of lobbying for crippled children's programs and services for the children with special needs.  We--I was director of the child development center which was then was mental retardation clinic which had--I guess it was the--it was the first publicly funded comprehensive clinic.  And during the time that President [John F.] Kennedy was in office, he told the world about his retarded sister, older sister, Rosemary [Kennedy], who was in an institution.  And then, Vice President [Hubert] Humphrey's grandchild was a Down syndrome.  So all of a sudden, it became acceptable for people to have children who had special needs.  At the same time, the Federal government, due to their efforts, introduced funding and for programs for children with special needs.  And so, all of a sudden, people who had their children at home started bringing them out, bringing them out, wanting services, requesting services, and demanding services, too.  So that, diagnostically, we were able to do this, but from a comprehensive standpoint, working with educators, social workers, and psychologists, and nurses, and we were--I went around to the various clinics diagnosing children.  And then we had to refer them to a school placement, educators, and so forth.  So that and no longer--and then, of course, within that framework, came mainstreaming and people saying, well, we, no, we don't want a special place to go.  We want our children to be in the mainstream.  So all these dynamic changes were taking place during these times.  And, of course, the systems had to adjust to, to fit the times and to meet the needs of the people as they at those times.
Speaker 1: Now that was really the time of what is called the Great Society.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's the programs (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, that was [President Lyndon B.] Johnson, yeah, he implemented the programs of the, of the Great Society that largely Kennedy had thought of, conceptualized, but really, implemented by Johnson so that made a big difference.
Speaker 1: And so money was not so much an issue at this point, right?  It was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How do you--and with the concept really the clinic concept?  Did it come out of this period?  Wasn't--'cause people used to have to go hospitals, right?   They were--
Speaker 2: Or their private doctors.
Speaker 1: Or private doctor?  So tell, how did the whole--who was--
Speaker 2: Well, well, there was legislature passed really.  A lot of this has been federally driven and legislation that went to cities and went to communities to--and went to health departments.  Those health departments never used to get money specifically.  So it--all of a sudden, health departments were being called, called on to develop services, open clinics, delivery services when they had not done that type of thing before.  And so, but much, much about how healthcare is delivered in this country really.  It is federally driven.
Story_ID: 78330
Speaker 1: But out of even things being federally driven, they're, they're lobbying for it.  Like you said, you know, we got, got more involved in lobbying.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I'm just wondering where you fit in the whole debate.  That's why I'm--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, the place I fit is that we don't lobby from--
Speaker 1: But I mean, where did you, where was your philosophy in terms of--were you, were you totally in support of these, you know, of the Great Society programs?  Did you think that some approaches were good, some approaches were not.  I mean, I'm just trying to--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I think that, in general, certainly with the migration, larger populations to city, the needs were met.  They were, they're not enough private physicians for everybody to go to.  And so, from that standpoint, I was, I was in a position where I could help develop some of these programs.  And so I did, and I could belong to organizations that could be advocates for, for adequate funding for these programs.  Now all programs--I think there are always some unintended consequences.  Now, there was this Junior Village that you saw I was associated with, and which was a city facility for children who were in need of, you know, either abused, neglected, or whatever.  And with the large numbers of people coming to the city, many were underemployed, unemployed, the numbers grew from what it used to be.  It was a nice facility.  It had programs, it was like a campus and they had programs for the children, it was a school.  Some children would stay there for a few months and then go home and or, but then were others who were chronically there.  They were not able to be adopted and the parents couldn't take them or, and so the institution just grew and grew and grew.  And the system could not find placement for them, couldn't find homes.  They couldn't go back to their own homes.  Some of them didn't exist.  And so it got so large that--and the newspaper would write up, oh, we have a thousand children at Junior Village and, you know.  So they closed it and it was the same thing with middle institutions.  If you don't, if you don't like the way it looks, you just close it.  And then nobody--then they become hidden.  With the mental patients, a lot of them are hidden and the homeless and under the benches and on the grates--a lot of these children went into foster care where we've heard some stories about being lost in the system, and really the caseworkers being overloaded with 60, 70 patients and not, I mean clients, and not enough time to see them all or supervise them adequately.  So with the closure of the--yes, they were out of sight and out of mind.  But I was active in our group with the auxiliary to the medical (unclear) society which is the National Medical Association affiliate.  And I used to take our kids once a month and they, with other members, would bring their kids.  And we would take, go out, and get these boys, 12 to 14 years old, from Junior Village because everybody wanted to do something, the babies there, everybody wanted to do something for the cute little toddlers.  And these kids, we would take roller rinks, roller skating.  And now we take our own kids there but very small and they loved, and these kids could really skate.  Those guys could, and so we would go out there once a month and pick them up and buy them some refreshments and hot dogs and what-not.  And so, just, you know, being involved and seeing what could be done, but so there were a lot of unintended consequences.  You know, with, with the positives and steps forward, there are always some things that don't quite--someone comes up with an idea, so that will be great, but a lot of the ideas are so--we don't see it.  We don't, we won't know about it.  It'll be hidden.
Story_ID: 78552
Speaker 1: And then, of course, they started cutting back, and restrictions and budgets and one thing and another.  And the problems kept getting bigger and more complex and more difficult.  And, and then, I think probably at the legislative level, they get impatient.  If things don't get better, they just move on to something else, you know.  And they become accustomed to the, to the problem, and it doesn't look as alarming as it did before.  And then, of course, they, what did they do?  They build prisons, put all these people in prison, and that solves nothing because it breaks up the homes and the families and the breadwinners.  And so that it just create--of course, they say they're getting the criminals off the street because when I, I directed a high risk project.  After I left public health and came back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for a brief period of time, I was the director of a program for high risk young people [High Risk Young People's Project], 15 to 24 years of age.  That was funded through the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and it was an exciting program.  I had just come from the community, so to speak, so I knew the community and the issues and the places to go and had to get these departments at the university to work together--OB/GYN, pediatrics, mental health, so forth, and, and then we really wrote a very good proposal.  In fact, a person on the review committee said if anybody--they were only going to fund twenty nationally, and they said if anybody's going to get funded, you all will because you're number one.  You ranked as best, but it was tight.  It was good.  And but the thing that was so amazing to me was that they were young people but they wanted to help.
Story_ID: 78553
Speaker 1: What we did was to set up a community-based program, which the hospital sent out services to the city [Washington, D.C.], and since I had just come from the city, I knew where to put the services.  So we had an evening clinic and had the young people come in the evening.  And one of the things that we did was to give them things that they want.  In other words, we offered vision testing for driver's license.  We offered physicals for sports events but the people had that.  And so we had a lot young people came and they--and we had, then they tied in with a community program in which we had tutoring and dance and had a library and so forth.  So they were able to--it really was a shelter.  And the question I had, not so much as why they have problems, but how do they survive?  It is amazing.  I don't know if I could survive--children who have no homes, no one to care for them, and what-not, so that we were able to really--and what I was able to do was to get it included into the district budget so that when the grant ended, the program could continue for a while so that--those are the kinds of things I sort of liked to do was see how I could put things together--combinations.
Speaker 2: When I was, excuse me, a director of the clinic (coughing), excuse me, (coughing), excuse me, with the children youth project.  We had some money to hire people, a federal grant.  We could hire people but you couldn't train them.  And I was, at that time, on the YWCA board and we had a--they had a school called Hannah Harrison School where they trained people to be hotel employees, you know, leadership roles, or practical nurses and things of that nature, particularly women who were going back to work who had had children so they had the school there.  I was on the board.  But they had no money to train anybody.  And our grant said we couldn't train anybody.  So I got with some of the white ladies, and we went door to door asking about places that--and we came to the Public Service Careers program.  Now they had money that could be trained, used for training, but they couldn't provide the training, and they had to be sure that the person had a job.  So by putting those three pieces together, we were able to train ten and I said, there's no way that I want to hire people from the community and throw them into a situation with a lot of professionals where they would feel unprepared, not know the language--you're really signing them up for failure.  So we took our nurse and social worker and trained these people--took them over to the Hannah Harrison School, bused them over there every day, and came back and gave them jobs--five at each of the centers.  Many of them had never worked--off welfare rolls, became leaders in their communities.  Some of them stayed there long enough to retire.  Some of them even went into more specialized areas, like some of them from being receptionists became, say, social work associates, or helped in the dental clinic as a dental assistant, and so forth.  So throughout my career, I've tried to take my volunteer efforts and combine them with what I'm doing professionally to make a difference for, for the people, and to make, to make a program that works that helps people.  And it's interesting that I've been able to do that each step of the way.
Story_ID: 78554
Speaker 1: Now when I went out to the National Institutes of Health [NIH]--also nepotism again, when my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps] became dean, I was at Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and they said, well, where would you like to go?  Well, I had been in charge of a program called Know Your Body, which was a health education program for elementary school children run by the American Health Foundation in New York.  This was a volunteer effort.  And when they would come down and we had a little school over there, and I got a grant from the heart association to give them a newsletter--went after the schools and got a healthy salad bar for them and so, and talked with the nutritionist about diet and so forth.  So when I was--he said, well, go out to NIH and talk to the people out there and see whether I could get a loan.  I mean, Howard said you could on an IPA which means they'll pay for two years for you.  So I said, fine, I'll do that.  So I went out there and I went around to the different areas and [National] Cancer Institute.  And I ran into a program in which they had developed a smoking cessation curriculum, but had not figured out how to disseminate it.  So I had been a member of all these organizations, professional organizations, pediatrics, medical society, MA, all those, and I knew how they operated.  I knew that they wanted--the membership dictates what they do.  This doesn't come from now--that they are always looking for something to do for their people, free of charge, you know, it's an offer--benefit of membership.  And so, they had this program NIH was willing to pay for it, but they just didn't know how to get out.  They didn't know whether to just send it out to the hospitals or send it to the doctors' offices.  So I said, well, let's, why don't we develop a plan?  And I developed a plan where we can train 2,000 clinicians, and then ask each of them to go back to their hospital staff meeting, local medical society meeting, and just train 50 other people.  We're going to train the trainers and with that, we can train 100,000.  And so they said, well, okay, you do it.  And so I, being a member of all these organizations, I had introduced resolutions that we need to have people trained.  And then when I went to them, I said, well, we need to have some training.  I said, we will have this training program.  We'll provide you free of charge, gift of membership.  And you can do it in association with one of your regular meetings rather than have to have people come force something and pay additional.  And so, they all bought into it.  And so then we put on these train the trainer session.
Story_ID: 78555
Speaker 1: But after I got there and there was no pediatrician there, I realized that smoking really begins during childhood, and that's it's really a pediatric problem.  And yet I had--was familiar enough in pediatrics to know that nowhere had I heard any discussion about tobacco.  So I said, what we need is a program to prevent onset of smoking, not just stop it after the people are addicted.  So I said fine, you go on and you do it.  And so, I called the Academy of Pediatrics, and I said we need to--we brought them in--for several of them in for a meeting, and I said we need to develop this program.  And I said, we can do it several ways.  I said you all can develop it and we'll publish it, or we can develop and publish it, or we can do it, whatever way you say.  So I think they felt--well, nothing's going to happen here.  So they said, well, won't you go on and do it, you know, and we'll look at it and see what we think about it.  And so, I also knew that, you know, I was not a long-term researcher in, in tobacco control, and then that in order to get something that people will go and buy, and I couldn't just develop something out of the, out of the blue.  So I tied it in--I'd been on several committees for the Academy of Pediatrics.  And I knew that they had the guidelines of when children should come, so I just wrote the program so it coincided with normal periods of time that they'd be coming into the doctor anyway.  And then added--they had four A's--ask, advise, assist, and arrange for smoking cessation.  So I added "A", a fifth "A" for children which was anticipate, anticipate the developmental stage 'cause, you know, you're going from one station to another.  The temptations will be different.  And so, it made--sent it to the Academy of pediatrics said, well, will you look at it and review, and they, they got their substance abuse committee people to make a few suggestions.  In the end, they were so thrilled with it 'cause we were publishing and disseminating and everything that they actually put their imprimatur on it as, as one of their official things.  And so, that we were able to disseminate that and so.
Speaker 2: That was groundbreaking in many ways, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yeah, that was really--
Speaker 2: It's groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And it sort of led to a lot of the focus on, you know, on the--well, now people are trying to get billboards, but it was sort of the beginning--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, all of that was going on simultaneously.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the medical community was really out of the loop, but they didn't realize--I mean the advocates were out there with smoking cessation.  Now I'm in my current role, semi-retired--I'm a consultant.  There's a program funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the Department of Pediatrics at Howard [University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] now that's going to look at smoking in high risk populations.  So, in other words, teenagers, kids who are in--out of school programs, kids who are in foster care, kids who are in job corps, kids who are really at risk, the ones who are more likely to smoke who don't have parents who will say, it's not good for you and that type of thing.  And so, we're working on that now and going to develop a curriculum.  I'm just a consultant on it now though. Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 78556
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back and just ask about pediatrics and the definition.  I mean it became more broadly defined in some respects, right?  Mean--
Speaker 2: Well, when I entered pediatrics, it was largely newborns to 12 or 13.  But then they had this period of time between 13 and about 21, in which internists really weren't interested, and they didn't want them.  Many of the children did not want to leave the doctor that they'd had all along since their birth.  The only physician they knew--they're kinda, they didn't have to come as often.  It was a sort of awkward stage and so, pediatrics sort of extended then beyond that and really, the subspecialty of adolescent medicine developed in which, because their needs are different.  They are a different group of people from babies and people who are dependent.  They're much more independent--the risks that they have, the kind of problems they have, everything from bulimia and anorexia, and a lot more issues involved with teenagers, a lot more risk-taking behavior.  And even now, we're having obesity and the onset of type II diabetes in children, so that pediatrics goes on to 21.  And, in fact, many pediatricians are--have to push their patients out at 21.  They don't want to stop coming because they have developed this relationship all their life.  And it's very hard sometime to find a physician really who's a generalist because even though there are subspecialties within pediatrics, a lot of people generalists, and first and they can take care of their whole child.
Story_ID: 78557
Speaker 1: Can you take us just briefly through, like the last 40 years of pediatric medicine and just like decade by decade, talk about the issues that are--were sort of more predominant than others?
Speaker 2: Hmm, 40 years.
Speaker 1: Well, you said--
Speaker 2: Well, I think--let me, let me just say for all the years, immunization is always there.  It never goes away.  Even when we think we've got it up to 80, 90 percent immunized, within five years, it's down to 40 or 30 percent because new children are being born.  And parents are not necessarily as--and we haven't seen the diseases.  And so immunizations, no matter what point you come in, you're just still redoing, doing it as, as an issue.  Obviously, the impact of drugs, alcohol, but particularly, they go into deep problems--more recently, not malnutrition, but overnutrition in children--the high salt content.  I was on a task force many years ago that looked at high blood pressure in children.  And nothing had ever been written on it before.  And most of the people in it were cardiologists and pediatric cardiologists and see Blumenthal out there.  And the age was--the chairman of the task force, and at that time, they had a study in Bogalusa, Louisiana, and we're still following children.  There was not even a realization that children had hypertension--nobody bothered to even take the pressure.  So we came out with a supplement to pediatrics on hypertension in children which really was the first study that had come out on it.  But it was a task force project that looked at it largely with the cardiologists and people like that who would--and I was really bringing more practical public health aspect of it.  I think the issues of--some issues are, I guess, always there.  Certainly, you know, more, more children die from cancer than from any disease because children don't die of diseases too much anymore.  There was a time when children died of diarrhea.  We used to have children come in with diarrhea and things of that nature, but we have fluids, electrolyte balances, and things like that, that pretty much take care of this.  Pediatrics has evolved from a hospital specialty to largely an ambulatory specialty over the 40 years with the advent of antibiotics.  With a lot of home therapies and fluids and electrolytes and so forth, children don't stay very sick long.  Children who are in the hospital very, very sick.  You see issues such as meningitis, but that's usually where there are large groups of people, such as in camps and cottages, places where people congregate.  So we, we find now the issues for adolescents are sexually transmitted diseases.  They don't have--the kids don't have a lot of that, but certainly with a lot of their risk-taking behavior and promis-, promiscuities as far as the young people are concerned, that's a big issue for people in adolescent medicine.  Adole-, even adolescent pregnancy which didn't--you didn't find many people with adolescent pregnancy in earlier years but now, of course, it does, it does happen.  And so, we find that people in OB/GYN are reaching down and having to take care of a lot of issues that normally they would not have in a population of this type.
Story_ID: 78558
Speaker 1: And how about AIDs?  That's been a--
Speaker 2: Yep, that's another one that's increasing, and particularly in the populations in the cities and what-not.  I don't think really the--we've seen the top of the mushroom yet because I, from what I hear, I'm not, of course, in practice, but a lot of the risk-taking behavior and denial that's typical of adolescents still exists.  They have not discovered any real treatment and so, of course, that didn't even exist 40 years ago.  It's a disease, so that's entirely, entirely new, and, and something that's potentially in the inner city populations.  And the population is rising greatest among all the minority populations and girls and women, so that is really major, major.  And some things that the, the incidence hasn't really changed that much, such as birth defects.  And certain percentages of the people have birth defects, no matter what, and it's just nature upon nature.  And then you have new infectious diseases like AIDs and you have a resurgence of syphilis, which goes along with all the other, and gonorrhea and diseases that--chlamydia, which is a sexually transmitted disease.  We never saw that when I started my internship residency.  I mean we read about it, but we never, never really saw it.  No one expected to, to see it, but so I think that is probably the big, big major difference.  I think that these things are being seen in younger populations.  Everything tends to go down and so that's going to be a problem for, for a while to come although, you know, they're constantly talking about breakthroughs and things that are happening.  But they haven't really found, found a real breakthrough, something that can--and it's sort of like the influenza virus, it just metamorphosis.  You fix it here and it goes another way, and fix it here and goes another way.  So it's just really a very devastating disease, not only here, but particularly in Africa.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you hear a lot more.  I mean that's really--people project the whole country's going to be devastated.
Speaker 2: The entire adult population will be wiped out.  And we're going to have all these orphans and children with nobody to take care of, and the countries can't support them either.
Story_ID: 78559
Speaker 1: Has it--the other thing with--oh, I want to ask another question before I ask about the one that's--cancer, with cancer research with children, has there much, you know, the--you think of cancer really with adults more.  Has there, have there been an equal amount of dollars allocated to the, you know, to cancer with, children with cancer?
Speaker 2: Well, they've been a lot of advances in cancer research in children.  The main cancer the children used to have, of course, was lymph, leukemia.  And they have really come forth with some medications and prolonged life and so forth, so that has really decreased in terms of treatment for childhood cancers in general.  They're getting much more effective.  Then they're doing bone marrow transplants and the--but it's still probably as a result of sort of a fixed thing.  Another thing that never goes away is lead poisoning.  You'd think, you'd think that by now, it would be gone, but I can recall when I was in public health that there were a number of children out northeast that had a sort--lead poisoning.  Now we knew about the destruction of housing, old housing, and the urban renewal, and (unclear) in the plaster.  But these children lived in public housing places that had been built in recent years.  They really weren't, were not lead in the plaster, and so now I didn't think the lead gasoline, the dirt, and the kids playing in the dirt might be exposed to it.  So we--there are some things we just have to always keep checking on.  One is the lead levels and immunization levels and things that are just chronic pediatric issues.  And because the population is new, we keep getting--it's not you check it one time and it's over.  You just have to keep doing the same things over and over again.
Story_ID: 78560
Speaker 1: Now you, you--I, I think you got a great deal of satisfaction working on, you know, publishing "The Women's Complete Health Book."
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And I want you--to ask you about how that even came about.
Speaker 2: Well, here it is right here, but she brought it down.  I did that book--we were really, this was the year after I was President of the American Medical Women's Association.  And there was a book producer, Philip Lief, and his group from Pennsylvania--he was in New York then, but now he's in New Jersey.  But they approached the American Medical Women's Association with the idea that they wanted to produce a women's health book.  And so, I, I was the president at the time and they asked if I would take this on as the editor.  So I said, I did, but as a pediatrician, I think that we needed somebody who knew something.  So the person who was going to be following me in a couple of years as president was an internist, Susan Stewart in New York.  So I approached her about her collaborating with me on it, and she was very pleased to do so.  And we were able to identify women who were really the specialists in their field to write each chapter, and we, we realized nothing personally.  Nobody was paid.  None of us received anything.  If there were any proceeds, they were to go back to the American Medical Women's Association.  I don't know if they got any either.  But the point is I--well, the real satisfaction is because it's such a good book.  And I can say that in an objective way because I have nothing to gain personally.  But the people were asked--these are, first of all, most health books that are written are written by people who are in one field.  And they know that very well, so they emphasize that, and then the rest is kinda fluff around it, but these were specialists who were in practice.  And so they were told to talk to, to write it as if they were talking to their patient.  In other words, don't write in a lot of medical, like you're writing for a medical journal, but write it as if you were writing for your patient which they did.  And so, it is really a very authoritative book.  And as I mentioned it, it was--each year the New York Public Library picks twenty-five books as the most significant books for that year.  And so, it was chosen.  And it turned out to be a much larger book than we thought, but the real satisfaction has come from people who tell me, I keep the book by my bed, or have you looked in the book on someone, and it has been and some things referenced to men and women.  People who have told me--I thought my mother was having a problem and I said, could it be the medication?  I looked in the book and I asked the doctor, and the doctor said, yes, I could--maybe that's the problem.  So it's those kinds of stories that come back, that people tell me that they use the book and that they, they saw that.  Now we've got another one since then, not developing the childcare one, but a family health book, in which I'm the fourth person that (unclear) my daughter [Roselyn E. Epps] is a part of that one.  And this one includes pediatrics.  Now, see the Women's Health Book doesn't include pediatrics.  This one includes pediatrics, and so when they ask me about coming in, I said, well, you know, I'm really not a close clinical pediatrics.  I said, well, get our daughter who is a member also, and she and I worked on the pediatric portion of it and, and get a lot of the reviewing somewhere, we have a copy of that.  But that first book was divided into 10 minibooks, M-I-N-I books, and they were sold at the (unclear), and it's been--I think Philip Lief probably, or the publisher, somebody sold the rights to someone else who has reissued the book.  And so it's, so it is, it's satisfying to me because it is meeting the need, and it's useful, and it's something that people find valuable, not something that anyway benefitted me, but that is something worthwhile that's going on that helps people.
Story_ID: 78340
Speaker 1: I know Joycelyn Elders.  When I was President of the American Medical Women's Association, she was one of the speakers at one of our, our meetings, annual meetings, and she has come.  In fact, the American Medical Women's Association gave her, as well as Tony Novello [Antonia Novello], who had been to a number of our meetings, an award last summer as outstanding person.  And Joycelyn is very frank.  She's not a politician.  And so I think a lot of the things she said--she meant directly from her heart.  She was a strong advocate.  Obviously, she rubbed a lot of people the wrong way.  And people took, took exception with more, I guess, her style than what she had to say.  But she's doing quite well--apparently is doing a lot of speaking and, and what-not.  It was unfortunate that her--that she was terminated in that way but, you know, this is a political town.  People are terminated all the time, you know, for the speaker of the house or whatever, when people don't agree with you.  And the pressure gets to be too much for the person in charge.  So I don't think, by and large, people who know her and know her (unclear) she's still a good speaker and she still speaks her mind.  And she talks about the issues and she was a strong advocate for children, for families, and for healthcare, so I think she's, she'll be all right.
Story_ID: 78341
Speaker 1: What do you think has been most effective talking about issues related to, you know, children or youth, or you know, from a medical standpoint?  Who has sort of moved on a, you know, on a--moved things furthest ahead that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Well, I--it's difficult to think of a, a about a single person because I think people who have been in positions to--that you have to be in a position to do something.  And, otherwise, you're outside trying to get things done.  I think there have been people, particularly in the area of maternal and child health, the director and such that I can think of who recently died, but who really did a lot, not only for the inner cities, but urban populations, and for children in general.  I think that there have been people in Congress who have been a spokesperson for children, but unfortunately, we don't have a lot of people who will speak for children.  And children don't vote, and many of the poor children's parents don't vote and, therefore, we constantly need people, need lots of people from different directions who feel that children are a priority.  Now we say that all the time.  Our children are our priority--our children, our future.  When we developed a comprehensive child care plan for the District of Columbia, and I--and we spent 18 months on that, and looked at every aspect of children, and the services in the city.  And then we presented it, and the city council says it costs too much.  It was about--would have been about $2 million--costs too much.  Compared to what, you know?  Compared to gangs?  Compared to kids on the street?  Compared to homelessness?  How do we manage our priorities?  Children are our priorities and then, then we need to say so.  I've been to other countries where children are a priority--in China, when we went there in 1980, which was shortly after it opened its doors.  And we went to the children's palaces, and we saw how they treasure their children and how everything-- And my own theory has been, and I have said it frequently, is that if we took one generation, just one generation, and if we had done that when I first said it in 1960 something--if we took one generation of kids being born, say, now or maybe three or four years, and then follow them all the way through, and gave them everything that's required--good healthcare, good education, opportunities, food, nutrition, stimulation, parks, libraries, what-not, then it wouldn't take but 20 years or so to turn this around.  But, you see, we keep putting our fingers in the dike.  We keep doing a little bit here, and patching there, and patching there, and it's not working.  But if we just took one generation, maybe for a cohort, for about four or five years, and follow them through, it wouldn't take but 20, 25 years to turn the whole thing around.  But we don't have the will, but we have the will to fight wars.  We have the will to--and it would be much less expensive, a lot more cost-effective, than the prisons and the jails, and the drug treatment programs, and the clinics, and the dropouts, and under-educated people. But, you know, we don't--we have not had--what we need--well, we had President [Bill] Clinton that said he was a children's president.  And I guess he was, but I can't think of anything that really was done.  Maybe they full, fully funded Head Start or something like that but--
Speaker 1: You mean, during his presidency?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: They did?
Speaker 2: I think they might have extended it 'cause I think it was going to end, but he extended the funding.  But other than that, I just can't, you know, really think of anybody who's really seriously done something.  And it takes--it's going to take a national person at a level where they can set policy and do something and say, yes, this is important.  Yes, we're going to do something about this.  In the same way, they said, we're going to put a man on the moon.  We're going to do something about this, and do--take care of our children.
Story_ID: 78342
Speaker 1: Have you been active at all with Marian Wright Edelman [HM] of the Children's Defense Fund?
Speaker 2: I have known and admired Marian and her, her group for a long time.  I think she's been a very strong advocate.  In fact, she was a member of our Links Chapter (ph.) for a long time so I know Marian quite well but--
Speaker 1: But you were drawn from a comprehen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She's one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that, and you see, she's on the outside really advocating on the inside.  But you got to have somebody who controls the resources, somebody who can make laws change.  And they do things or buy Fiats, say, we're going to do this.  We haven't had that.
Speaker 1: So and you know in, in countries, this is really when you look at Communist countries--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --they do it much better.
Speaker 2: Oh, they do care for children.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about the hospital, the--
Speaker 2: Hospital for Sick Children.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was affiliated with them for a long time as a volunteer, and it's a com-, comprehensive long-term care.  They have children there who have serious defects who can't really, cannot really function in the, in the communities.  Regional hospital people are referred there.  It's not a nursing home in terms that the fact the children just stay there.  So they have strong physical therapy and rehabilitation programs, although many of the children are there for years which you would not find in an acute hospital.  So I was only more there for a long time.  And then, so went through the ranks and, and became the president of the board.  At that time, they decided they wanted to build an addition to the hospital.  And we had never really, you know, people would raise some money.  You could send a check for $100 or something like that.  And so they had a feasibility study to see whether or not they thought we could raise it.  And 'cause I think that fundraisers always, they can be done, so anyway, I didn't realize that.  So she came, she said yes, you all could raise the money.  We, at that time, thought it would be about $12 million, of course, in (unclear).  But they had--that hospital itself had a lot of attractions because it is very--all the presidents' wives come there.  And Pres--Mrs. Bush, and I have pictures of--with me and Queen Noor [of Jordan], and people like that.  And Jim Brady was over there one day, and they called him from the White House, and he said, tell them to wait.  I'm over here.  I'm not going back.  Yeah, so, but anyway, it, it really was a challenge--shall we say--to raise the money, but, but we were able to do it.  And, of course, building, building a hospital or anything else, we had--all of a sudden, the preservationist came out of the woodwork and starts and, oh, no, this shouldn't be built--the facade shouldn't be changed.  That's one reason it's getting so expensive 'cause we had to build around the facade, and we had to go before zoning boards.  And this is all challenging but, you know, it's, oh, there's a learning experience, too, because you learn how things are done, about all those zoning laws and construction, and picking architects, and what-not.  So it was completed, and I can--we were all--the board was trained to ask for money.  And I can recall that they were, you know, we were told to look at a list of people or corporations or companies that we might know.  And so, I knew the fellow, Delano Lewis, who was head of the--I don't know, is it gas or Pep-, Pepco, (unclear) electric and power company, but anyway, I knew him.  We'd been on a bank board together, and I sort of knew him socially.  But I never asked anybody for any money like that.  So, and they had--a fundraiser figured out that maybe he could--they could give about 40, $45,000.  So I said, well, I don't know--how, how I'd even say that but, you know, I get everything ready and said okay.  So we went down there, and I went in and so, I said, well, how are you?  And I said, we came here to talk about the hospital (unclear). And he said, yes, I know about the hospital.  I've been there and so forth.  So and I told them about the building campaign and I said, well, I was wondering if you would be able to give--company would give us $45,000.  And I waited.  And so then he said, well, we couldn't really give that much, but maybe we'll give 42,000.  So just like that--that, to me, it lasted less than 10 minutes.  So I, I really learned that you can really ask.  And now, of course, I always go to all the fundraising because a lot of these groups that I belong to are non-profit, and they all require money, money, money.  And if you don't ask, of course, you don't, you don't get.  And there are foundations--and there are people every year that have to give money.  There are people that have to give money.  And what you have to do is get your calls connected with the, with the right one that--'cause I know The HistoryMakers project is looking at how it can go about finding funding, and it really is a job.  I'm working now with an endowing a chair in orthopedic surgery in my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM]'s name, so that's what we were working on that one, too.  So I--whenever it was the Girls Inc., they were having a drive, everybody's always raising money.  And I don't have a lot to give myself, but, you know, we, we do support the arts.  We support non-profits, we do.
Story_ID: 78343
Speaker 1: --Is there--should we talk a little about Girls Inc. 'cause you were president of that?  And that was sort of the thing you got a great-- At the time was Isabel Stewart--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's--I hired Isabel.  I was on the board.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I was on the board, Isabel, yes, Isabel, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Yes, and she--
Speaker 2: Lovely person, lovely person.  Now Margaret Gates was the exec when I was there and--
Speaker 1: Can you talk about just the--just to put things on--
Speaker 2: Sure.  Girls Inc. formerly was Girls Clubs of America.  And, in fact, it was--name was changed when I was the president largely because the Boys Club just summarily changed its name to Boys and Girls Club.  And so then that became confusing, and so we took them to court on it.  And they said--the judge in the final ruling said, well, there's a sort of a common usage of the word, Girls Clubs, you know, so that you really have no ownership necessarily because there are a lot of girls clubs, and they're not a part of the Girls Clubs of America.  And some are--so anyway, they paid us some money for it, and we changed our name.  And so, I was a part of that name change.  But the way I became involved with them is they have the largest repository--and not at that time.  They had set up a center in Indianapolis [Indiana], a resource center.  They had the largest, now, repository information on girls and research on girls in the world.  And, but they were--had gotten the money.  And I really was still working in public health--all along I was, and on--I had mentored a social worker at the time of a meeting for the Academy of Pediatrics who had developed a sex education program for elementary school children.  I, I figured, we should be on the program, too.  I said, meetings come and found--across the street from my office.  We ought to be on the program.  So I put a panel together of various sex education programs.  There was an innovative woman, Jane Quinn, who had developed the program.  People were so fascinated by her.  She did went about it with the elementary school kids, but she was hired, or she was sent to a "Y" to teach a course and then from there, she went to the Center for Population Options, and then on to Girls Inc.   And so, she invited me.  She was the program director.  She invited me to come to Indianapolis.  They were--they wanted women from different fields for their grand opening of this resource center.  And so I was--went out to represent Madison [Wisconsin].  And while I was out there, I said, well, these people are doing something significant.  I said they have programs.  They're building self-esteem.  There--it's a facility-based program.  It meets every day.  It's not--I was a Girl Scout as I mentioned myself.  Well, Girl Scouts are volunteers, and parents and they meet on the weekends.  And these are after, after school programs.  And they're really, they have professional staff, full time staff, part-time staff, and so they're facility-based.  They have a place, and so I was very impressed.  And so, then, through the years, I was asked to be on very--they have committees that judge programs 'cause most of the programs are developed in the centers.  And then, once they're developed, they are field tested to see how they--and then they are packaged and replicated and talked to the other--so that they don't--have something called fully peer-suasion, P-E-E-R, which is about keeping kids from, you know, using drugs--have PAPP, the preventing adolescent pregnancy program.  They have SMART program SMART called science, math, and relevant technology in which they actually had the computers in there and teach the children how to use it.  And they had girls fascinated with taking apart radios and putting things together.  And so, and then they asked me to join the board, and the rest is history.  I just moved up and became president.  So, it's a wonderful program.  It's largely in urban--in less--lower income families.  It reaches many young girls who lost self-esteem and has programs in dealing with self-esteem, and have to become citizens and contributing citizens--stay in school and all those kinds of things, so teaching non-traditional opportunities and occupations for girls and women.  So it's a life program.  It was just like in that they are having a celebration lunch.  They recognized women in various fields who have made great achievements.  They always include the girls.  They bring them in and have workshops and seminars, so they get to meet these people, too.  So it's, it's really a wonderful program,  So I won't be able to go to New York this year for the celebration lunch because I'll be in--but last year national meeting was here and I participated.  And so I keep, keep involved with them, and so, yes, well, Isabella, when Isabella retired, they had a wonderful program.  It's so creative and called the wizard of id or something, and they had her in the invitation, her and all.  It's just such a fun group of people.  And they have this wonderful center out there now.  When we went first to the resource center in Indianapolis, it was just a building, but now it's filled with programs, organizations, and really a repository of girls and but--what's happening with the girls in this country.
Story_ID: 78344
Speaker 1: What is your forty-year career being active with groups taught you about leadership?
Speaker 2: From what standpoint?
Speaker 1: Well, from all the standpoints that it takes to be a leader.  I mean, you know, what has it taught you 'cause--
Speaker 2: I am--but I subscribe--there's a lot, there's a lot being written on leader-, leadership.  There's this--I, I subscribe to this book, "Leader to Leader", but I buy the Drucker Foundation and Frances Hesselbein who's done a lot of talking and we're on a board together of Mutual of America, and in fact, that's a building there.  But I think a leadership requires a passion, a vision, ability to build consensus, collaboration.  Leaders are really a part of the group.  They are not anointed.  They can't dictate.  You've seen so many people march off and say, I'm leading the parade and nobody's behind them, or the ones who run and get in front of the parade and say, I'm the leader, and almost get run over by the people in the parade.  But, but I, as for myself and the leadership positions that I have held, I have never sought leadership.  I've never gone into anything to be, to be the leader of it.  It's because I've gone in, in an commitment that I have, and involvement and enthusiasm 'cause as I tell you, I don't get involved in anything that I can't believe in or don't think it's worthwhile.  I cannot be bothered with busy work although I have belonged to some things that are purely for fun.  And that's what I do there.  I'm able to compartmentalize, and when I'm for fun, that's what I'm doing.  But if I'm in an organization that claims to be doing something, then it has to do something, and I feel I have to help.  And In that process, if I become a leader, I guess that's what happens.  But I think I--when I left public health, and I had been acting as commissioner of health, and then put all of this together, and we had an opportunity for early retirement.  And I just had the minimum--nobody thought I had the time.  But at one time, Freedmen's Hospital was a Department of Health and Human Services--Health Education and Welfare.  And so I, in fact, had that time to add to my government time.  And I did have time, and just barely had passed my birthday, and was able to put the combination together.  And we'd been to China, and I had fallen, and working on the inauguration, hurt my knee, and I was bedded post-China flu.  And I--lying here, and I thought, I said, I can go.  So I went to personnel, and they told me what I would get and I said, well, at least I'm young enough to get another job and do something different.  And I called my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] and he said, well, do whatever you want to do.  So I decided I would leave and I went by and told my department chairman.  And the thing about it is that, you know, everybody was cutting, cutting, cutting, cut back, close this, cut that.  And you knew the needs were great and you just said, well, do I want to be here for, for this disaster?   I don't want to be overseeing something like this, I said.  So I went over and told him I was leaving, and he was shocked, uhh, why are you leaving?  And I, and I called my office.  I said, well, you all wait and I'm coming over.  I have something to tell you.  So I went to the staff and I told them--my immediate staff, and I said, I'm leaving.  And they bawled, they started crying, and they were just so upset.  And they said, well, Lois Phil (ph.), she's a nurse that had worked for me, who could have retired years before, but she just stayed because she enjoyed working.  We had worked together at, at the Gales (ph.) Clinic.  So I--as she's down the hall, she wants, she said, I thought that might be it.  She says, my papers are ready.  She says, I could go, and she says, I'm leaving, too.  And I said, oh, really?  And the next day, thirty people resigned.  I didn't even know some of them.  That's how it went.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: That's a real testimony.
Speaker 1: That's the testimony.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 78345
Speaker 1: That brings me to the other question.  Where, where, where are you, Dr. Epps?  What do you want to, you know, do that you haven't done and--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--I have no, I never had any ambitions.  My life has just evolved--no, circumstances.
Speaker 1: Right, circumstances.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then when--I mean, that circumstance--
Speaker 1: But hard work, but hard work always.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: With passion?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, I'm, I'm doing this.  I like what I'm doing.  I do these consultants' jobs.  I don't want anything that's long term.  I want to be able to--something with fixed time.  I can--product, whatever, and finish it and then move.  I'm an advisor to the Women's Health Institute at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  They were trying to get that established, and so I work with them and that in any capacity that they want me to.  I don't--I'm not going to impose myself for my ideas so people, I think, you're a real value.  I like to work with young people, mentoring.  I do a lot of nominating people, writing recommendations, and I get a big deal of satisfaction that they always get whenever I write them up, they get it.  But I, you know, we have a place in Florida.  I enjoy there.  We have grandkids in California, and so it's, it is good.  Everything's good.  This is sort of like a pause, you know, that's good.
Speaker 1: Right.  But you've had--I mean, in many ways, there are several things that come to mind.  One is that, you know, there was a time--well, women thought that they could it all.  And I'm just saying your life is almost a testament, like how someone can do it all, but the belief, you know, because--and you started before people thought, you know, that--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, you know, I really--I don't know that I did it all.  You know, people say, well, how did you do it?  Well, it never occurred that I couldn't do it.  And then, my, my husband [Dr. Charles H. Epps, HM] has been very supportive.  He's a wonderful person.  And then--
Speaker 1: He's very well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You have wonderful--the kids are following you.  I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you have two careers?
Speaker 2: --but yes.
Speaker 1: You worked, you were not just focused on just, you know, medicine, so--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --even now, you are at the point where you can say, why, I can choose this--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and it's not like, I don't know the world out there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I don't have diversity and the experience.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'm just saying-- how, what, what are the--well, you've outlined some, you know, some of the stepping stones, but do you look back, and are--do you say, well, that's the way it was, or are you sort of amazed that it fell in place like that?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not amazed, I'm not amazed.  As I say, you focus and you, and you do.  What people say, well, we--I say, well, you do what has, what has to be done.  I don't understand.  People who say, well, I can't do this and that.  What do you mean, you can't?  You know, everybody has the same amount of time in their day.  Everybody has, you know, I admit, I was tired a lot.  I was tired and, but, but you just put forth whatever is required.  And you do it.  And then I think because I have a lot of interests in a lot of different things, I'm able to get pleasure out of a lot of things.  My whole life isn't just any one thing, so if that isn't working too well, I've always got something else that is working, and it's always contributing.  I think being able to contribute.  Our children went to private school.  They all went all the way through.  But we decided, say, (unclear), we decided that it wasn't any point in two people working--that we weren't working for ourselves.  We were not working to acquire things for ourselves.  We were working, we were the working members of the family.  Our job was to work.  Their job was to go to school, and they understood that.  It's--I--when you say school is a child's work.  And so, they were very serious about what they were doing as we were about what we were doing.  And we vacationed together.  We went to meetings together.  We, we--whatever they were doing was important, too.  And so, you know, we were a family unit and so, you know, we never had to go to court.  We've never been to the police station.  We never had to hire a lawyer.  So all that money that people spend, we've never had anybody in a rehab program.  So all that money, you know, and resources and time, and I, you know, they were our priority.  We didn't have to have a car every year.  We didn't have to--we lived in the same house we were living in thirty-eight years, so, you now, we're just, we're a team.
Story_ID: 78346
Speaker 1: We'll see that all.  Why don't we stop and get something to eat?  They said, well, we don't like, you know, we eat at home.  It's a, it's a--we don't want to eat at those kind of places.  But yet, they exposed us to--I, I can remember when Philippa Schuyler came to, to the city auditorium.  And Roland Hayes came.  And all those people, we--they took us, but they bought--they didn't have any segregation in the orchestra in the best seats because it--I mean, you couldn't put people in the best seats in the back of the--  And so, we--I remember  putting on my long dress, and we'd be all dressed up, and march right down to the front of the theater (laughter) in front of the auditorium and sit right down in front.  And so, you know, we would--they would take us--I remember taking me to see Charles Drew when he--when I was interested in medicine and they, my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] and them came and he spoke.  And we went to Alabama, going to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], and seeing, actually seeing George Washington Carver working in his laboratory, so that, you know, we had a chance to see these people.  And, and, you know, my father [Dr. William Kenneth Payne] didn't make a big to-do about it, but he just was not going to be treated like that.  And the public transportation, they just didn't take it.  We had a car and we, we drove where we were going to go, whether it was far trips, and a lot of times, we had state campuses.  And you call ahead and we'd stay at a college campus or something if we were traveling, and we always had a room there.  I can remember when Mordecai Johnson was coming to Savannah [Georgia] and he called and said, can I stop with you overnight?  And, you know, people--it was like an underground and a railroad, you know.  And one time I had mapped a trip.  We were going up to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  We always went to the American Teachers Association meeting which was the black section of a rather the, rather than the NEA [National Education Association] which they have now.  So I had--they said, you map the trip so I--oh, it was wonderful.  We could go right through Greenville, South Carolina where my, where his sister lived there, go right on up to Ohio.  But I didn't know I was taking us through the mountains.  I mean we were up and down the mountains.  And that old Packard was having trouble with those hills, I tell you.  So we got to a place in Tennessee--Kentucky, and Paris, I think, Kentucky.  We said, we'll spend the night here so, obviously, no hotel in this--it was a town of horses and, you know, and that kind--people training and most of the people, I think, were jockeys.  And so I can remember we stopped at a stop sign.  And so, my mother [Mattie Beverly Payne]--or light--my mother called out the window to a young fellow and said, listen, and said, we're passing through town--says, anybody you know that, you know, has overnight accommodation.  So he said, well, the principal, Ms. so and so, usually lets people stay at her house.  So we went over there and sure enough, she had a couple of rooms.  And I remember my mother and I stayed--my father always let mother and me stay together, so I wouldn't be alone in a, in, you know, those kind of situations were strange where people might, might bother you.  But and she fixed a good breakfast the next morning with biscuits and grits and what-not.  And we headed on out the next day.  So, you know, we had ways of adjusting and accommodating.
Story_ID: 78347
Speaker 1: Do you think integration was good for the black community?
Speaker 2: It had to happen, it had to happen.  Oh, I, I--my parents believed, because there was a lot would be lost, 'cause, well, a lot of people took the best teachers.  You know, that we had college educated Ph.D. teachers, the school system here in Washington [D.C.] was like nothing else with all these--a lot of Ivy League-trained Ph.D. teachers who couldn't work in other situations, but it was wrong.  It had, it had to end.  It was just wrong.  And I don't, you know, even though some institutions were lost, some things were different, and I think one of the things that was lost was people who believed in our children.  In our school system, it was no question that you could learn.  And even if you couldn't, you sat up there.  I remember some girl--she must have been about 17, 18 years old, sitting in our class in the back, but that was all right.  She was there and she came every day.  And people told you, they believe in you.  So, Johnny, you're not doing your work.  You can do better than that.  But, you know, there are people who don't care or don't think kids can learn.  And that's why we have to do something about strengthening the family and getting--and, of course, now we have parents who never, who never were parented.  And so, we've got to do something about, about that.  But it had, it was wrong.  It had, it had to go.  It just there's no, no reason to think that people should be subjected or not have the opportunities.  But now, we have to prove to our own people that the opportunities are just there.  I mean, it's in the reward really.  You could do if you just apply yourself.  You can't be necessarily elected to an office 'cause that requires other people, but it's no reason why you can't do whatever you want to.  And I think our people have given up hope.  As a mother said who, with a project I started for high-risk, you know, for, for no--younger children who were in the fifth grade or third, fourth, fifth grades who are beginning to fall back in school, a lot of them had learning disability.  And the mother--it was set up in this program where they'd all be diagnosed, and the parents could come at the same time.  It was only six weeks, but the parents never wanted to leave.  They just said, oh, even some of them brought their adjudicated husbands out of, you know, to the pro-, and one was so sad when one mother said to me, I didn't think anybody cared anything about my child but me.  Now what in the world is going on when people don't think that the teachers care, or that their neighbors care, or that the minister doesn't care.  I didn't think anybody cared what happened to my child but me.  I'll never forget that.  I said, if this were--this is a different world.  From the day when Mr. Winchell (ph.) says, come with me, and I was in the back of his car, or the, or the teachers, parents would have a reading club.  We were in little reading clubs when we were children.  On Sunday afternoon, we would go and meet in all--just take out little books and read in elementary school when, when the village really was there.  The village is gone, the village is gone.  But I think it's that, that, I think the pendulum is going to swing back.  I think--
Speaker 1: You--why are you an optimist about this?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm an optimist.
Story_ID: 78348
Speaker 1: And with young people, black people going into medicine which you have, you know, this is not a theoretical question there--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but what advice would you have for them, even in terms of it being a career?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, unfortunately, just as when I came along, people were discouraging people.  It's still the best thing I know.  It's a wonderful career.  It's nothing else you can do and feel so gratified.  And regardless of what you want to do, whether you want to teach, whether you want to practice, whether you want to work in an agency, or whether you want to be a policy maker, you can do it with a medical background.  And it's, it's not what it used to be, but it's still better than a lot of things.  Every, you know, look at--industry is cutting back.  Wall Street is losing its luster.  Everything is having problems.  And so, it isn't--there's no perfect occupation, but there are opportunities, and it's a matter of what you're interested in.  And I think it's really unfortunate that so many people have been discouraged who were interested--not be that many, many more opportunities and fields exist that we never even heard of.  You know that we're even there, but yet this is quite satisfactory.  I know people coming to it later.  A lot of people are now entering medicine, particularly women.  Now the doors open.  They had other careers or been there in other fields and said, I always wondered too, but I did something else.  There was a time you couldn't do that because they didn't take anybody in medical school if they were more than 20, 25 years old because they figured they had to have a length of time to practice.  But now, of course, with the ending of age discrimination, you can--so we find people 30s, 40s, who are going second career into medicine.  One of the best things that happened was in engineering when the space program laid off a lot of people.  A lot of them were retrained as physicians. And so, that's where we come with the artificial hearts and the artificial limbs and so forth because they understand the metals and the mechanisms and the, and the physics behind it all.  And so, the blending of those two has been really very beneficial for medicine, so I think there are a lot of opportunities.
Story_ID: 78349
Speaker 1: And the role of our black institutions, you know, our, our colleges and universities that--would you comment on that 'cause some people say, you know, we should shrink.  Some people say, you know, there's now increasing--people saying we need to preserve them and make sure they do exist.  I mean there're --so what are your views because your, your family's history is really steeped in--
Speaker 2: I think once integration occurred, and a lot of people went to major institutions, which you and my children did as well--that people thought that the--some of people thought, but I think they need it now more than ever.  And I think that institutions--that we have, we've had a proliferation of a lot of institutions that perhaps can't make it then.  Financially, it's very expensive.  And these private institutions, and I mean it's expensive.  It's just as expensive to run them as it is to--or more so, than it is a larger one.  And yet, and still the tuition base isn't there and tuition doesn't support it anyway.  It has to be other monies.  And so I think that for institutions that are strong, that it's all the more reason to get stronger.  And more and more people are coming to them.  And as we used to say, we just had charted (unclear) at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  The other day, here at Howard, and we said, we used to tell our children, everybody has to have the Howard experience.  You need to know the Howard experience.  And when our daughter was accepted at several medical schools, she used to tell them, I want to go to Howard.  And they all, you know, had some fellowships there to work there because the relationship should be over the network, since you'll be on--just don't exist in the other institutions.  And as if I talked to various people who've gone to some of those institutions, they said, well, I have no contact with anybody who was really my college or very few people or whatever.  And yet, you know, we have a network of hundreds of people that are like brothers and sisters from the shared experience.  And I think it's always an opportunity to get it.  I said, people can always get that experience.  They ought to come and spend some, spend some time and really get to, get to know about it.
Story_ID: 78350
Speaker 1: And your legacy, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't care really.
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Being a good person.  Trying to help others.  Taking what I could and making it work for other people.  Reaching out.  Doing something for others because it, it really isn't worth anything unless it's something you do for others.  And, hopefully, you know, one of the biggest satisfactions I have is from time to time when people coming up to me and say, I'll always remember what you said.  And I would not even remember having said whatever it is they said I said, but I'll always remember what you did or you helped me.  And that's, that's it.  That's enough.  I think a job well done is its own reward.  You want a quote, here's one, "A job well done is its own reward".  And so, I don't worry.  I've had a lot of honors and awards, but they're--I can't even find a lot of them.  I think the, the real thing--it's nice to be recognized and appreciated, but it's something everybody can do.  Everybody can do something and people need to do it.  I, I really feel so sad about the people who have not used their education, not used their talents, and not used their resources.  And there are so many ways you can help.  I, you know, started as a physician working in the personal level and always intended to sort of do that, you know, one on one in my office.  But my life evolved in such a way, and in growing, I found out that there are ways to contribute on a larger scale as well.  And I'm glad that I've been able to do that.
Speaker 1: That's it.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 78351
Speaker 1: These are the six recipients of the Federal Women's Award which was given to the most outstanding women in Federal Service.  In 1974, the presentation was made and this is the group.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our family and our dog, our first dog, Trixie.
Speaker 2: I'd love to their names.  I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: A portrait, my husband, [Dr.] Charles [H. Epps, HM], first; reading from left to right from the second row is Kenneth [C. Epps], Howard [R. Epps], Roselyn [E. Epps], who's stabilizing the dog, and Charles [H. Epps III].
Speaker 2: Do you know the year?  You don't have to know the year.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Then go ahead with this one.
Speaker 1: This is President [Richard] Nixon congratulating me on--and The Oval Office receiving the Federal Women's Award.  This was in March 1974, about three months before he resigned.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good description.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about this one?
Speaker 1: This is my brother [William Kenneth Payne II] on the upper right hand corner and our immediate family taken at the Federal Women's Award Ceremony at the Sheraton Hotel in 1974.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, hold on one second.  This is good.  We got a real rhythm.  I just got to try to keep up in terms of checking the focus.  Okay, next, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Queen Noor [of Jordan] and me at the Hospital for Sick Children, along with Dr. Constance Battle, the hospital director, at the bedside of a patient.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Year, if you recall?
Speaker 1: 1985.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's good enough.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the First Lady, Barbara Bush, along with Constan-, Dr. Constance Battle, at the Hospital for Sick Children during her tour during the time she was the wife of the President [George H. W. Bush].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And year or date range or decade?  You're allowed to approximate if you don't know exactly.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they know when he was President.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  It was during the, during the administration of her husband?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  You can say something like that, too.  You're allowed to.
Speaker 2: Okay, during the Pres-, during the President's administration. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is Dr. Battle and myself taken at the same hospital in front of a mural of handprints by the children during my term as president.
Speaker 2: That's Powell Laboratory School on the grounds of Savannah State College [Savannah, Georgia] where I attended elementary school.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Take a (unclear).  You're pretty fast today, Ms. Richardson.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You're just darting around with--okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me with the elders taken in Zwedru, Liberia on a mission for the United Nations--no, for the World Bank taken in 1985.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture taken at the Child Development Center interviewing a patient in 1981.
Speaker 1: Now that Child Development Center was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: At Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 2: This is a--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Maybe we could take the stack down behind it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Give it a little (unclear).
Speaker 2: They got to think (unclear), huh?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I just--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, great, okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Rosalynn Carter, (unclear), Mayor Walter Washington, taken at the clinic demonstrating the importance of immunizations being administered by a nurse to one of the patients in 1975.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my parents and our, and my two young children, Charles and Kenneth, maybe, and, and with me, visiting our home in Savannah on campus.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: That would be 1960.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's the Links Walkathon taken on the [National] Mall.  That's my husband and I were taken when we were attending the walk.  I was co-chair of the local walk raising money for hunger and homelessness in 1995, 1995.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: This is a visit to--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Went too fast (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a program of President Bush and Mrs. Bush taken at a dinner that was being given by the Bushes at a hotel but not at the White House.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, yeah, Rosalynn Carter, First Lady Rosalynn Carter, during the President's term, with a group of volunteers from the YWCA when we attended a coffee at the, at the White House.
Speaker 2: Do you know the women--the other woman there?
Speaker 1: I did, but not anymore--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the biologist.  That's when I was received in 1981 when a day was named in my honor by the city council.  February 14, 1981 was declared Dr. Roselyn Payne Epps' Day in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is at the White House on a visit there with--during the First Lady Betty Ford.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oops, it's falling.
Speaker 1: Oops, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Down she came.  First Lady Betty Ford.  It's not going to stand there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: You got it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.  All right.
Speaker 1: That is a program when received the Charter Day Award at Howard University in 1995--1999, I'm sorry, 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you find your graduat--your--
Speaker 2: No, he said it was on a slide.  Those are remarks being made at the dinner, Howard University Charter Day dinner in 1999.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture taken outside the Child Development Center with my husband, Charles and myself, when I was the director of the Child Development Center at Howard University.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next--
Speaker 2: That is a scene teaching medical students in the College of Medicine at Howard University in 1981.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is a group of students at the medical school in 1981 taken at the same time teaching pediatrics.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: You had mentioned--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  This is a reception held at 7th of--Dale Bumpers that was held at the--it really was a program for Arkansas, but I knew Daddy (ph.) Bumpers and so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they invited me to come to this Arkansas reception that was held at the--on the hill.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is taken at, at Charter Day with Kweisi Mfume, who was the speaker at the convocation, along with President H. Patrick Swygert.  That's S-W-Y-G-E-R-T.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oops.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I mean I don't know.  You're getting all these pictures out of there.  There--let me see, hold it for a minute.
Speaker 2: You can look down there, too.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I don't know if that'll help--it's not much bigger than the photo.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  That was holding the Charter Day Awards at the Charter Day Ceremony at the hotel.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When was that?
Speaker 1: In 1999, and what we said.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next, and this one?
Speaker 1: And this Dr. Dorothy Height [HM] at that same Charter Day Dinner with my husband and myself and friend, first.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandfather, John W. Beverly when he was a student at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] in 1894.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now one second.  (Unclear) there we go, okay.  All right, go ahead, next.
Speaker 1: This John W. Beverly when he was President of Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This a picture of my mother and me taken when I was about 10 years old.
Speaker 2: You have to give your mother's name.
Speaker 1: Mattie Beverly Payne.
Speaker 2: Can you spell it just because--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  M-A-T-T-I-E, Beverly, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, P-A-Y-N-E, Payne.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  This a picture of my daughter and me.  She's on the right, Roselyn Elizabeth Epps, R-O-S-E-L-Y-N Epps.  And that was taken in 19-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Or roughly about--
Speaker 1: About 1980.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the next--
Speaker 1: That is a library book plate that's inserted in all the books bought with the John W. Beverly Fund, which we created at Brown University, celebrating the graduation of our daughter, Roselyn, R-O-S-E-L-Y-N E. Epps in 1984, 90 years after her grandfather graduated.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, I want you to just take a look through that--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) when I was--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about the one that's up here right now, Dr.--
Speaker 2: President--what's that?  Oh, that's a family portrait of Charles and myself, and left to right standing, Kenneth Carr (ph.) Epps, Howard Robert Epps, Charles H. Epps III, and Roselyn E. Epps.  And that was taken in probably about 1980.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the grand ballroom of the Hilton Hotel in Chicago [Illinois].  And on the stage are the presidents of the society, state societies affiliated with the American Medical Association.  And I was the first African American woman, president of the State Society, and that's the grouping of the people that marched on the stage, yep.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, here's the pony shot (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That's my brother and me.  He's William Kenneth Payne II and me.  I was about two years ago taken on a pony beside our house at 1516 Rango Street in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Things are falling apart.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  This is a later picture.  That's a later picture, that's a picture of my mother, Mattie Beverly, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, Payne, and that was taken in 1965.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me taken during my school years, probably 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my brother, William Kenneth Payne II; my mother, Mattie Beverly Payne; my father, William Kenneth Payne, Sr.; and me, taken probably 1952.
Story_ID: 78352
Speaker 1: This is at the Charter Day reception prior to the dinner greeting Dr. Muriel Petioni [HM] of New York City [New York] who had come to the ceremony.
Speaker 2: And that's M-U-R-I-E-L--
Speaker 1: L--
Speaker 2: P-E-T-I-O-N-I.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And next--
Speaker 1: That is at the Medical Society of District of Columbia.  I think that was taken at the AMA meeting in Chicago, the year I was President of the Medical, first African American woman president of the Medical Society of D.C., the AMA Affiliate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about this one?
Speaker 2: This is a recent picture of me in front of the Stone Hall which a girls' dormitory at Palmer Memorial Institute in Sedalia, North Carolina taken June 2002, the 100th anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 199-, in the year 2000.  This is a member of a couples' club which we had been members over 35 years and this was taken at the home of one of the members.
Speaker 1: And what's the couples' club?
Speaker 2: The Couples Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the Peace Links Gala with the founder of Peace Links, Mrs. Betty Bumpers, wife of Senator [Dale] Bumpers and Peace Links Women's Organization striving for peace worldwide.  And my daughter is on the board.  I was on the advisory board.  That was in, that was in probably 1999.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These are the Palmer classmates at our reunion, all class reunion, celebrating a 100th anniversary, Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina, June--
Speaker 1: Can you spell Sedalia?
Speaker 2: S-E-D-A-L-I-A.  June 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a portrait of the two of us at home taken in 2000.
Speaker 1: You have to give your--
Speaker 2: Charles Harry Epps, Jr., M.D., my husband and Roselyn Payne Epps.
Speaker 1: This is at a reception with Marian Anderson as a member of the Board of Directors of the Washington Performing Arts Society taken in 1975.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  'kay next.
Speaker 1: That's the visit to my parents' home with Charles holding Charles III, me, my mother, Maddie Beverly Payne; my father, William Kenneth Payne; and Kenneth Carter Payne being held by my father.  And that was taken in 1959.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And next.
Speaker 1: And this is 1959.  My parents, William Kenneth Payne and Maddie Beverly Payne with Charles H. Epps, Jr., my husband standing, and presenting a gift to Charles H. Epps III and Kenneth Carter Epps.  It's December 1959.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And next.
Speaker 1: This is a reception Ford's Theater had for Vinnette [Justine] Carroll when she--production at the Ford's Theater and Yvonne Brathwaite Burke [HM]; Carris Homan (ph.) who was there.  And it was held at Chez Brown, C-H-E-Z B-R-O-W-N, African American restaurant here in Washington.  And that must have been the 1971.
Speaker 2: Can you go from left to right?
Speaker 1: Left to right--Yvonne, Congresswoman Yvonne Brathwaite Burke, Roselyn Payne Epps, Charles H. Epps, Jr., and Vinette, V-I-N-E-T-T-E, Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L.
Speaker 2: That is a picture taken at the Tonga Club in the Fairmont Hotel, San Francisco, California in 1968.
Speaker 1: That is a formal photograph taken of Roselyn Payne Epps in 1975.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Ahh.  That is a wedding picture taken with the groom, Charles Harry Epps, Jr., and the bride, Roselyn, being, being greeted by Dr. Wilmette Wilson, a dentist in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: And who, what's this?
Speaker 1: This is a shower that was given at our wedding in the week before my wedding, including the bridal party and the members of the--attendees at the shower.  It's called the Spirit of Saturday Night.  It was a bathroom shower.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: June 1955.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
