Story_ID: 482851
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  This is Neculai Burghelea with The HistoryMakers, and we will start by having you state your full name, including your middle name if you have one, and spelling it out for us.
Speaker 2: Sure.  My full name is Deborah Marie Augustine Elam.  D-E-B-O-R-A-H, M-A-R-I-E, A-U-G-U-S-T-I-N-E, E-L-A-M [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam].
Speaker 1: Now Elam is, it's not American, or is it, the name Elam?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Elam is my husband's name [Archie Elam].  I have no idea--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what its origin is.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he's American?
Speaker 2: He is American.
Speaker 1: Okay, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on June 1, 1961 in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's just repetitive (unclear).  Today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 26, 2007.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We are in Fairfield, Connecticut at GE's [General Electric] corporate headquarters.
Story_ID: 482852
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna start by asking you five People magazine type questions.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Strawberries.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  If it ain't broke, don't fix it (laughter).
Story_ID: 482853
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna start and I told you before we're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You don't mo- know much about your father's [Henry Augustine, Sr.] side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so we'll focus mainly on your mother's side of the family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: Give me your mother's full name, date of birth, and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name is Jeanne Marie Cunningham Augustine [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine].  She was born in New Orleans, Louisiana on June 5, 1930.
Speaker 1: Is she French?  Was there any Fr- Creole?
Speaker 2: She's Creole.
Speaker 1: She's Creole.  Now explain to me what Creole means to you because I've heard several definitions (unclear)--
Speaker 2: What Creole means is someone whose ancestry is a mixture of French, Spanish and African, I mean that is what it's--technically means, and in New Orleans, which has been a melting pot for many years, there's a heavy French influence in names, people, et cetera.
Speaker 1: What about languages.  How many languages did your mother speak?
Speaker 2: My, well my mother at one point would speak French in, in a very elementary way.  French was required of all students in New Orleans, kindergarten through eighth grade it was mandatory for many years, and then in high school you had an option of French or Spanish.  So all school kids took some level of French.
Speaker 1: Now Creole, is there a language associated with Creole?  Is there, I mean--
Speaker 2: It's a broken French, so it's not, I wouldn't say it's necessarily a specific language--in, in the U.S.  I mean in other parts of the world I think it is a specific language, but it's very much a broken French with phrases mixed in with English.  I couldn't say it's a named language.
Speaker 1: Now what are your mother's, tell me the earliest memories you have of, of I guess of your mother, things your mother said to you about her childhood.
Speaker 2: The earliest things my mother, my mother was the oldest of five, or is the oldest of five.  She grew up in a large family, and she grew up in an extended family household, so her grandparents lived with her as well as maybe a couple of aunts and uncles, so it was a large family and you always got the impression in talking with her that Christmas gatherings were very large.  They owned a cleaners in the Irish Channel part of New Orleans.  They were one of the few African American families out there who had a cleaners, and so it was called the pressers, the presser shop then, we call it a cleaners now, and they were well known for that reason.  So, a lot of people would come and get their clothes cleaned there, and my uncle, who is mentally challenged, he's still alive, he's in his eighties in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands now, but he would deliver the cleaning.  He would get on a bicycle and sort of deliver the cleaning to people's homes.  So, those were some of the early memories.  Big family, lot of cousins, lot, lot of family around.
Speaker 1: Well what happened to your mother's parents [Ruby Cunningham and Joseph Cunningham]?  Why did she, why was she raised, no I guess nothing (unclear), but everyone lived in the household.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a large house and everyone lived in that household.  I don't know the reason why.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you know where that house was located?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they lived what, what in New Orleans would be called out front of town, which was in the Irish section of town.  I think it was on St. Thomas [Street] if I'm not mistaken.  They had a fire when she was maybe late junior high, early high school, and I know they went from the house on St. Thomas to another house, which was smaller.  I know so the, the quarters were more cramped, but some of the older siblings or, or people, not siblings sort of had moved out and married, so it wasn't as many people at that point.
Speaker 1: Now where did your mother go to elementary school in New Orleans if she lived in that section of town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: What about high school?
Speaker 2: She went to McDonogh 35 Senior High School [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was also where she taught for over thirty years.
Speaker 1: Now did she grow up in a segregated New Orleans?  Was New Orl- New Orleans I'm assuming was legally segregated because it's the South or was it not (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she very much grew up in a segregated New Orleans.  McDonogh 35 in fact at one point was the only public school for African Americans.  In fact, it's interesting one time I noted as I was reading obituaries of African Americans who had passed away in her c- age group, which would be in the seventies, I would say you know why did everybody go to 35, and she said well because that was the only public school that African Americans could go to way back when.
Speaker 1: Did she have any recollections of having grown up in a segregated society?
Speaker 2: Oh very much, very much because it was segregated really through my early years, so you know riding the bus, back of the back, that kind of thing very much so.  A lot of fear for safety of going certain places or not going certain places, certain parts of town.  So, yeah it was very much a part of our lives.
Speaker 1: But your mother, I mean specifically your mother's life, she grew up with it as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She did grow up (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was less--
Speaker 1: With you, probably less noticeable.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Now again she lived in a white neighborhood, and so many of her childhood friends were white.  She was the only black family, and I think they were accepted because they were the presser's children or grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Now let's, was she very light skinned?
Speaker 2: She's light skinned.
Story_ID: 482854
Speaker 1: Now then her [Elam's mother, Jeanne Cunningham Augustine], let's talk about her mother and father--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your grand--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --grandparents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --their names and dates of birth if you have them.
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's mother's name was Ruby E- I'm sorry Edna Ruby Vinette Cunningham Francis [Ruby Cunningham].  So, she was go- she was go- she went by Ruby, though Edna was her first name.  She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] also.  I am not exactly sure what part of the city she grew up in, and then her father's name was Joseph Cunningham (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, I don't remember, it's on there.
Speaker 1: Okay it's on there though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she was born in the 18- I mean the late, early 1900s.
Speaker 2: Early 1900s, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in 1910.
Speaker 1: And so Ruby you called her, she was called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: She, she was very fair.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say very fair--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she was more, if you, you would have characterized her more light than dark.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then her, your mother's father?
Speaker 2: My mother's father's name was Joseph Cunningham, and he would certainly been characterized as fair.
Speaker 1: Now do you know about their parents, like who of them had a white mother or father?
Speaker 2: I don't.  We really don't unfortunately have that lineage or history.
Speaker 1: But, you could assume that one of them did or no that was just New Orleans, people were all different shades (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well New Orleans, New Orleans had a number of people who were fair, so I would necessarily assume that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know if you wanna go two, three generations, possibly--
Speaker 1: Possibly.
Speaker 2: --but I, I couldn't say that with any, any fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the grandparents, they owned a cleaners.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so and they, do, do you know if your grandmother had the opportunity to go to school?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, Ruby, was a high school principal in fact, and she taught school.  So, education, so, so women in my family on my mother's side have been educated for a long time.
Speaker 1: Wow, so she was a principal of the P.S. 41 or 35 or what was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, she was principal of an elementary school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in New Orleans.  I don't know the name of it.  It may not exist anymore, but years ago.
Speaker 1: Now your grandfather's, the business, was it his that he'd, that it sort of been in the family or it something he started on his own?
Speaker 2: I believe he started it and in fact I think it's one of those stories where he kept the first dollar he made sort of thing, so it was, it was very much the pride of the family and like I said they, they were known very much as the presser's children so there was a lot of identity with the cleaner business and in, in them as family.
Speaker 1: Well, do you know why they chose a cleaning business?  Was it because it's domestic and they could make money or something they thought they were good at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: But they opened a business and, and--
Speaker 2: Yep, opened the business.
Story_ID: 482855
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to your mother [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine].  Where did she go to--you don't know where she went to elementary, but where did she go to college?
Speaker 2: She went to Dillard University--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about the stories of how that may have happened, who inspired her to, I mean I guess, she was inspired because her mom [Ruby Cunningham] and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she, she loves Dillard to this day.  She absolutely is one of the most loyal Dillard alums you would ever meet.  My, as I said there was an extended family in the house, and so her aunt [Lorraine Francis], who is only three years older than she was, her aunt was the youngest of five, she was the oldest of five.  So, they grew up sort of like sisters and so she had gone to Dillard.  She was three years ahead of my mother, so when she was a senior, my mother was a freshman and of course since she had gone there, was doing well, it's where my mother naturally followed.
Speaker 1: And Dillard was founded when?  Do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't, but I would assume--
Speaker 1: Okay, but it been around for--
Speaker 2: --it was seventeen--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah 17- 1800s I would assume.
Speaker 1: So then your mother majored in education?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Social studies education.
Speaker 1: Because at that time it was one of the few things she could do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, if, if it had not been, if my mother had not been born in the time I believe that she was, she would have been a very successful fashion designer because she has been a seamstress and designing clothes.  She made my wedding dress.  She's made her sister's [Beatrice Cunningham Johnson (ph.)] wedding dress, her own wedding dress, clothes for my father [Henry Augustine, Sr.], but of course at that time there was no opportunity for African American women to go into that kind of field.  It was generally either education or healthcare, you know so it was being a teacher or nurse, and education seemed to be at least what my aunt was going into and what her mother had been in and so it was a, a very acceptable choice and field to follow.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about like holidays at home with that extended family, like what were Christmases like--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --or Easters or--?
Speaker 2: --yeah she said holidays were, were a big deal for them because everybody was there.  We, I can remember actually one of the few memories I have, this was years later, of my mother crying.  We were trimming the tree when I was a little girl, and we had these ornaments that my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Cunningham] actually made during World War II [WWII].  He physically made them to ensure that they had some sort of lights and ornaments, they were lights.  And I remember one of the ornaments dropped and, and broke and it sort of sent her over the edge because I think it was, you know, a connection to her childhood, which was a very happy childhood.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  So, did she have any other stories about her childhood that you can remember?  Did she talk about legends in the family that have been passed on to her--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and she wanted to make sure you knew about them?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know as much about legends.  I mean there are people she would talk about I know--
Speaker 1: Who would she talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, there's one of her very dear friends, Ms. Peola Carey who's still her dear friend.  It's her oldest friend.  They've been friends since about third grade.  I remember they walked to school together, ended up going to high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] together, went to separate colleges.  Peola, I think, went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and she went to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], but they've been friends, you know, for, you know, sixty years plus, which is great, so they are, they are, they are reminisces of people that will come into play.
Speaker 1: Who would you say was your mother's mentor?
Speaker 2: My mother's mentor.  Probably her mother.
Story_ID: 482856
Speaker 1: She was the oldest of five, and I got the impression that she was really under her mother [Ruby Cunningham] a lot.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's get your mother's siblings.
Speaker 1: Sure, so my mother, Jeanne [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine], is the oldest.  Next to her, eighteen months younger, was Bea, Beatrice Cunningham Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 2: And what did Bea do for a living?
Speaker 1: Educator.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She went to Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] after she got out of high school [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  She was the rebel in the family so to speak and wanted to go away.  She's like, I'm going away, and after Alabama State got a teaching position.  At that point, the aunt I mentioned earlier who had gone to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and blazed the trail had moved onto Chicago [Illinois], and so she was married in Chicago and then Bea, when Bea graduated, she went to Chicago.
Speaker 2: What did that aunt do for a living, the one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Educator.
Speaker 2: Educator.
Speaker 1: Everybody was in education, and some went to the rank of principal.  My--
Speaker 2: Okay so, go ahead.
Speaker 1: So, my mother's aunt was Lorraine [Lorraine Francis].  This was the one who was three years ahead of her at Dillard (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she went to Dillard, and sh- then went to Chicago.
Speaker 1: She went to Dillard, then went to Chicago, married went to Chicago.  Then Beatrice graduated Alabama State went to Chicago.  Mother graduated Dillard at the age of nineteen, and it was interesting because at that time she could not get a position she was too young to get a position teaching in New Orleans [Louisiana] based on their rules and regulations.  So, she went to another part of Louisiana to teach for a few years until she was really old enough to teach.  Now, at that time, of course, there was no twelfth grade.  I think they finished at eleventh grade at that point.  So, she started school early and then I think she may have then skipped a grade, so she really was young coming out of school.  The next sibling, so then there's a gap, and then the next sibling is--we called him Junior, my uncle, Webster Francis, Jr. [ph.].  And then--
Speaker 2: Was Junior an educator also?
Speaker 1: No, he actually went into the [U.S.] Navy.  He went into the Navy and stayed in the Navy, a Merchant Marine for quite some time.  (Laughter) I think he's probably the only one, up until me, who didn't take that, that choice.  And then--
Speaker 2: Did he ever have any stories?
Speaker 1: About the Navy?
Speaker 2: About the Navy?
Speaker 1: The only thing I know about him and the Navy I know he was on a ship that caught fire, and he was in a very serious accident.  He survived, but I know--
Speaker 2: Was he burned?
Speaker 1: He was not burned, but a number of his fellow sailors were, and he talked about actually seeing people kind of move away from flames, so I think he feels very blessed in that he, you know, he was spared in that regard. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Do you know why he chose the Navy?
Speaker 1: You know he enlisted I think when he was about seventeen he, you know, wanted to see the world.  I think he was the only boy with four sisters and you know I think, you know, wanted to chart his own course in life and decided to go see the world.  Then the next two siblings are Mary and Mildred.  Mary and Mildred, it's Mary Francis Byrd [ph.] now, and Mildred Francis Denwoody [ph.].  They were much younger than my mom (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Are they twins?
Speaker 1: They're not twins.  They are about two years apart in age.  They ended up, my--we're fasting forwarding a little bit, but my grandmother was killed by a drunk driver when I was a year and a half old, and so the two youngest children went to Chicago to live with my Aunt Bea, who was then established and teaching there and they ended up staying there.
Speaker 2: And, and they what, and then where did they go to school, end up going to school?
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they stayed in Chicago and, and still live there today.
Speaker 2: So how much of the family remained in New Orleans at that time?
Speaker 1: My mom.  She had another aunt, Ethel [Ethel Francis], and her husband, Henry [ph.], Uncle Henry, Ethel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did aunt, what did Ethel and Henry do for a living?
Speaker 1: Uncle Henry, what did he do?  He was a cook in the Navy at one point and then I think he worked as a longshoreman.  So, the longshoremen were people who unloaded the docks and so forth in New Orleans and then my aunt I think did small kind of jobs periodically here and there.  She didn't have a professional career per se.  They, and, and so they lived in New Orleans--my aunt is deceased--until her death, and my uncle still lives in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 482857
Speaker 1: All right let's talk about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't know much about them--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but you know your father's full name and his--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --date of--place and date of birth.
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's full name is Henry Louis Augustine, Sr. [Henry Augustine, Sr.].  He was born in Joyce, Louisiana, on November 22, 1919.  I know he had one sister who was ten years older than him.  His name, her name was Oni [ph.].  I don't really know what her last name was.  I think her last name was actually Williams [ph.], Oni.  She had a number of children who I'm unfortunately not really in touch with.  And that, that's, that's more or less what I know.  I know his father's name was Joseph Augustine [sic. Louis Augustine], and I believe he was from the Marksville area in Louisiana, which is in North Louisiana, and I believe his mother [Emilee Augustine] was from Sikes, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 482858
Speaker 1: How did they meet, your mother [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] and father [Henry Augustine, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: My mother and father?  In church (laughter).  My father came to New Orleans [Louisiana] from North Louisiana when he was, I think, sixteen, seventeen years old, maybe even a little younger.
Speaker 1: To do what?
Speaker 2: To work, you know, just leaving kind of the rural, agrarian North Louisiana area to find a better life, and grew up in a household that apparently was very, very much rooted in religion and churchgoing and so he joined Pilgrim R- Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2 [New Orleans, Louisiana].  My mother as she became an adult and stayed in New Orleans after she got out of college [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] she started teaching there, she decided, she didn't necessarily want to stay in the church she had grown up in, but wanted to look at, at other venues and visited that church, liked the church, and actually attended the church.  My father taught Sunday school, and she joined his Sunday school class and I think was a member of a Sunday class for several years and then I think they started courting as it were and married.
Speaker 1: And what year did they marry?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: And then you were born in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 482859
Speaker 1: Now what are your earliest memories of your own childhood?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of my own childhood, the earliest memory I have, literally, is standing in a crib, which was in my mother's [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] bedroom when I was probably about a year, over a year old 'cause I was standing, so maybe a year and half old, and I remember in our home we had this sort of built-in radio system, which was really rare at that point and I remember this radio station on and I remember there was a jingle for one of the furniture stores in New Orleans [Louisiana], Rosenberg [Rosenberg's], and it was (singing), "Rosenberg, Rosenberg, 1825 Tulane [Avenue]," which was their address and anyone from New Orleans will remember that, but I remember hearing that jingle on the radio.
Speaker 1: Wow (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that's pretty good and you were a little over a year old.
Speaker 2: I would say probably a year and a half, a year and a half.  I can remember, I remember when my [maternal] grandmother [Ruby Cunningham] was killed, I was about sixteen months old.  I don't remember the circumstance of her death at that time, but I remember everyone in the house being very sad.  I just remember the house didn't feel happy, it felt sad because she kept me every day.  When my mother would go to work, she was my babysitter, and so all of a sudden she didn't show up, and so even at sixteen months I, I remember recognizing that something was wrong, something was not the same, something was abnormal, though I obviously couldn't know or understand what it was at that point.
Story_ID: 482860
Speaker 1: Who were your neighbors and what street did you live on at this time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--sure, my address was 9331 Forshey Street [New Orleans, Louisiana].  My neighbors, we lived on a corner, and the people who lived across the street from us interestingly across the little side street were Mr. and Mrs. Joseph August [ph.], but the interesting thing about them was I didn't know what their real name was almost until I was in high school [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] because the man called everybody neighbor.  If you walked outside, he's like, "Hi neighbor, hi neighbor," so we called him Neighbor.  Everybody in the neighborhood called him Neighbor and his wife Mrs. Neighbor.  And I can remember they gave me a gift at some point, and I remember writing a thank you note and I had to ask my mother [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] what was their real name.  So, they lived in a cross little side street.  We were on the corner.  The house next door to the house I grew up in we owned, and so we had a series of renters over many years, you know, various people who would stay for a couple of years at a time.
Speaker 1: How would you describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Very middle class, homeowners.  There was a public school, my elementary school immediately across the street.  The neighbors knew each other very well and most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was Paul Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana].  The neighbors all knew each other.  The kids, it was very safe, the kids could go out and play.  I can remember skating on roller skates on the sidewalk or riding my bike on the sidewalk and being, feeling, not, not feeling any danger whatsoever.  We could--remember playing dodge ball on the side street.  So, I would say it was a very close-knit community where the people had been there for a long time and, and really knew each other.
Speaker 1: Who did you look up to at this time in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Who did I look up to in the neighborhood?  There's, there was a family around the corner, the Sharetts [ph.], and they still live there; their parents are deceased now.  Sandra [ph.], who is about ten years older than I am babysat me several times, and her sisters did as well.  There were three I think, four sisters and a brother, and I just thought she was cool, you know, she was ten years old, you know, she had nice makeup, nice hair, she dressed well, I just thought she was cool.  So, I would say I admired her because she was always very flashy and, and she would come over to see--my mom ended up teaching her in high school, and she would come over sometime and sit and talk with my mom, so I admired her a lot.
Speaker 1: And in the neighborhood were there any community leaders?  Like who did, in the neighborhood, who did people go to if there was trouble, let's say, oh somebody's son is in trouble and--?
Speaker 2: You know I, I don't know.  I don't remember a particular leader in, in, in, in our immediate neighborhood.  I mean the interesting thing for me is many of the people in my immediate neighborhood for example they went to church there, everything was there.  My church [Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2, New Orleans, Louisiana] was in a different part of town, so I had probably broader networks of people that I knew, but I can't--there's no one that I can recall that comes to mind with any, I mean to be honest with you I don't remember any sort of trouble per se.  The first trouble that I can remember, and I'm skipping ahead probably a little was when Mar- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go, we'll go back, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --was when, was when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 1: And that was '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because this was an all-African American neighborhood.  You know, the city was still very much segregated for the most part at this point, and I can remember after he died, in the wake of his death, the months after, he died in April, so probably that summer, there was a group and I don't remember their name, but they wanted a show of black solidarity in the black neighborhoods and they wanted, and it was kind of word on the street, I don't remember this being on TV, but that every household had to put a piece of black cloth out front, (unclear) out on the door, out on the porch, or tied to something, and I can remember my mother and I going to the shopping center to the fabric store to buy black cloth to put out because my parents were, my parents were not the rabble-rousers.  They certainly believed a lot, very strongly in black pride, but they were not the protestors, they were not the marching type.  They were more the keep your nose clean, work hard, so they complied.  I remember the woman who used to do my hair, Mrs. Jones [ph.], who lived about two blocks down.  She had a beautiful home with a big picture window, and she said she wasn't gonna do it, and I remember there was a brick in her window a couple days later.  So, that was the only sign of trouble.  But I don't know that there was anyone, the, the neighbors sort of went to.  Most people just complied un- until it blew over.
Story_ID: 482861
Speaker 1: Was that your first recollection of race relations--is--Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination?  Was that the first time you were aware that there was some animosity possibly between the two races?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say, yeah that merged in with when my school integrated.  So, I went to Paul Laurence Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was immediately across the street from my house.  My house address was 9331 Forshey [Street].  Dunbar School was 9330 Forshey, and it was an all-black school.  The teachers were all African American, and I remember when white teachers came.  I was in fourth grade when white teachers came, and that was a big deal.  And I sensed that there was some animosity because it was a big deal.  If, if there were no animosity it would have been a big deal.  I remember there were a lot of questions about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kinds of questions?
Speaker 2: --and what was gonna happen--just, you know, what, what did it mean and, and--
Speaker 1: What did it mean to you?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I thought of it as bad or good.  I just thought of it as different.  Most of my world up to that point was segregated.
Speaker 1: What about the doctors when you were sick were they black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my doctor was, was white.  My doctor was white.  That was a good point, but my minster, my church [Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2, New Orleans, Louisiana] was African American, my Girl Scout troop was African American, my ballet school was African American.  Where I took music lessons was African American, so my, that was more or less my world, so my fourth grade teacher was Mrs. Cook [ph.] and--
Speaker 1: Was she African American?
Speaker 2: She was white--
Speaker 1: She was white okay.
Speaker 2: --so she had just come to the school, so this was when several white teachers came and I remember she had white go-go boots and a mini skirt and I thought she dressed kind of cool like the people on 'American Bandstand,' and she had long blonde hair.  But, I remember the parents just kind of wondering what was this gonna mean.  You know were the kids gonna be treated fairly and was it gonna work out okay.  It was fine, but I just remember there were more questions about what did it mean than just a normal school year.
Story_ID: 482862
Speaker 1: How involved would you say were your parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] in your, in school, and then we're talking about first through fourth grade.
Speaker 2: Very involved, extremely involved.  If there's any one pillar in my life that I can remember from my earliest recollection until now it was sort of educational excellence.  You know my parents believed in education, and they believed in nothing less than you best effort and that was generally excellence.  So, I can remember them being at all events, all PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, any program I was on.  I was very active in elementary school.  I was in the kinder rhythm band, and I was a Girl Scout, and so my mom was one of the mothers that would drive us to events or places.  So, so my parents were very focused on what was happening with me at the school.  They were very focused on the grades.  I can remember even--as I mentioned French was required in New Orleans [Louisiana] through eighth grade.  Now for the black schools, the French resources were not the same as the white schools, so the white schools had a French teacher; it was actually a class.  We had a television set wheeled in to our classroom two days a week where we would watch, so this is now kind of first, second, third grade, we would watch French on TV.  Had no clue what was happening and they'd wheel it out.  And I can remember I was an A student, I mean I was a straight A student, conduct, deportment, everything, and I got a C, what was equivalent of a C in French.  I think we had E, G, excellent, good, satisfactory, I got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, E, S, H, S, A, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, E, G, S, yes, so I got a satisfactory in French and I had had, you know, excellent in everything and my father was like, "What happened? What did you do? Did you not study?" Blah, blah, and I explained to them what our French instruction was and they went to the school the next day.  They set up an appointment with the principal and they said this was unacceptable.  And they said well we're just them, you know, a grade because and, and so well give them an A.  You know if you're gonna give a grade, then just give an A.  And I remember that profoundly because it said to them this is serious to us and how you do at school is important and serious to us, and so you know and, and I don't know if any other parents complained because everyone in the class just got kind of the average passing grade, and they said no, that's not good enough.
Speaker 1: Which teachers stands out for you?  Or which teacher stood out, first through fourth grade?  Did you have a mentor (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my first grade teacher was Mrs. Urselle Lunnon.  She was an excellent teacher.  She took a lot of interest in me and how I was doing, what was doing.  She was also my Brownie troop leader, so I spent a lot of time with her in that regard, pushed me a lot.  I can remember in first grade I, I was very advanced in terms of reading.  My parents worked with me a lot before I even started elementary school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, when I was in first grade my parents had me taking, reading with the fifth grade students.  So, I would leave my first grade class at whatever period, however many times a week, and I would go to the fifth grade class and take reading with them and in second grade I did that with the sixth grade kids and, and honestly I don't what happened after that because sixth grade is when the school ended, so I'm not sure what happened when I went to third grade.  But it was always a push.  It was always a push to really do well academically.
Story_ID: 482863
Speaker 1: And we're gonna go back to kindergarten--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your education.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, so I--
Speaker 1: Well where did you go before you went to the private kindergarten school?
Speaker 2: I went to a private nursery school called People's Nursery [ph.], and I can remember one of my bad memories from childhood, little childhood, was they made you take a nap every day, and I wasn't somebody who napped in the middle of the day; I'm still not.  And I can remember well you have to take a nap and they'd make you take a nap, and I'd go home and complain to my mother [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine].  And I can remember one morning just clutching the, the steering wheel of her car, you know and they had to drag me out.  I just wouldn't go, and my mom told my dad [Henry Augustine, Sr.] that's it, you know, I'm not, you know, I can't do this every morning I'm, I'm done.  At the same time, there was a private kindergarten in New Orleans [Louisiana], Martinez [Martinez Kindergarten School].  It was started by a woman, I think her name was Josephine Martinez [sic. Mildred Bernard Martinez], African American woman, who had been a teacher in the public school system and was really concerned about how African American kids, bright kids, were being taught and what kind of resources will they have, what kind of education were they getting, many of who were in segregated schools, most of whom were in segregated schools.  And so she started a small private kindergarten for kids who really had, you know, were gifted you know from an academic standpoint.  And I can remember there was a wait list everywhere and my parents were at a dinner party and one of the couples at the dinner party said, just indicated that they were gonna be moving away and their child was there and so my parents said, there's a spot, there's a slot open, and so I feel it's like what I'm doing now with my own kids [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam] once they said there is a slot open, and so they called and set up an appointment for me to go and meet and be interviewed and I can remember you know during the interview, you know, the tea- the, Mrs. Martinez said, "Well we're reading here," and my mother said, "Well my daughter can read," I was four years old, and she said, "Okay, well, let her, let her read this calendar."  It was a little church calendar on her desk.  And I read it and I think I got one word wrong phonetically, but she said, "Okay she, she can keep up with us," and I was able to enter the school that next fall.
Speaker 1: What do you remember Ms. Mart- Martinez--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --looking like?
Speaker 2: She was Creole.  She was very Creole.  I remember her being stern, but she was always around.  I remember her walking around.  I remember a lot about her, but I remember her walking around.  I remember her being very engaged with the kids and some of the kids interestingly if I look at my year book from Martinez many of the people who were in there I ended up going to college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] with and had no recollection of them from kindergarten.  It was pre-K and kindergarten, so it was a two-year kindergarten program, four year old and five year old.
Story_ID: 482864
Speaker 1: And then you went into the first grade [at Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and that's when you had the teacher that you liked?
Speaker 2: Ms. Lunnon [Urselle Lunnon], yes.
Speaker 1: Ms. Lunnon.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When do you remember being, like, African American for the first time in a sense that people may discriminate against me because I'm black?
Speaker 2: I can remember going to a Girl Scout camp.  My Girl Scout troop was all African American, and one of the things my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] believed in was being busy in the summer.  You know we didn't have to work.  We were, were financially able that I never had to work during the summer, but were always engaged in some way, be it a camp or something academic or Vacation Bible School.  So, I can remember going to a Girl Scout camp, which was maybe like a two week camp at Audubon, I think it was Audubon Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] or City Park [New Orleans, Louisiana], and my Girl Scout troop was all-black, but this camp was almost all white girls.  So, that was new.  That was different.  I just remember feeling different for the first time, not bad, but just, wow, this is a different group of kids.  And I can remember my first grade teacher, who was also my troop leader, called my mom one night and said, "There's gonna be newspapers here tomorrow from the Times-Picayune," the, the daily newspaper, "make sure that Deborah [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam] wears her official Girl Scout shorts and shirt."  And I didn't know what was going on.  My mother did that, but it was because she wanted the teacher, the troop leader wanted to ensure there would be an African American girl in the picture.  And when they selected people they sort of picked kids who had on something that looked a little more official that day.  So, it was kind of the networking behind the scenes even at that point.
Speaker 1: Well that's, so you never had an incident to where (unclear) you were made to feel bad about yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I really didn't, I really didn't.  My parents affirmed so much every day for our abilities and who we were that you know I really cannot in childhood think of any situation where it was like, oh my god, I really, I really don't, but again remember most of my world was African American most of the time, so I would not have had that setting in my childhood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Talk to me about the ballet school, the name of the school.
Speaker 2: Deirdre Jefferson School of Dance [ph.].
Speaker 1: Was she African American?
Speaker 2: African American and all the students were African American.  So, here again--
Speaker 1: But does any of this stuff exist today?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These African American schools, this ballet school, Girl Scout troop.
Speaker 2: Well certainly I mean if you think about Dance Theatre of Harlem and you know that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's on a big scale, but I'm talking--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and, and the South--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --I mean it sounds so rare.
Speaker 2: It's probably mo- more integrated now.
Speaker 1: Than it was then, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because remember at that time many of the white ballet schools would not have admitted me, and this was just a Saturday class (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah of course.
Speaker 2: --I mean this was not a big fancy school.  I was just taking lessons.
Speaker 1: Well, where did you study music?
Speaker 2: I studied music, I started out with our church organist and just taking private lessons with her, our church pianist.
Speaker 1: And who was that?
Speaker 2: Oh dear, Cathy Singleton [ph.] and then I took lessons with Gloria Atlas [ph.], so--
Speaker 1: Why do you think your parents felt music was important because a lot of African Americans have studied piano or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Yeah, my father had a very unique reason for wanting me to take the piano because he wanted me, my father grew up during the Depression [Great Depression], and it was important to him as a woman I could support myself and not have to do day work.  And so he saw being able to be a church musician as a way to earn a living and not have to do day work or do a maid, and so in his mind if I had that skill it was something I could always fall back on or if I were in school or married years later and needed extra money it was something I could always use that would earn a decent income and not something (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it's practical, it wasn't because he wanted a cultural or--
Speaker 2: No it was not a love of art, no, no, no it really wasn't.  It was more, it was much more a practicality at that point.
Speaker 1: And what about dance, why did your mother let you study dance?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know I think that was more of an exposure thing.  I think it was much more of an exposure and refinement and learning about a variety of dances because certainly my friends and I learned how to do the, the R&B dances, but I think she (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  So between first and fourth grade what music did you listen to in the house?
Speaker 2: Between first and fourth grade, The Jackson Five.  It was all about The Jackson Five (laughter).  I listened to The Osmonds.  I had, I had both.  Probably the remnants, but late remnants of kind of the James Brown, the Motown era, that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: What did your parents listen to?
Speaker 2: My parents listed to older jazz.  So they were much more big band jazz than contemporary jazz.  They were Louis Armstrong or Nat King Cole, or Count Basie, Duke Ellington.  A lot of that stuff was played.  Music was played a lot in my household.
Speaker 1: And did your mother and father ever go out dancing that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  In fact, my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did he out dancing, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --took dance lessons before they married because he was not a great dancer and you know he said I have a wife, or I will have a wife who likes to dance and took dance lessons.  So, they would go--you know New Orleans [Louisiana] has a lot of social clubs.  So, the social clubs would have parties and balls and I can remember them dressing up in tuxedo and the whole thing and going out dancing, and things like that.
Story_ID: 482865
Speaker 1: So before we go back to your education in, in the neighborhood that you grew up in was there one street of that neighborhood that was considered, let's say main street, by that I mean it had the businesses, the bank--
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  Was there a black bank in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: A black bank, not at that time.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not at that time, no, no.
Speaker 1: What were the black owned oper- (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Mom and pop shops.
Speaker 1: Mom--
Speaker 2: They were mom and pop shops.
Speaker 1: --all mom and pop shops.
Speaker 2: My, my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Cunningham] later in life owned a luncheonette.  It was called Ruby's Luncheonette [ph.], which was named for my grandmother [Ruby Cunningham], and luncheonette was really just a counter you know that served sandwiches and floats and so forth.  And I remember it was next door to where my father [Henry Augustine, Sr.], my father's barbershop.  It was not in our neighborhood, but it was maybe I don't know a twelve, fifteen minute drive.
Speaker 1: Oh your father had a barbershop also?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no where he got his hair cut (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh where he got his, his hair cut okay.
Speaker 2: Where he got his hair cut--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right, and so sometimes I would go with him when he would go get a haircut and I'd sit at my grandfather's barbershop and have a malt or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 482866
Speaker 1: So fourth through seventh grade, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Fourth through seventh grade, so fourth, fifth, and sixth grade I finished up at Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and then in seventh grade I went to Ursuline Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Now were the teachers fourth through seventh because it integrated did you feel a difference in your education than you'd received the first four years?
Speaker 2: No, because my only teacher, my only white teacher was Mrs. Cook [ph.] in fourth grade.  My fifth and sixth grade teachers were African American, and they were teachers that had been at that school at that time probably twenty years, they were well known (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were there white students also--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --coming to the school?  Only the teachers?
Speaker 2: Only the teachers.
Speaker 1: So the integration was only bringing in teachers.
Speaker 2: Only the teachers.  There were one or two white families and generally they were European immigrant families at the family that I ever remember.  I mean I really don't remember any white kids of any mass at all.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any kids being bused to schools that were pretty far away from their homes for integration in your neighborhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, were not bused.  We were no bused.  No, we just, it stayed a black school and the teachers came.  That was the plan at our particular school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were gonna tell me about were there any teachers that first through fourth, fifth, and sixth grade that made impressions on you at Dunbar before you go into seventh grade.
Speaker 2: Yes, my sixth grade teacher Mrs.- it been Mrs. Jackson [ph.] and I think her husband died and she remarried and later it was Mrs. Powell [ph.].  She had been at the school twenty years, so many of the people in the neighborhood knew her.  She was very tough.  She pushed a lot.  I can remember to this day her coming in and asking the class, just literally on December 7 saying, "What happened today in history?" And no one knew the answer and she said, "Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was bombed on December 7," and I remember that like it was yesterday.  So, there were things like that that she would have pronouncements that you just sort of just committed to memory, but she was--I liked her a lot.  She just, she pushed, she really, you know, really pushed people to their academic potential.
Speaker 1: Well how did you lose your accent or did you not have one?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know when I go home I can pick it up very quickly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Vocabulary, were there any English teachers that stood out for you?
Speaker 2: Not at this point.  That, that'll be a little bit later, but my, my mom because my mom taught school in her career for forty years, really pushed me a lot at home and again in summers I would do academic stuff.  I mean I can remember going to summer school one summer.  I was an A student, but it was a free summer school, it was across the street at the school from my house, and I went.
Speaker 1: What periodicals did they have at home or magazines or--you got the Times-Picayune?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got the Times-Picayune every day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there black newspapers in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: We had the Louisiana Weekly, sure we got the Louisiana Weekly every week, which was a black newspaper.  I remember Ebony being in my home.  I remember Jet.  My parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] read a lot.  But, I remember reading a lot.  I, I, I had an insatiable appetite to read, and we had, I mean we had a library in my home, so we had literally, so we had books, books, books.  I can remember reading about Greek mythology or reading--I was fascinated at one point in time with the, the Holocaust in Jewish history.  So, I remember reading 'Diary of Anne Frank' ['The Diary of a Young Girl,' Anne Frank] and other books of that genre when I was that age.  So, I read, read, read a lot and I used to get something called the Weekly Reader, which would come in.  It was a children's sort of periodical that would come--or newspaper that would come once a week, and even books that I would get, Highlights, you know I would, I would read them by the end of the day.  I mean my parents could not keep me stocked enough with books to read.  Comic strips I used to read the 'Archies' ['Archie'] and 'Richie Rich' and you know Mad magazine, all these various comic books.  So I just, I was an avid reader as long as I can remember.
Story_ID: 482867
Speaker 1: How do you get into Ursuline [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: So Ursuline Academy--at the time I a- we were applying it was considered the number two school in the city.  It's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And number one being?
Speaker 2: Isidore Newman [Isidore Newman School, New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time.  I don't know what it is now, but girls school, small school.  Well known people were there.  There were governors, former governor's daughters who were there.  Mayor Moon Landrieu was mayor of the city.  His daughters were all there.  Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial], who was not yet mayor, but was certainly a prominent attorney, his kids were there.  So, it was a school that as I think my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] interfaced in different circles that they thought would be good for me.  And so I applied and, and got in, in seventh grade and remained there and graduated in twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Was this your first exposure on a broad scale to being with students that were not just African American?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: And how is that different then?  How did, how, how was it different?
Speaker 2: It was different, the school was much bigger, just physically the, the geography was bigger.  That was one of the first things I noticed.  I noticed the resources were very different.  I mean I can remember at my elementary school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was African American where we would get hand me down books every year.  And I can remember the first day of school we would spend the day erasing the marks out of the books because they had been handed down from the white schools and they were raggedy and we'd, we'd have to tape them up.  And this was literally the first day of school we'd have to tape them and put book covers on them so they would be usable, you know, for the school year.  And pages would be torn out.  I mean they were just really in a dilapidated condition.  Now up until this point, that was all I knew.  You know and I can remember at Ursuline, first day, you know the stack of books and opening it and the spine cracking, and you know it was like wow.  So the resource allocation and, and what was available was really the first big difference that I, I recognized.  The kids were fine.  I mean the kids were not, you know, and not in any way mean.  I mean we, we were in seventh grade, so everyone was friendly.
Speaker 1: Did your opportunity to function in leadership roles diminish because you were at a school that was majority white now versus one that was majority black?  Were you still able to function in the student council and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.  In fact, I was elected, I think, I'm, I'm not certain about this, but I believe I was probably the first African American who was elected president of both my freshman class in high school and my junior class.  I was, so I was on student council.  But, but to stay with junior high, I was on the volleyball team.  I was the only African American on the volleyball team, so I was active in sports, clubs.  I mean, no I didn't in any way feel diminished.  I mean I really didn't.  The thing that was different was, and I realized this later in life, we, we sort of lived in two different worlds because when I would go home I would go home very much to a black neighborhood and they went home to a white neighborhood and so even going to parties or whatever had a level of tenseness to them from my parents' standpoint, just from a safety standpoint because it was different because I was venturing out now to a home where in a neighborhood where you know ten years prior they probably couldn't walk and was it gonna be okay, was anything gonna happen to me.  I didn't necessarily know all of what was going through their head at that time, but I could sense a little more tenseness when they would drop me off at a birthday party or whatever.  But, again never any issue for me other than I could tell my parents were a little more uptight about it than say other parties I had gone to with African American girlfriends.
Story_ID: 482868
Speaker 1: Did you have any ideas of what you may want to become at this time?
Speaker 2: What I may want to become.  Successful, but I couldn't tell you in what genre.  I always wanted to be successful, again that whole excellence, excellence in everything you do.  So, I had a thirst to be very good at something.  I couldn't have told you what it would be.
Speaker 1: But you always knew?
Speaker 2: I always knew I would do something well.  That was valued in my home.
Speaker 1: But you'd seen teachers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What else had you seen that you could possibly say, oh I may want to do that--
Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) other women doing that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --African American women?
Speaker 2: You know, well, well again the African American women I saw were mostly teachers and nurses, and my mom [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] actually did not want me to go into education.  She felt like at this time period, and you know we're now in the early '70s [1970s] that things would open up for African Americans.  So, her view and my father's [Henry Augustine, Sr.] view was if you get an education, if you work hard, if you persevere, they'll be endless, you know, endless may be stretching it, but they'll be opportunities for you that there weren't for me.  So, she was not in any way pushing me toward education.  I think it was all new to see what would be available.
Speaker 1: How were the counselors at Ursuline [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] treating you as far as preparing you for college and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your college applications.  Were they involved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah very much so.  I was a strong student.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: Oh God I'm not gonna remember the names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not gonna remember the names.
Speaker 1: But you were a strong student.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah I was a very strong student.  I was in the honor society.  I was in the drama club.  I was on the volleyball team, basketball team for a while.
Speaker 1: Were there, were there any African American teachers at Ursuline?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  No.  There was one when I was near my junior or senior year whose name I'm not gonna recall.  But no, prior to then not at all, not at all.  So I wouldn't have had an African American role model per se, but I think because I was a very, very strong student and I was very willing to engage with (unclear) other people.  One of the things I remember my mother telling me later, one of the nuns there, it was a Catholic school, told her was that I was more so, potentially than some of the other girls, willing to engage with people from different nationalities and different, different racial situations.  So I was never afraid of it 'cause I was confident in who I was and my own abilities and you know from an academic standpoint my, my grades were better than, than most of them, black or white.  So, I never had any self-doubt about my ability to, to be competitive, if you will, in that environment.
Speaker 1: Well what year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].
Story_ID: 482869
Speaker 1: And how did you select a college?
Speaker 2: I--well it's interesting because I very much wanted to go to a historically black college [HBCU] at that point.
Speaker 1: And you have to tell me the reason why.
Speaker 2: Because I had been in a white environment at Ursuline [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I can remember just very distinctly, particularly my junior, senior years, we lived in two different worlds because New Orleans [Louisiana] was still not legally segregated, but pragmatically segregated.  So, when my girlfriends that I had, white friends, Monday through Friday, we never did anything on the weekend because it just wasn't done.  Where I went on the weekend was with a totally other group of people than what they did on the weekend.  I said you know what I want to get past the Monday through Friday friends.  I want friends that I can do stuff with all the time. And so I very much wanted to go to a historically black college.  My fam- my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.]--I only had one relative to go away to school, which was my aunt [Beatrice Cunningham Johnson (ph.)] who went to Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  My mom wen to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  You know her mom [Ruby Cunningham] went to college locally.  Everybody went to school locally, so going away was not in the cards at this point.  I was the only girl--that was just not in the cards.  So, I got a scholarship to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I had a scholarship to Dillard.  Much to my mother's great dismay I selected Xavier for two years.  She was very upset about that, but I was pre-med.  I was very, very strong in science in school, and I selected chemistry as a major and I was gonna go pre-med.  Xavier had pre-med program.  I had a full scholarship to both schools, and so I selected Xavier, and I went to Xavier for two years until I got out of pre-med (laughter).
Speaker 1: And then where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to LSU [Louisiana State University] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I finally convinced them to let me go away.
Speaker 1: Where did you pledge?  Which school did you pledge (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I pledged at Xavier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I pledged Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] at Xavier in the fall of 1980.
Speaker 1: And why did you pledge?  Why did you s- feel the need to do so?
Speaker 2: I had been a Delta debutante when I was a senior in high school, so I'd been presented through the Deltas and many of the women that I would look at in my life, my first grade teacher, Ms. Urselle Lunnon that I mentioned earlier was a Delta, and I knew she was a Delta, I can remember her Delta key ring, and other women at my church [Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2, New Orleans, Louisiana] that I admired just for who they were, were Deltas.  And then when I looked at what the Deltas were about, you know, it was scholarship, which again was important to me and sisterhood.  I didn't have any sisters, so I thought we'll that'd be kind of neat and, and so I decided to pledge Delta.
Story_ID: 482870
Speaker 1: Well let's go back.  You talked about the world of debutantes--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Di- how prominent was that in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Very, very, it was very prominent.  It was a big deal.  Most of my friends made their debut with one of the clubs.  There were a couple of women at my church [Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2, New Orleans, Louisiana] who literally when I was less than two years old asked my mom [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] if they could sponsor me for the Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] debutante you know fifteen years later.  So, at that point they--my parents felt locked in 'cause they had sort of made this commitment to this one particular person from my church and, and there were other clubs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name was Helen Bryant Gordon, and she asked first and they felt committed to that 'cause there were other clubs I could have been presented with, but I ended up being presented with the Deltas.
Speaker 1: Talk to me a little about that world.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why does it exist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know why it exists now I think it's more a tradition than anything else.
Speaker 1: Back then why, why was it important for your parents, for you to be involved?
Speaker 2: It was probably tradition then as well, but there were, there were a lot of practical learnings.  I mean I learned how to waltz there.  We did waltz practice every Saturday for three months (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's practical (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know you never know when you may go--
Speaker 1: It's great you know, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --to an event and you gotta waltz and, and then I can do it (laughter).  You know I can waltz with the best of them.
Speaker 1: What else did they teach you?
Speaker 2: You know they taught us about being ladies, about how to sit and how to stand and how to curtsy and how to, how to be, how to be ladies in many ways and, and I think at that point it's something, I think it's something that's missing now, that a lot of young women don't know how to be ladies also and be feminine.  We learned how to put on makeup and we learned--I mean it was, it was neat, it was fun.  You know I don't know it was tradition and everybody did it, so I did it too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Of course and your, what do your daughters [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam] think about it today just to jump forward?  Do they find it something that they may be interested in or it's just a different world?
Speaker 2: You know they're, they're young now, so I don't know that they fully understand or appreciate it.  I just took them to their first Mardi Gras a couple of months ago, and they loved Mardi Gras.  They loved the scenery and the parades and all, so I'm trying to, you know, ease them in very, very slowly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when you were presented, who presented you?  Isn't it--
Speaker 2: My father [Henry Augustine, Sr.].
Speaker 1: --your father, yeah.
Speaker 2: My father, my father escorted me and then I had another escort, David Terrance [ph.], who was a senior at St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time.
Speaker 1: And what does all of that mean, your father presents you, he's saying to society, this is my daughter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's what it meant then (laughter).  It's kind of wild isn't it, I mean that technically what it means and technically you weren't supposed to date until then and I probably didn't date much until that point.
Speaker 1: Also they're looking other families that you would--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --be appropriate to marry their sons.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we were past that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time I was presented.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think we were way past that then, but it was more a tradition.
Speaker 1: But there's a lot of prestige.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a lot of prestige, it was very prominent.  You know we went to all of the other debutante parties.  So I remember having I don't know five or six different ball gowns to, to go to these different events that my friends were being presented, and you know it was fun--
Speaker 1: It was fun yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a lot of fun.  I'm glad I did it.  I want my daughters to do it.  I hope they'll want to do it at that time, so.
Speaker 1: Does that still exist in New Orleans today?
Speaker 2: Very much so, very much so.  In fact, there's an article in People magazine a couple of months ago that said, that really featured the black debutante balls and that they were back since Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] because last year they really curtailed quite a bit, but they were very much back this year.
Speaker 1: And who are the women today, the daughters of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My friends, they're my friends' daughters now (laughter).  They're my friends' daughters.  I feel old, yes, but they are.  One of my dear friends here in Connecticut son was a page, you know a page with a plume and a costume and carrying the queen's stole and the whole thing.  It, it's just a tradition.  It's a ni- traditions are nice, I think.
Speaker 1: Traditions are nice, but do you know where that comes from in the black community, that tradition of the debutantes and--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was traditionally New Orleans community in general.  It's just that in New Orleans it was segregated.  There were white debutante balls and black debutante balls (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we had, I mean a tradition in Mississippi as well, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that and--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was just segregated for, for many years.  It's not, it's not totally segregated now, but it's--
Speaker 1: But it's still sort of.
Speaker 2: Very much, yeah more or less.
Story_ID: 482871
Speaker 1: Okay so you decide to go to college, your major is pre-med.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: First two years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chemistry pre-med--
Speaker 1: --chemistry pre-med--
Speaker 2: --for the first years and I slowly started to decide you know I'm not sure--I went to a pre-med summer program.  I was accepted at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: What was the turning point in you deciding I'm not cut out for--
Speaker 2: For pre-med? I just, I didn't have any passion around it.  I just, you know I was doing a lot of labs, I was in lab you know two days a week for three hours and you know I just said, you know I'm, I'm much more, I enjoy being engaged with people, I'm an extrovert and I said you know I just don't know if this is what I wanna do.
Speaker 1: Who did you socialize with those first two years at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], Xavier?
Speaker 2: Friends from high school [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] (laughter).  Most of friends went to Xavier, so it was just an extension of the circle.  My African American friends from high school most of them went to Xavier and ended up in pharmacy.  But--
Speaker 1: What stands out for you from those two years?  What developed in you those two years?
Speaker 2: What developed in me?  I would say, I wouldn't say there was anything I can point to that was new, but I would say a continuation of confidence, more of an evolution of what is it I wanna do with my life, what is it I wanna be, and I think I became less sure because when I got out of high school it was I wanna be a doctor, so I had, I had an answer.  And then I realized maybe this answer isn't the right answer and then you go from that very safe position of certainty to an unsafe position of not having clarity, and that was a little disconcerting.  I pledged.  I loved being a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and being with the Deltas and the other, you know, African American Greeks and that was a whole another kind of new scene for me.  It was a small school, so most of the people knew each other.  I ran for the homecoming court, and I made it.  What was interesting about that is almost never did people from New Orleans [Louisiana] make the homecoming court.  It was generally the people from away, because the people from New Orleans generally lived at home and so they wouldn't even stay to vote (laughter).  You know they would go to class and go home and kind of go back to New Orleans, and the people from away this was much more, so I got people to vote for me and I got people would you just stay and vote today.  So, that was kind of fun.  We did the coronation and all that.  That was, it was again was just a different experience.  It was, it was nice.
Story_ID: 482872
Speaker 1: And then you decide to go to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I convinced my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] to let me go away.  I really wanted--you know at that point having gone to a very small high school [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana], my high school was all girl and there were eighty girls in my graduating class, so very small.  We all knew each other.  Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] was very small.  I wanted a big school.  You know I wanted a school that had a football team on TV, and I wanted the big college experience and so Baton Rouge [Louisiana] was close enough, it was an hour drive, and so I convinced them to let me go.
Speaker 1: Now that school isn't all-black is it--
Speaker 2: Oh no, LSU is, is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) LSU, yeah it's huge.
Speaker 2: --LSU is--Louisiana State University was at the time thirty thousand students and I would venture to say probably less than 5 percent African American, very small African American percentage, which was not uncomfortable for me because I'd had that environment in junior high and high school, so it was not at all uncomfortable.
Speaker 1: Any teachers there that stood, that stepped up to the plate--
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) you a little bit and said you're gonna be okay?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really because it was such a big school.  I mean I can remember you know going into some of the lecture classes and there be, you know, three or four hundred people in a, in a, in a class and you know to be honest with you, you know you almost felt like a number.
Speaker 1: So when did you decide to change your major?
Speaker 2: Right after I got there because I, I decided to transfer as a pre-med student and then really more and more I said you know this is, I really don't have any passion for this; I just didn't have it and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then you changed it to?
Speaker 2: Sociology because I found it interesting at that point.  I really, you know, I, I enjoyed the history of societies and how society worked and how people work and what people think about and what makes them click.  So I took a lot of psych [psychology] courses, but I ended up really having my degree in sociology.
Story_ID: 482873
Speaker 1: You're at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and somehow you become the president of the Delta--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.  Yeah, my senior year I was president of the chapter.  We had a fairly small chapter, but close-knit.  We all knew each other, and you know I think I just exhibited leadership skills, which is why I was elected president.  And it was a one year thing.
Speaker 1: What was happening at home during the time you were in college with your parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.]?  What were they doing?  What was happening in city politics and then Morial [Ernest Morial] was elected, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My father had retired at that point.  My mother was still working.  My father--
Speaker 1: You said he retired from the post office.
Speaker 2: From the main post office in New Or- in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He worked there I think close to forty years.
Speaker 1: Now you should also talk about your father.  This is a good moment to say he was the first African American to rise to a certain level in that post office?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that he was first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say one of the first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my father was one of the first African Americans to get to be a postal supervisor at the main post office versus a branch in New Orleans.  And interesting thing about him he taught deaf mutes for a number of years.  He studied sign language and as a number of governmental programs were happening then to bring in physically challenged people he was able to supervise them and teach them the, the mail things.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did the children learn sign as well?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You know when I was little I would just, 'cause daddy's girl I would have a few things, but I, I don't know any of it now.  At any rate, so what was happening in New Orleans at this time, so Morial had been, Dutch Morial had been elected the first African American mayor and in fact before I got to LSU, when I was still at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], we campaigned quite a bit for him.  We drove people to the polls.  I mean it was a big deal to have an African American running for mayor.  It was a huge deal in New Orleans.  I was very active with the sorority in doing that sort of thing.  By the time I transferred to LSU, he had been elected, I believe.  My father had retired.  My mother was still teaching at McDonogh 35 Senior High School [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and you know the city was changing.  I mean you started to have white flight out to the suburbs, and you had more of an African American political landscape coming into play.  So that was exciting from that standpoint.
Speaker 1: Had the convention center [New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] been built?
Speaker 2: No, oh no that was much later (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that was in the '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Late '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or early '90s [1990s].  It, at that time, well when I graduated college in '84 [1984] was the year the world's fair was in New Orleans [1984 Louisiana World Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana] 'cause somebody gave me tickets as a graduation gift.
Speaker 1: And then the convention center was in town for that fair right?
Speaker 2: The convention center was built after the world's fair (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, on that site.
Speaker 1: But when did they get the football team then?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Saints [New Orleans Saints] celebrated their fortieth year this year.  The Saints came in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: And where did they play?
Speaker 2: The Saints played in Tulane Stadium [New Orleans, Louisiana] and we went to see them several times, and then they played in the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] when it was built. The Superdome was built in the late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 482874
Speaker 1: So did you ever think of going to some place like Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] for college or never (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, Tulane was certainly on the radar screen.  I had, again I mentioned throughout high school [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] very busy summers, very busy.  I had gone to a summer program at Tulane what was called MITE, Minority Introduction to Engineering [Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science].  Not that I had any aspiration of being an engineer, but it was a free program and my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] heard about it and they enrolled me and so I learned computer science and programming and some stuff like that.  I, I can't recall a lot of it now, but yeah, so Tulane was certainly on the radar screen.  But, I ended up selected LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] again because I wanted to go away.  I wanted to experience the big dormitory (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah having that experience though the big dormitory, the big campus--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then who would you look up to?  Who would you look to for role models?  Who were you looking at to say okay if she can do that I can do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know there probably weren't any at that point.  There really, there really weren't.  I mean there were other African American students there who were, you know, when I was a junior they were seniors, so certainly you could see, but I--there's no one figure or one person who, who stood out per se, so I think at that time I really looked toward inner strength and inner self-confidence to know that, that I could also graduate from school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you continue to go to church during the time you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did, I did.  I, I went to different churches.  I never joined a church in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I'd go to Mount Zion [Mount Zion First Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] from time to time.  My mother's extended family, her grandmother, had been one of the founders of that church.  I knew that, though I didn't ever know my great-grandmother.  So I would go there periodically.  I, I'd go to the, the chapel on campus.  So, yeah I definitely went to church during that time.
Speaker 1: Now did they ever have any racial like eruptions at LSU during that time because this is the '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].
Speaker 2: Sure, '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  We didn't have the Black Panthers.  The one thing I remember that was a racial concern, there was a white fraternity, the Kappa Alphas [Kappa Alpha Order], the southern gentlemen, and they had something called Old South weekend every year, and for Old South weekend they would dress up like the Old South.  So, the men would wear Confederate uniforms and the women would wear the antebellum, Scarlett O'Hara type dress and I can remember they had a couple of guys dressed in blackface who were, I think, supposed to be slaves as I recall and this just erupted and I know there were rumors that students from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was across town, the African American school [HBCU], were gonna come over and you know so I remember that being of great turmoil.  I don't know what finally happened, maybe they abandoned it or whatever for that year, but that's the only thing on campus that I really remember.  I knew the black students stuck together.  We very much stuck together.  We sat together at the football games.  I can remember being in the end zone and, and my dad making a joke like you know gosh you know Jim Crow was thirty years ago.  You guys are still in the end zone, what happened?  But, we all sat together and so we knew each other because we had to, to, you know, to survive or to feel I think some, some kindred spirit-ness if you will.
Story_ID: 482875
Speaker 1: Now were you thinking about what you were going to do with your life after college at this time, (unclear) when you were a junior, senior?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I was thinking it would be you know--
Speaker 1: A social worker.
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: A social worker.
Speaker 2: You know I wasn't sure at that point.  I really, I, I, I would say probably in my junior, senior year I went through probably the greatest level of discomfort and uncertainty about what I wanted to do than I ever have in my life.  I really wasn't sure.  I knew I wanted to be successful.  I knew I wanted to do something that would earn a good living, and a decent living as my parents [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and Henry Augustine, Sr.] would say, but I really wasn't sure what it was.  I hadn't really thought about business yet.  Social work certainly could have been a possibility.
Speaker 1: But you hadn't thought about it?
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about it in that, in that context.  Public administration--I ended up graduating LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and I was accepted into Southern's [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] public administration master's [degree] program.
Speaker 1: So you didn't work in between?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  I didn't work in between.  I worked part-time at, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] in LSU when I was in school.  Prior to that, I had never worked, never.  My father, God rest his soul, had a belief that you know when people started working too early they created bills, they had obligations, and then school might become a little less important, so his whole focus was school and education, and I will provide for you what you need.  So, I really did not, I mean I didn't even have a social security number until I started college.  I can remember saying I gotta get a social security number because I really didn't work.  It was all academic pursuit or camp or something like that.
Speaker 1: So when you graduated you decide, well I should go back to grad school immediately because I can't work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah because you know there's not much to do with a degree in sociology (laughter) just to be frank so.
Speaker 1: What were you friends doing?  Where were they working?
Speaker 2: Some friends were in business, so they, you know, those who had let's say an accounting degree got a job as an accountant, or my friends from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] who I'm still very close to until this day very close to my three or four girlfriends that I've known since seventh grade were pharmacists.  They, they stayed at Xavier, so the pharmacy and kind of went into the pharmacy field.  A couple stayed in pre-med and were now in medical school or going into a residency or, or somewhere in there.  So, you know it was a mix, it was a mixed bag.
Speaker 1: Now what about the men you knew?
Speaker 2: What men, there were no men (laughter).  Same thing, I mean same thing.  I, you know I, I didn't have a lot of male friends at that point.  I would say the same kind of mixed bag.  Either those in finance or accounting did that.  Those in pharmacy or healthcare did that, so it was probably the same sort of thing for both male and female friends at that time.
Story_ID: 482876
Speaker 1: So why did you decide to go to--back to Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for school, for grad school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know I, again it was a time where I was just really not sure what I wanted to do, and so--
Speaker 1: And Southern is located in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: In Baton Rouge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's, it's about ten miles from LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  It's across town.
Speaker 1: But why didn't you stay at LSU because you were already there?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't sure what program at that point, and I knew--someone I think told me about a master's [degree] program at Southern that was fairly new and that I should look into it, and I did.  I went over and I talked with them, and they told me what it would do.  I was fascinated at this point with politics and government, so I said well you know this could be a venue.  And as I understood what the degree prepared you for I said well it makes sense for me.  You know I'm still--I'm already in Baton Rouge, I'm interested in government.  They said yeah you've got the right academic credentials for us to let you in and so they did.
Speaker 1: And there, did you meet any teachers or any professors (unclear) you or say you know--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, so again a, a, an African American historically black college or university [HBCU], small, everybody knew each other, much more nurturing.  The dean of our program, Dr. Jewel Prestage [Jewel Limar Prestage], really one of the preeminent black wom- women in academia in the country.  She, I think, received the first, was the first African American to receive her Ph.D., I believe from Iowa.  I'm not certain, but I believe it was the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], really just well-known and, you know, again pushed.  The thing I liked about that program was while I had literally just kind of gotten out of school there were many people in the program who had been working for a number of years.  So, I got a chance to interface with different kinds of students, different walks of life.  Mostly African American, but not exclusively.  There were some Africans.  There were some West Indians.  There were some Asians, but again very different experience.  And, and I found that to be interesting as well.
Story_ID: 482877
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Graduate school, I finished graduate school in '87 [1987], but I was recruited by GE [General Electric] before then, so I should talk about that, I was recruited by GE.
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's talk about the recruitment.
Speaker 2: Sure, so in between my two years of graduate school a man named Wiley Harris, who is still at GE, came down to Southern.  He was a GE executive and was recruiting.  You know he wanted to bring in minority students into human resources where he was in Rockville, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Was he a minority himself?
Speaker 2: He's African American.  At the time, I had one of the stronger GPAs [grade point average] in the graduate program, and they interviewed a number of us and I was selected to do an internship with GE [General Electric Information Services].
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In Rockville, Maryland.  Now, I didn't go in the summer because there were courses that I was gonna need to graduate that were only being offered that summer, so GE agreed to let me do the summer in school and then I interned in the fall and so I went up, and this was the fall of 1986, I went up to Rockville Maryland, and I worked in human resources.  It was great, I mean, it was a totally different world.  I had not before the thought about business at all as a career.  I knew nothing about it.  No one in my family had worked for a corporation per se, so it was a totally new experience for me.  I can remember, and my mother [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] jokes about this 'til this day, when I was gonna go up for the site visit interview you know people said, "You gotta have a blue suit."  Well, I didn't have a blue suit, and we couldn't find a blue suit.  It was short notice, the interview was a week away, and my mom spent, now you know this is twenty years ago, two hundred dollars for a blue suit, which was you know I mean tha- equivalent of five hundred dollars now.  And you know she said, "We can only afford this one suit," you know, and she said, "Well, bring two blouses. In case you have to stay over you can change the blouse," and to this day she will say whenever I you know go on a business trip or something good happens she said, "You know that blue suit was the best investment I ever made."
Speaker 1: So that blue suit got you the internship.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and maybe I said something reasonably intelligent as well in the blue suit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were there, were there any, like--at when you arrived at the interview were you, did, did you feel prepared in the sense that people had taught you, I mean your mom knew about the blue suit or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone else.
Speaker 2: But, she knew nothing about interviewing for a corporate--
Speaker 1: Well who taught you those skill, where did you--
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: --pick those skills up?
Speaker 2: --I, you know I've never thought about that before, but I didn't have any formal preparation to interview.  I really didn't.  I just answered the questions to the best of my ability.  I mean the way we have now with all sorts of training and interviewer skills, I had none of that.  It was just sort of cold and raw, and you know I answered as best I could.
Speaker 1: What do you remember them talking to you about?
Speaker 2: (Pause) You know because I was in school I remember them talking about subjects I had taken and leadership.  They talked a lot about leadership, and I was able to talk about various phases of my life where I had exhibited leadership, where I'd been president of, you know, the junior choir at church, or of the sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], or my class in high school [Ursuline Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And so I think the strain or thread of leadership throughout is probably as I reflect upon it now what sold them that I would, I would be a good fit.
Story_ID: 482878
Speaker 1: I'm kind of jumping around, and I don't even know why this question popped in my head, but I have to ask.  That blue suit was a skirt I presume (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes it was.
Speaker 1: When were you, when did you, when did they introduce pant to women, that you can wear a pair of pant--
Speaker 2: I think pant, you know well we, we used to dress like men, you know it was blue suit with the little bow tie.  I mean it was horrible.  A little paisley red tie; it was terrible.  I would say slacks became more prevalent when we went to more of a business casual.  So, I would say that's probably been in the last eight to ten years.
Speaker 1: So, not that long ago.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: We wore high heels, hose, and skirts (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think, do you have any opinions on it one way or the other?  Do you think slacks are appro- I mean obviously they're appropriate, but there, are there times when they're not appropriate?
Speaker 2: You know, I think as long as you look professional as a woman, as long as, if it's a pantsuit I think it's fine, it's perfectly fine.  If it's an evening affair in New York City [New York, New York] that's an after work kind of thing, I will probably wear a skirt versus a pantsuit, but I think pantsuits are perfectly acceptable.
Speaker 1: Now are there, do you find that you have to teach that to young girls today, the interview skills or techniques things that you said, oh I just went in cold, there's no one to teach, are you teaching that today?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so, very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what are teaching that you were not taught?
Speaker 2: I am teaching how to magnify your strengths and really illuminate what you have done, quantify what you have done.  Demonstrate where you have been a leader.  Really be specific about what your role was.  If you say, you know, well when I was on the XYZ team, well were you the captain of the team.  Make sure those attributes come out.  Make sure if you worked in something in the summer, if you had a key role what, what was your role, what did you deliver, so that you really distinguish yourself.  I find when people interview, they use a lot of broad terms: we did, we were responsible for, and what interviewers are looking for is what did you do.  What did you deliver?  What was your output?  And so I really push them to focus on that and you know things that were extracurricular, I mean coming out of school that's a big deal, you know, were you in clubs?  What role did you have in the club? Wh- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you in clubs during that internship [at General Electric Information Services, Rockville, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: During the inter- no not during my internship, no.  When I said clubs, I mean clubs in the school, in--
Speaker 1: Clubs, clubs in school, okay.
Speaker 2: --school that you have may have been in.  If you were in the science club--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or whatever, you know, and you or, or you may not have been the president, but maybe you led the fall fundraiser.  So, if you led the fall fundraiser okay what was the objective?  Well it was to raise money, and how did you do?  You had a goal of X, how did you do against the goal because quite frankly in business that's what we do.  You have a goal to have this amount of income or this amount of output and how did you do, so really trying to get them to be able to articulate that in a very crisp and concise way.
Story_ID: 482879
Speaker 1: So back to the internship, what did you learn about yourself that year because this is your first--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --business opportunity.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was and let me tell, talk a little bit about what I did in the internship, so I shadowed a lot of the people there because I had, I had basic skills, I had computer skills.
Speaker 1: And who were the people?
Speaker 2: The, the human resources team.
Speaker 1: You don't remember their names.
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't have to remember their names.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah I mean so, so Wiley Harris was my boss, my supervisor, and he managed a team of I don't know maybe fifteen people in human resources at GE Information Services [General Electric Information Services] in Rockville, Maryland.  There were people who did benefits, compensation, payroll, sound administration, stuff like that.  I can remember trying to leverage what I knew, so I had computer skills, so I could go on the computer, I could research stuff.  So, what I learned was I bring something.  It may not be the experience these other people have, but how can I leverage what I bring.  What I ended up doing, because again I went the fall between my two years of graduate school.  One of the things they wanted to know again because they did comp [compensation] and benefits was how do people understand their benefits.  What, you know, or, or the, the GE [General Electric] benefits, so the medical, the healthcare, the dental.  Do people understand them?  People may use them, but do they really understand what they have, do they value them, and if so are there any correlations with which groups of people understand which segments of the benefits.  What I ended up doing, which was really terrific, was using that project as my master's thesis, so I was able to actually use that and have it, have it published as my thesis when I, when I went back to Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in the spring to graduate.
Speaker 1: And what did you find out do people, were, was there any correlations between the groups of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the benefits that were used?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, totally correlated to age and experience or circumstance, so--
Speaker 1: How so, age meaning you use the medical benefit?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah so age meaning women who were of childbearing age and in that mode very much understood maternity leave and all of what was associated with that, but really didn't have a strong comprehension for retirement benefits, or post-retirement medical, or that kind of thing and, and vice versa was true.  People who were in five, six years from retirement didn't really know what might be available from a maternity leave or personal leave standpoint.  So, when we did the surveys, and again I used the East Baton Rouge Parish [Louisiana] population to do the survey, but I had developed all of this while at GE on the internship we were able to make those correlations (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did they talk about diversity at all during that internship, or is that a new word that came ten years ago?
Speaker 2: You know what I recall about that was the person who hired me by, by the time he hired me and I got back--'cause remember I stayed in school through the summer, and then after, well this is actually after the internship, but after the internship I finished school, so from January to May I graduated, then I started with GE in June, he had gotten promoted to another position, so he had moved on.  He was the only other African American, he, he was the boss, and he was African American in the group.  And so when I got back, it was interesting because I did overhear a couple of racial comments here and there about him going down to Southern University, historically black college [HBCU] to recruit and why didn't he go to another school, a better school.  And so you know that was sort of wow, you know, that was like how and I can remember feeling you know did I make a mistake coming here.  It was the only time I think in my career I said boy was this a mistake, and I called him.  I remember calling him.  I was still in Maryland.  He had been promoted and actually moved up to Stamford, Connecticut, and he said, "Look you are very bright, you have a very bright future and if it really gets really bad down there you let me know and we will try to find something for you in GE here."  And I said no you know I've just left home, I've packed up everything in my car, I've driven across six states, you know, my whole family thinks this is great I said I'm not gonna quit and I'm not gonna give up now.
Story_ID: 482880
Speaker 1: So Carla [HistoryMaker Carla Harris] said something to me she said in the corporate world you need two things to be successful amongst other things, but you need a sponsor--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and a mentor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have those two things early on?
Speaker 2: Yeah Wiley [Wiley Harris], the, the guy who hired me--
Speaker 1: Was your mentor?
Speaker 2: --was a mentor and is still a mentor and friend, very much so, very much.  I could call him any time and say, what do you think about this?
Speaker 1: And did you have a sponsor someone who and, and she explained it to me--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that a sponsor is someone who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is in that room when you're not saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she--
Speaker 1: --Deb- Deborah's [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam] gonna get, she, yeah--
Speaker 2: I can tell you what Carla said--
Speaker 1: --okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --Carla said carries your paper for you--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --'cause I've been on panels with her.  You know the sponsor and the mentor can be the same person, but don't have to be.  In my opinion, a mentor is somebody that you can call and be yourself.  You can ask the dumb question, you know, how did I sound when I did that presentation, was it okay, was it terrible, what should I have done differently?  You can just ask the really crazy question.  A sponsor, in my opinion, has to be someone senior to you, so it has to be someone who is senior to you in your organization 'cause it doesn't do you any good if the sponsor works for XYZ company and you're here, and somebody who is willing to put their name next to yours and speak up for you when key projects or assignments, opportunity for visibility comes up.  So, it's the person whose willing to say, you know Deb would be great for that project, or yeah you know I worked with Deb on this she was terrific.  It's the person who's willing to extend their own personal credibility to help you and pull you up.
Speaker 1: And did you have that early on when you made the telephone call prior?
Speaker 2: I would say earlier on Wiley Harris was both.
Speaker 1: Was both.
Speaker 2: He was both very early on.  And as time evolved, there were periods where I would say I had mentors and sponsors and periods where I didn't.
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna go chronically--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --because you joined in 1987--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and you joined as a--
Speaker 2: As a--
Speaker 1: --your title?
Speaker 2: --as a member of the human resources training program.  I was on the HR management training program.
Speaker 1: And how diverse was it at that time--
Speaker 2: There were--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987]?
Speaker 2: --yeah, so this program is the theater for human resources professionals in the company [General Electric].  It's a two-year rotational program where you do rotational assignments.
Speaker 1: And so it starts off big and then it dwindles down to a few people (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, in other words everyone who goes through the program will over a two year period will do three or four different assignments, so it's generally the same size.  Now at the time I joined the program it was probably the smallest in the company's history.  At that time, I would say there were 20, 25 people in total on the program.  There are now probably about 150 just to give you some sense of scale.  For whatever reason at that period in the company's history it was smaller.  There were two African American women including me on the program.
Speaker 1: Name them because they're important.
Speaker 2: Julie Brooks, Julie Baskin Brooks and me.  We were the only two African American women on the program the entire two years we were on the program.  There was one African American man, Gary Flanagan [ph.], and he's no longer with the company.  And then there was another African American man, Phil Manley [ph.], who was in our class.
Speaker 1: What about other women (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were--
Speaker 1: How many women versus men?
Speaker 2: There were, there were several white women and there, there was a Canadian, one or two Canadian women.  I don't recall any Asian women at the time, but there were certainly women on the program.
Story_ID: 482881
Speaker 1: Did the internship, or that s- what was that section, segment called?  When they invite the program, what was it called?
Speaker 2: Human resources management program.
Speaker 1: Human re- was that program--did they talk about diversity or was diversity something that would come later--
Speaker 2: I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because now you, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah I can remember actually, so as part of this two-year program you would have twice a year a week that you spent at Crotonville.  Crotonville is GE's training and development institute [John F. Welch Leadership Development Institute; General Electric Management Development Institute] in Ossining, New York, and everybody on the program would come together.  So Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam] might be working in Rockville, Maryland, and Julie [Julie Baskin Brooks] might be working in Stamford, Connecticut, and John might be working here, but for that week everyone on the program came together.  And I can remember during one of our weeks we did a segment on diversity and I remember the, the exercise had, we were kind of sitting around like a card table and I, this was so, these were the other vestiges of diversity training.  So, I remember all of the white men were sitting at the table and the women and minorities were sort of sitting back from the table, that's how we were placed initially, and the instructor was sort of what do you notice about this and how does this feel and we talked about that, and then I remember we did a switch off.  So, I can't remember all the details of the training, but that was one of the first diversity trainings, or even mention of it as it was woven into our curriculum.
Speaker 1: So you completed the two years of that program?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were, were there any other women in GE [General Electric] at the time, African American women, that you could model yourself after?
Speaker 2: Not of which I was aware at that point.  There was an African American woman, Barbara Scott Preiskel who was on the board of directors who was one of the early African American women on a Fortune 50 company board of directors.  I knew who she was.  I did not know her, but certainly you know to make it to the board of directors I knew that certainly there was some path within GE, but no, at that point I cannot say there were other black women that I, I knew personally.
Speaker 1: What conversations were you having with your mentor [Wiley Harris] at this time?
Speaker 2: You know, just how am I doing, what do I need to be doing differently.  A lot of it was around what's the next job because at that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the next job, go ahead because at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah well at that time GE was very much a company where every eighteen to twenty-four months you moved, you changed jobs either jobs and/or job and geography or business.  So, it was what do you think I should be doing next?  What, you know, what business is good, what assignment, what leaders are good, so it was a lot about that because I certainly had exposure to my little piece of the world, but I needed input in terms of other pieces of the world.  And at that point, I would say I started to engage other people, non-African Americans, just in career discussions, just what do you think?  So I was not afraid to do that at that point.
Story_ID: 482882
Speaker 1: And so where do you go from the initial two-year program?
Speaker 2: So, on the program, I did assignments in, I started back at Information Services [General Electric Information Services] in Rockville, Maryland, where I had interned, and then I did a rotation at GE aircraft engines [GE Aviation] in Evendale, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Is there were you meet Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne M. Hewett] because I think he was in that department.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, not at all.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, Evendale, Ohio, which is our aircraft engine business I worked there for six, six or seven months.  That was interesting because it was my first exposure sort of to a union relations role, so I worked in union relations, I took minutes at third step grievance procedures.  It was gritty and mundane, but I learned a lot about how contracts work and how union contracts work and how you stick to the letter of the law.  So, that was a new and different experience, but it was a good experience.  After that I went back to Rockville, Maryland, this is my last rotation on the program.  I was the HR [human resources] person for our sales and marketing team for the last eight months and then from there I supported our sales force for two years.  I was one of four people who had geographic responsibility in the sales force.  My boss at that time was Dave Roscoe [ph.] who was African American, and so that was good.  I was the only African American on the team.  His administrative assistant was African American also.  But then I saw other black women.  There was another black woman, Meredith Levert who was there, had been with GE [General Electric] a long time, that I looked up to.  You know she seem to be on the ball and had a lot going on, so I'd of confer with her.  I was kind of the young sister on the block.  I was single and you know they all were married with kids, so they were in kind of a different zone, but, but I could relate to them at work.  You know did that for a couple of years and then I had an opportunity to move to Atlanta [Georgia].  At the time, you kind of had a view of work at headquarters and then go out to the field, so I'd been at headquarters in Rockville, which was the headquarters for that business unit, so then I was gonna go do a field assignment.  That's to really test can you stand on your own two feet 'cause when you're at headquarters if you have a question about something there's somebody down the hall to ask.  When you go out in the field, you're the HR person, so you hopefully at this point have a level of confidence that you can answer questions and function on your own supporting that, that business team.  So I did go to Atlanta.  What was interesting, what was unbeknownst to me at that time was I was su- I was asked to support two different businesses.  So instead of me having one group of people I worked with, I had two sepearate GE businesses I was working with.  Now unbeknownst to me it was because we were trying to sell one of them, which we ended up did announcing the sale of this other one.
Story_ID: 482883
Speaker 1: Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: So, in Atlanta we--
Speaker 1: And the way we'll structure these jobs, you'll give me the challenges, yeah go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). You're f- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're gonna do that anyway I'm sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the biggest challenge and which was also the greatest learning in my time at Atlanta was we announced the sale, divestiture, of one of our business units, and so it was really interesting because I as an HR [human resources] manager had to really empathize with people who were gonna be sold to another company, knowing that I was not gonna be sold.  And so knowing that I was not gonna be sold actually put me at ease and allowed me to do my job.  And so really you know how do you help people negotiate?  You, you, you know you learn the important of communication, learn the importance of people really just wanting to understand what are the facts, candor, openness, and so that was, that was good.  It was a good learning experience for me at that point to do that.
Speaker 1: Were you seeing other African Americans in Corporate America rise up in ways they had not before or were you just not aware--
Speaker 2: No aware, not at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, not aware--
Speaker 2: Not really, not at that point.
Speaker 1: --'cause you're still really young and you're just doing your thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, right.  I'm just doing my thing, not at that point.
Speaker 1: Happy that my company isn't being, my portion isn't, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My port- right, that's exactly right, and trying to do the best I could knowing that people had a lot of angst and anxiety about whether or not they would have jobs with the new company or just how that would work and the transition and trying to make that work.
Speaker 1: And your role for them was to do what?
Speaker 2: I was their human resources manager, so I was to help them understand when their payroll was going to transition, was there gonna be a job for them or not, were they gonna get layoff benefits if there was no job for them, what were those layoff benefits, what were we gonna provide in terms of out placement support.  It was all of that.
Speaker 1: Who else was in that office working with you?
Speaker 2: I worked for a man named George Alber [ph.], he was the sales leader, but I also worked for a man named Walter Okenica, who was with the part of the business that went with the new company.
Speaker 1: Now were any of them African Americans?
Speaker 2: No, none, no.
Speaker 1: None.  No one in Atlanta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were no, there were no other African Americans in my office in Atlanta as I recall.
Speaker 1: Ever? During your time--
Speaker 2: Not when I was there, no, no, no.  Not even the admins actually, nope.
Speaker 1: Wow and that's 1987 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--
Speaker 1: No, '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, that was about '91 [1991], '92 [1992], '91 [1991], '92 [1992].
Story_ID: 482884
Speaker 1: So where do you go from there?
Speaker 2: So at this point we finished the divestiture and a wonderful man named Archie [Archie Elam] that I had been dating for a couple of years has returned from Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm] and wants to marry me, and the challenge for us because he was still in the [U.S.] Army and a career Army officer was how do we marry and live in the same place.  At the time that I was in Atlanta [Georgia], he was at Fort Stewart, Georgia, which was outside Savannah, Georgia, so we could see each other on weekends, but to get married it was very important to me if possible to start off married life under the same roof.  And he was transferred to Fort Bragg, North Carolina in Fayetteville [North Carolina], and so I started talking to people in GE [General Electric], you know, and at that point I had a pretty good track record for performance and I said, "Look, I'd like to stay with the company, I'm engaged," and I did this five, six months out, "I'm engaged, I'd like to get to the Raleigh [North Carolina] area, you know, it doesn't have to be by this date, but I'd like a good opportunity there."  And I called Wiley Harris, my mentor, sponsor, and he said, "Well I'm with GE Capital, and GE Capital has a business unit there [GE Capital Mortgage Corporation, Raleigh, North Carolina], but you ought to come up to Stamford [Connecticut]," which was GE Capital's headquarters, "and kind of do a meet and greet with a number of people."  And so I came up and did that, and he set up interviews for me with a bunch of people and I did well and they said look we think there's gotta be a spot for you in Raleigh, we want to send you down there to meet with the people down there and I did that.  This was in the, this would have been around November (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-four [1994]?
Speaker 2: --November of '92 [1992] I would say, at--November, December '92 [1992] and then because I, I got married in February of '93 [1993] and you know they said look we think you're great, you've got the right background, we need people with sort of the GE DNA, HR [human resources] here, we need to work out what the role is gonna be, you go off and get married, and we'll be in touch, and I said great.  So, I went and did that.  I ended up going to Raleigh, and I was in an HR generalist role, so supporting one of the small client groups in Raleigh after I married.  It was tough because my husband was still in active duty.  We lived in Fayetteville, North Carolina, on post actually for the first couple of months and I commuted, god, sixty-five miles each way every day for the first two months of our marriage.  You know it was wedded bliss, so it didn't really matter, but it was a challenge.  And the as we bought our home, we decided to live in between because he was in Fayetteville, I was in Raleigh, so for two years I commuted about twenty-six miles in one direction and he commuted forty-two miles in another direction and, but we made it work, we made it work.  The job was great.  I was able to distinguish myself in Raleigh because I had a broader GE background than many of the people who were working there who had really only worked in that business.  There were a few people who had worked in other places, but most of the people had only been in that business.  And so I had a very tough assignment because I was the HR manager for seven of the ten direct reports to the business leader.  I had all of the functions, so I supported HR and risk management and business development and legal and finance.  So I sort of had seven bosses.  And I tell you that's not something you ever really want to do, but you know what, if you do it well, it's wonderful because at the leadership team with the business there's seven people advocating for me, so it worked out very well for me.  I received management awards and performance awards and stock options and you know the goodies started coming at this point.  So, it was, it, so Raleigh ended up being a very, very good move for me for that, from that standpoint.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Raleigh?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Story_ID: 482885
Speaker 1: Two ye-
Speaker 2: Two years [at GE Capital Mortgage Corporation, Raleigh, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then you moved back to--
Speaker 2: No, then what happened was my boss' boss at the time, and this is very common in GE [General Electric], came down and did a series of reviews and meet and greets with people.  And then a job opened in Stamford [Connecticut] and it was a job as the HR [human resources] manager for a small insurance business that we had and he said, "Hey, would you be interested in this?"  And I looked at it and I said sure.  Now the challenge was you know my husband [Archie Elam] was still in active duty in the [U.S.] Army, and you know in the Army you can't just say I'm moving, I mean it doesn't work like that.  But, he was very close to retirement at that point and said you know what we should do this and so in January of 1995, January 2 to be exact, I moved to Stamford, Connecticut.  He had planned to retire the upcoming summer, so we were gonna sort of commute for six months.  I became the HR manager for GE Capital Insurance Services [Stamford, Connecticut], which was a very small insurance property casualty business.  Now, the interesting twist of events in this entire mix was three or four weeks on the job I found out that I was pregnant.  So, here I am, you know talk about the stressors in life, you know relocate, pregnant, new job, I mean I'm like what else can we add to the mix here.  So, it was tough, it--but it worked out okay because I was, I was here, you know.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, go ahead, I mean it's interesting that you bring that up because it, does it become extremely difficult to, I mean to do both, to be a mom and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, just getting through the pregnancy (laughter) was tough.  My husband came up in May and so by the time I delivered in September he was, he was very much here.  He had retired from the Army at that point.  It is tough being a mom and working with a new baby was very tough.  My mom [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] came up and stayed with me for several months.  She, once I told her that I was pregnant, she immediately retired and said well I'm done, forty years in the school system is enough, that's it, grandchild on the way, that's it.  So, but you, you know you prioritize and you have to figure out how to be very, very organized.  That's one of the thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that something you talk to women about today?
Speaker 2: Very much so, very much so because see I think you can do--people say you can't have it all.  I think you can have it all.  You may not have it all at the same time, but I think if you are very organized and very disciplined about what you do and how you do it and when you do it, I think you can be very full and rich in your life, both professionally and personally.
Speaker 1: So what became those early challenges of having a kid and trying to continue to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --climb the ladder.
Speaker 2: Sure, child care.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: Child care was the biggest challenge by far.  Safe, reliable child care because child care centers close at six p.m. and my job did not end at six p.m.  So, you know, then we opted for a private setting or a nanny and finding someone to leave your child with that you feel comfortable with, that you've likely just met, that you feel safe with is very hard.  And, and when your child is very young, your child can't tell you what's going on.  I mean my kids now can tell me if something isn't going right.
Speaker 1: How do the men relate to you at the office now that you have a baby, a child at home?
Speaker 2: Well, I think initially people wonder, are you really coming back.  I mean that's always, that's always the question is she really coming back and it's like yes I'm coming back, here's the date I'm coming back, et cetera.  You know you try to make it seamless.  I mean most women and, and me included, I'm more comfortable with it now than I was ten years ago when my daughter [Katherine Elam] was born.
Speaker 1: Because you have ten years of practice or because things have change?
Speaker 2: I'm more senior.  I have more of a proven track record.  You know a lot of me about what you do is about your track record, because in, in a performance-driven company like GE if you deliver most of the rest of the people don't care about, so you know to the extent that I was able to continue to deliver the job and again it required me being very organized.
Speaker 1: What did Wiley [Wiley Harris] say when you told him?
Speaker 2: That I was, I'm having a baby.  Oh he was thrilled.  He was thrilled, I mean there were women with children.  It's not like there were no women with children here.  There're plenty women with children, but--
Speaker 1: But who were on the same path that you were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I think, yeah definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not uncommon.
Speaker 2: It's not uncommon, it's just hard.  It's not uncommon, it's not uncommon at all, but it is hard because again, you know in many, in many careers you have the dual career, so you start moving around, you're relocating and what does that mean.  I mean I was fortunate in that in coming to the Lower Fairfield County, Connecticut area--
Speaker 1: That's Stamford?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Stamford area, GE is big enough so that I actually could do and, and a couple of jobs where I was being promoted and not have to move geographically.  That helped tremendously.  I mean if I had to move geographically for those two or three jobs, you know it may have been even more difficult because once you set up a support system with your child, you know you really don't want to disrupt that if you don't have to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Story_ID: 482886
Speaker 1: When did they reintroduce diversity to you because you said you did it that once in that--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --training [at the John F. Welch Leadership Development Institute; General Electric Management Development Institute, Ossining, New York].
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did it come up again?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, so let's back track a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I was in Raleigh [North Carolina] at the Mortgage, GE Capital Mortgage Corp [GE Capital Mortgage Corporation] in Raleigh, North Carolina, the two years I was there, there was a big push on diversity.  The business leader there had put a diversity leader on his staff, on his direct staff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: This is '92 [1992] or '93 [1993], put a diversity leader, a white female, Ellen Schloemer, directly on his staff, which was almost unheard of at that point.  I don't know what the genesis was or where the light bulb went out, off for him, but he decided to do that.  And she went into some very aggressive diversity training.  I can remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For example, yeah.
Speaker 2: --we had a group called Kaleel Jamison [The Kaleel Jamison Consulting Group, Inc., Troy, New York], which is still a diversity training consulting group now that came in and we did a week long session in Charleston, South Carolina, it was Charleston, South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, deep dive into diversity, I mean real personal stuff.
Speaker 1: What is diversity from that standpoint?
Speaker 2: It's valuing differences.  It's really valuing people for who they are and what they bring to the table.
Speaker 1: And that should have very little to do with color then?
Speaker 2: Whatever that is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it does have to do with color, and then the color has a historical context in this country because as, as you know, you know we've had, a, a history in this country where color had legal implications of what you could do and couldn't do, et cetera.  So, color very much is a part of it, but it's not all of it.  I mean I really think diversity is about making sure that no matter who you are or where you are in the world you have an opportunity to contribute and be successful, no matter what your background is you can come to the table on the same terms and play.
Speaker 1: So, you're in Charleston, you're at this seminar, what do you learn from that seminar that sticks with you today, if anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's one thing that stick with me, sticks with, sticks with me from that week-long seminar.  There was one exercise that we did where we gro- broke up into homogenous groups.  So, you had women of color, men of color, gays and lesbians, et cetera.  And I can remember the gay, lesbian group.  Actually it was gay men and I think lesbian women.  But the gay men group there were a couple of men in the group that until we did the break outs, I didn't not know that they were gay men.  And I can remember, and it sticks with me to this day and I talk about this often, I can remember one of the men who was artistically very talented.  He drew a picture, so we came back after these breakouts and did a report out in terms of how do you feel and what's an image of you and the company.  It was something like that.  And I can remember him drawing a kaleidoscope, sort of a black and white collection of like flowers or figures.  It was all black and white.  It was a thick, thick, thick da- black marker.  It was all black and white.  There was this little piece with a V in the middle that was in color, and he said because I can't be who I am, you know, this is all you see of the real me, which was the color portion.  And the rest of me, which is out here, that you see is the black and white and more mundane.  And I always think about that in terms of anybody, not just gays or lesbian, but anybody feeling like can I bring my whole self to work.  Can I bring who I am to work because if I can, I'm gonna be better.  I'm gonna be more effective.  I'm gonna be more comfortable.  I'm gonna deliver more for me and for the company than if I've gotta hide and really have you only see this little part of me.
Speaker 1: What, what was her name, the woman that he hired to come on staff as--
Speaker 2: Ellen Schloemer.
Speaker 1: Ellen.
Speaker 2: She had been I marketing, but he asked her to lead diversity for the company.
Speaker 1: Did you learn anything from Ellen, even as a woman?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ellen, you know, yeah, Ellen pushed, she pushed the envelope on this a lot and it showed me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In what areas though, how did she push?
Speaker 2: Well, this, this training was pretty provocative back then.  I mean you're talking you know '92 [1992], '93 [1993], I mean this was, you know to take a week out of a business week to go off and do a deep, emotional dive into this kind of thing about where'd you grow up and what were your, you know what were your, your belief system and so forth was, was very provocative at that point.  And she was a white female who was very much willing to push the envelope, and I thought that was good.  I thought that was very good.
Speaker 1: What did GE [General Electric] take from that week seminar?
Speaker 2: Actions to try and increase the diversity in the population there and really aggressive hiring and its recruiting and, and training of, of more managers, we replicated that seminar.  I think we end, ended up, we were the pilot groups.  We ended up cutting it down to maybe a few days, but really trying to roll out a lot more, at that time it was more sensitivity kind of training, so a lot more training of the managers; that's sort of what the GE action was coming out of that.
Story_ID: 482887
Speaker 1: Okay so back to you and Stamford [Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what's your next la- move--lateral move, upward move (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I was, so I was the manager for GE Capital Insurance Services [Stamford, Connecticut].  When I took the job in 1995, there were probably, I don't know, three or four hundred employees.  When I left the job, we were over three thousand employees.  We had done six or seven acquisitions over the two and a half years or so I was in the job.  I learned how to do acquisitions, which is a very valued skill in the company from an HR [human resources] standpoint, you know what do you look for, what do you do on a due diligence, what are some of the issues that may come up, et cetera.  I was able to leverage--you know my career has been about leveraging what I've already learned.  How do I always, always, always leverage what I have in my bag of tricks for the next opportunity--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because you can't always know what you're going into, but you can figure out what is I can bring that I already know how to do.  So for me it was leveraging the divestiture which was just the opposite.  It was realizing when you are selling a business and then you start to acquire what must those people who are now being acquired think.  What empathy do you need to have for them?  What are their concerns gonna be about the new company because I had gone through it in helping move some of our people out, so it gave me, I think, an additional insight to go through some of those pieces in a more empathetic way, than a mechanical way.  We did acq- sorry.
Speaker 1: No go ahead, we did.
Speaker 2: We did a number of acquisitions.  We did, we closed some locations.  That was not easy.  You know I can remember having to go and say we're shutting this place down and, but, but, you know, always, always, always and, and this is what I admire about the company, always saying we're gonna take care of our people to the best of our ability no matter what.  I can remember shutting down in that particular assignment a location in north Roxboro, North Carolina, which was a very small town.  And I can remember arranging before we announced the shutdown with some of the other employers a job fair.  And we brought in Lowe's [Lowe's Companies, Inc.] and other companies that were headquartered there into a ballroom at the hotel.  We helped our employees prepare their resumes so they would have a better shot, a direct connect, and not have to fend for themselves.
Story_ID: 482888
Speaker 1: Well, do you ever reach a point to where you are creating the laws for or the HR [human resources] laws for GE [General Electric] as opposed to just implementing what has already been created.  Like do you ever get to a point where you say okay guys we're going to work on sexual harassment, and these are going to be the laws that come down (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, well we, well yes, and it depends on what it is.  So, let's take the prevention of sexual harassment, which went into U.S. law, so there, there's law, there are laws on the books in this country in certain states.  For example that would say, you know, you've gotta have prevention of sexual harassment training annually and so making sure that we do that.  Now where I would add my spin is making sure we do it in a way that people can actually learn it and understand and that it's not a check a box, but it's something that actually learn from or take away from.  What I do in my job now is very much creating the diversity policies and practices for the company and programs.
Speaker 1: And how did you, yeah, but you don't get that job until 2000?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry that's, that's it.
Speaker 1: So, but, but so that, so you are, you do reach a point to which you create?
Speaker 2: Yeah you have a fair, well you have a fair amount of autonomy in senior HR roles to create the practices for your business or your site.  GE operates in a very autonomous way in terms of its business use.  We have some policies that are common and sort of umbrella and glue across, but there's a lot of autonomy at the business level to, to do your own thing so to speak.
Speaker 1: Now was Wiley [Wiley Harris], is it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --serving as your mentor throughout this whole time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and did someone else come on board and take over?
Speaker 2: Wiley clearly was serving as a mentor, but another woman that I worked for initially ended up really being a mentor and a sponsor.  Her name is Anne Abaya [Anne Nohara Abaya].  She is an Asian female.  In fact, she was the first woman of color, American woman of color that was an officer of the company.  She's decided for personal reasons to take a step back and so she actually decided to now work part-time as of a year ago.  But she for me was very much a sponsor.  I worked for her for a couple of years, and so she had a chance to see me.  Again, I think--
Speaker 1: Okay, this is good I wanna stop here because I wanna talk about your personal, well more in-depth your relationship with her--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as two women--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and two women of color--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --what concerns do you have?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well you know--
Speaker 1: That may be different from other women.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I don't know if I would talk about it as much as concerns, as much as camaraderie in terms of us being the only ones.  I mean she was very much the only Asian American female in her career path and I, as I became more senior, was the only African American female in, in my career path if you will.  She became very much somewhat inspiration to me because she was in human resources.  So, here was a woman of color in my discipline that I could see and I could talk to and I could touch and understand what her career path had been.  So, so she was a mentor and really, really was a sponsor because when I went to the next job where I didn't report to her I always went back and leveraged her and her experience and I, I talk to her often to this day.
Story_ID: 482889
Speaker 1: So after what's the next level before you become actually the, the managing director (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay so I have two more jobs in there.  So, the next job--so after the insurance services job [at GE Capital Insurance Services, Stamford, Connecticut], what ends up happening is we decide, GE [General Electric] decides to move the insurance business headquarters down to Virginia and at that point in time I really was not in a position where I wanted to relocate to Virginia and I said look this is probably not gonna make sense for me.
Speaker 1: Do you have one or two children now?
Speaker 2: I have one child [Katherine Elam] at this point.  I wanna look at other opportunities, and so there was a business that we were consolidating, Capital Markets [GE Capital Markets Services, Inc.].  We had Capital Markets' activities in several financial services businesses, but we decided to centralize that activity and create a little business and they wanted a HR [human resources] person who was not totally green, but it wasn't a very, very senior person because at, when it started it was only a handful of people, but this was very much the Wall Street crowd.  I mean this was a crowd of people who were highly compensated, very much the (unclear) banker crowd.  So, they need an HR person who had a certain level of maturity and so asked me if I would take that role and I said yes.  So, I worked for a man named Steve Kluger [Steven Kluger], who was the business leader.  It was interesting because I found out, I took that job, I forget which month February, March, and the found out a month later that I was pregnant, second child [Alexandra Elam].  And I can remember telling him that I was pregnant, and he was like this, but he was very much a family and he said, "Well that's great," and I could tell though he was probably panicking like she just got here, she's supposed to be really good, you know and there's always that question is she gonna come back after maternity leave, but, you know, I made it very clear that I was.  I was actually quite sick during this pregnancy just in terms of having nausea, just nausea all the time, all the time, all the time up until probably two weeks before I delivered.  So unbeknownst to many people, you know, just going to work every day and not throwing up was a struggle, but I did it (laughter).  I did it for seven months, God bless me.  But I loved the business because I had a chance to work with a different type of employee base that I had not worked with before.  It was a very, the IQ points in this group were way high, so it was a very smart group and you needed to be swift to keep up with them.
Speaker 1: What issues do they have that just regular workers don't have?
Speaker 2: Tied to Wall Street, tied to the street.  So, their, other business I had been in I would say the employee base was very tied to GE, so it was very much GE, GE career.  Because we were growing, we started with I don't know sixty people when I took the job.  We consolidated the existing pieces and then ended up with about three hundred people a couple of years later.  So, we did a lot of recruiting and we recruited people.  It was very interesting because we recruited people off of Wall Street many of whom took a pay cut to come and you, you sort of found the sweet spot.  The sweet spot was people who were at a point in their life where they didn't want to be on Wall Street until midnight every night.  They were at a point where they were getting married and they wanted to start families, and so they wanted that house and front yard and backyard and they wanted a place where they could have or they, they, they believed they could have more training and if GE is known for anything it's training development opportunities.  So, you could get people to say you know what I don't need to make this.  I need to, I need to be in a certain compensation range, but it doesn't have to be here 'cause my tradeoff is I can live in Connecticut, I can drive to work in twenty minutes, et cetera.  So, they recruited a lot of people like that so the environment in that business was very positive because there were people who very much had elected to be there, so our employee survey scores were very high.  We could do neat stuff.  People were very positive about the business, and I did that for three years.
Speaker 1: And what was your job title then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the managing director of human resources for GE Capital Market Services.
Story_ID: 482890
Speaker 1: And from that job you only have one more step--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) before you and what was that?
Speaker 2: Yes, so--
Speaker 1: And how do you get there?
Speaker 2: A few years in that job [at GE Capital Markets Services, Inc.] and again, at this point in the career, it's expressing interest.  You know we do an internal process every year in GE [General Electric] which is very rigorous of self-assessment and then performance assessment.  So, in my self-assessment it's called an EMS [employee management system] form.  You know you talk about how you've performed, what you've delivered, what are your strengths, what are you development needs, and what do you want to do career wise, are you geographically mobile.  And so in that document you know it was sort of time to say hey you know open to bigger career opportunities that you know really are commiserate with my background and skill set.  So a job became open for GE Commercial Finance it was called then, it's called Corporate Finance [GE Corporate Finance] now, to be the, the head of HR [human resources].  The business had a couple of hundred people, but was really poised to growth.  It's middle market banking, it was leverage lending, it was factoring, so really just poised for explosive growth.  And they wanted someone in the role that could come into the role and perform, but somebody who could grow, somebody who they thought had runway and could go because they knew the job was gonna become a bigger job.  And so I took the role, I worked for a man named Mike Gaudino [Michael Gaudino], who was just great, very different person, very introverted person.
Speaker 1: And the on- but the only African American boss you'd had, had been Wiley [Wiley Harris] from--
Speaker 2: And Dave Roscoe [ph.]--
Speaker 1: And Dave Roscoe.
Speaker 2: --from a HR standpoint.  So this guy was a business leader.  These other folks were HR people.  This guy ran the business.  I was his HR person.  He had a CFO.  He had a CIO.  I was his head of diversity.  And then I had a team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's a big job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a pretty big job.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had a team of total HR people of I don't know maybe twenty-five people around the world.  We had locations at this point, you know big locations in Europe, in Asia, so I started doing a lot more global travel at this point and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you do with the children [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam] when you travel, I mean 'cause it doesn't seem like a problem men would have because they have wives?
Speaker 2: You know have had to have a nanny and just really expend the money to do that because it's the only way to have the flexibility.  But what my husband [Archie Elam] and I do and, and my mom [Jeanne Cunningham Augustine] actually is lay out our calendar as best we can six months at a time as best we can.  If there are big events, we do to this day.  If there are big events in my children's life, piano recital, ballet recital, skating competition, you know my mom and I will lay this out and say okay this is when I need you to be here, this is when you can be there, et cetera, and so that helps or you know what mom I know I've gotta go to Asia for a week can you be here this week, 'cause then it just helps out.  I still have the child care, but then--
Speaker 1: You have your mom, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know in the evenings I have my mom, my husband, we know everything is gonna work--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so that's, that's the way, that's the way you deal with it.  But the job was big.  It was growing.  We did several acquisitions.  We acquired a company called Heller Financial Services, which more than doubled the size of the business and more than doubled the locations, and so that was good though because I'd had acquisition experience previously.  In fact, I was probably one of the few people on the staff at that point who had had acquisition experience which involved people.  We had done a lot of asset deals, so asset acquisition, no problem, but not many people on the staff had really done anything of any size that involved inquire- acquiring several hundred people.  How do you make payroll work?  How do you, how do you onboard them?  What kind of orientation do you do?  How do you even assess who you need, who you don't need, where is there, you know duplication of effort, et cetera, so that kind of thing I was able to distinguish myself in some ways, again because I was leveraging--
Speaker 1: What you already knew (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what, what I already know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --to, to bring it forward to, to set myself apart.
Story_ID: 482891
Speaker 1: Okay how did this final job come about, and who was responsible for it outside of yourself helping you to make it happen?
Speaker 2: Well, you know at this point I've performed well, so I've got a pretty good track record in the company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this 2000 or 1999?
Speaker 2: This is, this is 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is 2000.  And you know GE [General Electric] has a really strong reputation for succession planning process, so at the executive level because I'm an executive at this point, which means I'm in the top four thousand, five thousand people in the company we know who the talent is and so there're reviews that happen every year to talk about people and what they can do next et cetera, et cetera.  So, the business, didn't I talk about this--commercial finance, corporate finance.  I talked about this.
Speaker 1: Where you'd written that, but go ahead let's see, tell me.  I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, no so Corporate Finance [GE Corporate Finance] was a, a smaller business, a few hundred people at that point--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and we knew it was prone for growth, right, so really poised to grow, and it was a great role for me because it was middle market, we did several acquisitions, got me into more of the financial services world and I was in that role for exactly two years.
Speaker 1: And you said you had to write something about where you wanted to be next, you do this E- S--
Speaker 2: EMS [employee management system].
Speaker 1: EMS form.
Speaker 2: EMS, EMS form.
Speaker 1: And on that form you stated that you were ready, it was time for you to move on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, you know I don't, you know didn't know necessarily what it would be, but really kept it broad, something that leveraged my skills and background and so what happened in the summer of 2000, GE, no not 2000, 2002 at this point.  We talked about 2000 already (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah t- yeah so now we're 2002.
Speaker 2: Right, right, so in the summer of 2002, late summer, what was then GE Capital [GE Capital] was reorganized into four separate financial services, businesses, and the person who was in the diversity leader role, Steve Thorne [Steven Thorne], at the time went down to Stamford [Connecticut] to work for Art Harper [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper] and to be his HR [human resources] person for his business at Equipment Services [GE Equipment Services, Stamford, Connecticut].  His role became open.  Steven had been very much a mentor for me as well as one of the senior African American men in the company in human resources (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's his last name?
Speaker 2: Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E.  And so I called Steve and I said you know are you gonna move down here really interested in this opportunity if it's gonna open, not sure if there's somebody kind of already in mind and he said, "Hey you know what I was gonna call you because I think you'd be great for this role let me talk to Bill Conaty [William Conaty]," who was the head of HR who was his boss at the time, and so this was late July.  Everybody went on vacation in August, so August nothing happened.  He says, you know, "We'll get back to you near the end of the month."  End of August, Bill Conaty was the head of HR for the company called and said, "Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam], I'd like you to come up to Fairfield [Connecticut] and talk to you about this role," and so I did.  At this point, I was a senior executive, I had been promoted to senior executive earlier in 2002.  Senior executive means I'm now in the top six hundred in the company.  And so went up and talked to Bill and he said, "Look based on what I know about you I think you'd be great for the role."  I thought it would be great because it would put me on Bill's staff, who is the head of my function.  We had a new chairman, a relatively new chairman, who had come in, in 2001, Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt], who didn't know me particularly well.  Jack Welch knew me, but I said this would be a great move to come to Fairfield as Jeff Immelt is reshaping the company and building sort of a new regime and to be a part of that and, and I didn't have to relocate, you know, I mean that, that always does factor in when you're a working mother and so I took the assignment.
Story_ID: 482892
Speaker 1: --Have been in the role now four and a-half years, but a year and a-half ago I was appointed by the board of directors an officer of the company, the first African American female officer of the company and that puts me in the top 185 people in the company.  The role has been tremendous because it's you know as, as my executive assistant at the time I came to interview said to me, because I shared with her I was gonna interview for this role, she said, "Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam], this culminates so much of what you've done and who you are," and I'll never forget that because she knew that I was also very committed to giving back and to helping people and to helping different people and people who were diverse in general.  She said this is a perfect role for you and I hadn't really, really thought about it that way.
Speaker 2: How do you give back?
Speaker 1: I give back in a lot of ways.  Part of my role as the diversity leader is to ensure that the company has diverse talent in its leadership, and so I will coach and mentor diverse talent that's sort of coming up through the ranks.  I will help to identify diverse talent, let's say someone who may not be as well noticed.  I will coach and give feedback to say you know you really ought to do this or you really ought to take an assignment like that, you know, because that would, would help you differentiate yourself, so, I do a lot of that.
Speaker 2: What's the difference, what are the differences, or is there a difference between like diversity and affirmative action?
Speaker 1: Well, affirmative action is a legal requirement and it's a baseline legal requirement, which has a lot of laws and loops in it in terms of counting and representation.  I think there's something called diverse representation, where you look at how many people you have who of, who are of difference in whatever setting.  If you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you do it?
Speaker 1: How do I do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, how do you make sure that GE [General Electric] is continuing to grow as, as far as diversity?
Speaker 1: Well, I think we have to have two things.  I think you have to have people who are different.  If we have all white U.S. males in the leadership of the company, we're not different, we're not getting the best brain power, we're not getting the best talent that's out there.  To have diverse representation is one thing, but to sustain it you have to have an inclusive culture because you can hire people.  GE is GE.  We can hire people, but people won't stay unless we exceed their expectations as an employer, and so I look at it from a two-fold standpoint: A, trying to being in and coach and help diverse talent in its broad sense, non-U.S. citizens, women, U.S people of color, be successful, but again making sure the culture is one that is conducive for them to be successful.
Speaker 2: How do you feel the fabric of diversity has changed since I don't know you've started, twenty years ago?
Speaker 1: The company is a lot more global.  We, we have, you know, for the first year we will have half of our revenue outside the U.S. and half of our employees are outside the U.S.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's awesome.  Let's talk about for African Americans--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --has it changed?
Speaker 1: Sure, sure because we got a lot more role models.  We have people like Lloyd Trotter [HistoryMaker Lloyd G. Trotter] running a $35 billion business, first African American vice chairman in the company's history.  We have people like Louis Parker [A. Louis Parker] running our security business, security, a high growth visible area for us.  We have people like [HistoryMaker] Paula Madison running KNBC [KNBC-TV, Los Angeles, California], the, the, our NBC affiliate and Telemundo on the West Coast.  So, there are people in big substantial revenue-generating jobs that are meaningful and you know fifteen, twenty years ago you didn't have that.  You didn't have--you had one maybe.  Maybe you had two, but I can point to a cadre of people in visible jobs.  We have a woman, Tammee Thompson running GE Security in China.  We have, you know, Mike Jones [Michael Jones] who is running sales, our commercial piece of GE Consumer and Industrial in Budapest [Hungary].  We have Darryl Wilson running GE Consumer and Industrial in China, I mean so people in big meaningful assignment, you didn't have that twenty years ago.
Story_ID: 482893
Speaker 1: How do you, you said Lloyd Trotter [HistoryMaker Lloyd G. Trotter] had been or is a mentor?
Speaker 2: Lloyd, Lloyd Trotter is very much a mentor for me, very much a mentor, someone I can call, someone who has been with the company, you know, over thirty-five years, or thirty years I should say.  He's a vice chairman, always open, always very, very committed.  I can say, "Lloyd, I really need to talk to you, here's what I'm thinking about, here's my challenge, what do you think," and he will always engage, and that's important, it's important.  You know GE [General Electric] has, one of the things GE has where I think we are best in class or our affinity networks, we have large robust affinity networks.  Our African American Forum is fifteen years old this year, sixteen years old.  Our Women's Network celebrates ten years.  We have an Asian forum.  We have a Hispanic forum, and these groups are not just social kind of groups.  These are groups that are committed to helping advance their constituency in the company.  So one of the things it does it makes the diverse leaders of the company very visible, so we can be connected to each other, so we can help each other, so we can network with each other and help pull people through.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) how do you know Art [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper]?
Speaker 2: Art Harper was with GE for twenty years.  In 2000 and, in 2000 he came to GE Capital, which was the business I was working in and ran the equipment services segment of business, very committed to the African American Forum, our African American Affinity Network, and Steve Thorne [Steven Thorne], who I mentioned who was a mentor told Art, "Hey you know what you ought to get to know Deb Elam [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam] because even though you are senior to her, she's been in GE Capital."  I was one of the few senior African Americans in GE Capital, and I think you recognize when you're coming into a new business unit you know you kind of get past what levels peoples are, but who can help you, who can help you understand the history and the climate, and the relationships.  And when I talked to him, he said, "You know I'm moving here, any thoughts on where to move?"  I said, "Sure move to Stamford [Connecticut], it's great, it's diverse," and you know he lives I don't know five minute drive from, from me and he and his wife [Linda Harper] and, and my husband [Archie Elam] and I are friends.  He's great.  I can call him, I can call him now and, and say Art I really need to get on our calendar and, and talk to him and just be very candid and open.
Story_ID: 482894
Speaker 1: For men, you always hear about men playing golf--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what is it for women?  How do corporate women socialize?
Speaker 2: I play golf (laughter).  I play golf.  Golf is not a bad thing, I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I'm not, all right.
Speaker 2: --I'm, not good at it, but I do play.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But do you socialize, do women socialize differently than men in the corporate--
Speaker 2: You know what I think has happened is I think the spa has become the new golf course, and I can say that because when I go to events now there are many, many men in the spa as, as well as men on the golf course.  So, I think it's merging a lot.  And there're many more women who play golf.  You know if you play scramble you don't have to be great, you just have to have the courage to get out there and hit.  I'll tell you a funny story when I became a senior executive, so one of the top six hundred in the company [General Electric], we'd go down to Boca Raton [Florida] every year for our global leadership meeting and golf is a big thing and so they're two, you know morning meetings, afternoon golf, and I was panic stricken because I said, oh my god, I'm gonna have to play golf and I mean I, I sort of own golf clubs, this is several years ago, and that's it.  So, I said okay I'm gonna start taking golf lessons.  So, I started taking golf lessons, and we always go right after the New Year's holiday, so January 2 or 3 and I'm packing and I told my husband [Archie Elam] I said I don't think I can do it.  I said I think I'm just gonna leave the golf stuff here that way I won't have to worry about it.  He said, "No, no, no you know you can do it, you can do."  I mean, I mean I was awful.  I mean I would swing and the ball would still be down there; it was terrible.  But, I did go out and play in the scramble.  Now at this time, I was one of a handful of African American women at this particular meeting of the top 550 or 600 people.  I went out and I played.  I was awful.  I had a good time.  I kind of talked to the guy running it, I said you know you gotta put me in a four-some of people who are bad, and he did that.  That night at cocktails I had no less than ten to twelve white men, colleagues, come up to me and introduce themselves and say, hey I'm So and So and I saw you out there today.  You were looking pretty good.  Or hi, I saw you out on the fifth hole or whatever and the lesson for me was you know what this was an icebreaker.  This was a comfort zone piece.  This said okay I have something in common with her, and so I will go out and introduce myself.  And I always remember that because as awful as I was, and as hard as it was to go out there, it was worth it.  It was worth it.  And so I tell people you know what try, just try because if you lean into your discomfort, good, good stuff happens to you.
Story_ID: 482895
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Paula Madison you mentioned her.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that GE [General Electric] owned--
Speaker 2: NBC.
Speaker 1: --NBC and Telemundo and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's a big company (laughter).
Speaker 1: So she's one of the women then that will be at these functions with you as well?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the others African American woman--
Speaker 2: Paula Madison.
Speaker 1: --of that top, what is it you say now--
Speaker 2: Top six hundred in the company.
Speaker 1: --six hundred?
Speaker 2: Well Paula Madison you would know, Cecilia Lofters who is on the senior IP [intellectual property] counsel here in Fairfield [Connecticut].  Marcia Haynes who is the sourcing and procurement leader for NBCUniversal [New York, New York].  Tammee Thompson who runs GE Security in China.  Those are the people who come to mind right off hand.
Speaker 1: And how do you know Carla, [HistoryMaker] Carla Harris?
Speaker 2: So, Carla and I met about three or four years ago when GE had a Women's Network customer event.  We invited some of the top customers--women customers, and people that we interface with.
Speaker 1: And Pau- and Carla is at Morgan Stanley.
Speaker 2: Yes, she is she is Morgan Stanley, so they do business with GE and she was invited to attend and I met her and it was interesting because she had a red briefcase and one of my friends said, "Is she a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]?" And I said, "I don't know if she's a Delta or not."  But when she pulled out her red wallet I said, "Oh yeah, she's a Delta."  And we met and we remained fast professional colleagues.  You know we don't socialize sort of personally.  We don't run in the same circles on the weekend, but she's somebody, and I think this is something you find with African American women at my level and her level, if I pick up the phone and call her right now she will get back to me.  If she calls me right now, I will get back to her because it's a professional respect of where we are in our corporations, and if I'm calling her it's not for play, it's for business, it's real, and vice versa.  Carla (unclear) sent me a bouquet when I was appointed an officer.  It was one of the first flower bouquets I received in my office.  Because you know it's important for us, it's important for us as sisters to support and affirm and uplift each other.
Speaker 1: Are there any other people that you share that same relationship with as Carla, women, African American women (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, Westina Matthews Shatteen.
Speaker 1: Where does she work?
Speaker 2: At Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management].  She's a senior woman (unclear)--well I'm a member of an organization called the Executive Leadership Council or ELC, as it's referred to, and Carla is a member as well.  It is an organization.  It's about 350 members now, it's twenty years old.  It's the top African Americans in Corporate America and so you cannot be more than two levels from the enterprise wide CEO to be invited to join, and it's a big deal because it really gives us access to each other in a very constructive and meaningful way.  We meet a few times a year in a conference and so we can network.  So, there are a number of people at that level that I might interface with and who might interface with me and it's all, it's all to help advance African Americans in the, in the Fortune 500.
Story_ID: 482896
Speaker 1: What do you think needs to be done to help advance?  What steps are taken by GE [General Electric], what steps are you looking at to make sure that the doors are open for other young African Americans coming up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think in a company, in GE and a company like GE, a company that's big you need to understand that size is not always your friend because people kind of get lost in the shuffle in their middle management years.  So helping them see role models at the top, making role models very visible, helping them know that these role models are real people who have real lives who have real history, who have the same challenges they may have at home, that they can interface with and touch is a big deal because then it says I can do it too.  And so I think in big companies it's very important to create touch amongst the senior people, between the senior people, the mid-level people, and the junior people.  At GE for example, in our African American Affinity Network, we have what we call mentoring circles, so every company officer has a group of senior executives and a group of executives that they sort of attach to for a two-year period in a mentoring circle.  We will have periodic conference calls (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that new?  Did you have that?
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't exist when I was a--
Speaker 1: Okay yeah, so--
Speaker 2: --junior person.
Speaker 1: --that's one of the things you've created.
Speaker 2: It's something over the last several years, yes something over the last several years, which is a big deal, and so really helping to try to stem any attrition so that if somebody is unhappy in their situation with their boss they don't feel like I have to leave big old GE just 'cause I work for a jerk right now because there are other managers.  There are other people.  How do I connect ends so I can move somewhere else.  That's a big deal for us.  I think trying to show people what a path might be like, you know.  We, we, we more and more have dual career situations in all walks of, of our employees now that you didn't have twenty or thirty years ago where you generally had a male who picked up and moved and you had a trailing spouse who was generally a trailing wife.  You know you now have a lot of dual career stuff, so how do you, how do you leverage that, how do you, how do you make that work.
Story_ID: 482897
Speaker 1: So you talked about--was it NEC, the organization?
Speaker 2: ELC.
Speaker 1: ELC.
Speaker 2: Executive Leadership Council.
Speaker 1: What about Links [The Links, Incorporated]?
Speaker 2: I am a member of the Fairfield County [Connecticut] Chapter of The Links.
Speaker 1: You're the president right?
Speaker 2: I'm the president of The Links, for my local chapter here.  It's a great organization.  It's another venue for me to interface with African American women in a very positive and affirming way, and that's what I enjoy about it.  It gives me, you know we are linked in friendship and service, so I'm with friends and with people I enjoy being with and I've committed to community service.  We, one of our service initiatives in this chapter is called Your Link to Health, so it's really focusing on African American women and women of color and health issues, so diabetes and heart attack and stroke and bringing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Breast cancer.
Speaker 2: Breast cancer, and bringing programming into Fairfield County, our service area, for, for the underserved community, women who may not have access.  We partner with Stamford Hospital [Stamford, Connecticut] and other organizations in the area to bring information and resources and services to women who may not otherwise have access or have the wherewithal to get--
Speaker 1: And it's called Links to Health.
Speaker 2: It's Your Link to Health.
Speaker 1: Your Link to Health.
Speaker 2: Your Link to Health is our initiative.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna have to remember that one.  The White House Project.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was an award you received for (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the White House Project is an organization, initiative who it's, it's run by a woman named Marie Wilson [Marie C. Wilson], and its purpose originally was to put a woman in the White House.  It has been around for a long time, but what it really does now is advocacy for women who want to run for public office and seek public life, so it does training, how do you run a campaign, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Is that something you're considering?
Speaker 2: Not at all, but I was recognized along with two other corporate women last year with the EPIC Award, so it was an award for women who give back, who created possible role model, image for women in the business community.  It was presented at the United Nations [UN].  Other honorees so the, for example, Geena Davis was one of the honorees from an actress standpoint for her role in what was the name of the show?
Speaker 1: 'Thelma and Louise.'  Oh, the president show ['Commander in Chief'], yeah.
Speaker 2: The president show.  Yeah, I can't think of the name of it right now, the White House (unclear)--
Speaker 1: The White House (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever it was.  Yes, that show where she played the first female president.
Speaker 1: And the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] in Greenwich, Connecticut are you affiliated with it somehow?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the--no not really.  The Greenwich, Connecticut Y for several years has done an award called the BRAVA Award, and the BRAVA Award is given to a woman who resides in Stamford [Connecticut] or Greenwich who has achieved something professionally, has really, you know, done well in the professional life while also giving back to the community and so I was nominated by somebody and selected to receive that award as well.
Story_ID: 482898
Speaker 1: What do you think your daughters [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam] see in what you're doing?
Speaker 2: You know I try very hard to integrate my daughters into what I do, so I'm very open with them about what I do.  If I'm going to a meeting I'm very open about what it is and why I'm going to the meeting and why it's important, and when I can take them to events and activities I do so.  I think they, I, I hope it's engraining in them the importance of giving back very early.  I mentioned Your Link to Health, our health initiative [at The Links, Incorporated].  We did a, something called the day of dance health fair and Stamford Hospital [Stamford, Connecticut] in February of 2007 where we brought in screenings and we had dance and hip-hop, using dance as a way to focus on cardiovascular health and I brought them and I had them help register people and you know as little as they were you know give out the flyer, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Do they like hip-hop music?
Speaker 2: They do.
Speaker 1: What do you think about it?
Speaker 2: Hip-hop music.  I think hip-hop music is okay as long as the lyrics aren't bad.  You know I grew up in the rap era.  I think rap music okay as long as the lyrics aren't bad.  Music is wonderful.  Music is a wonderful medium as long as the lyrics aren't bad.
Story_ID: 482899
Speaker 1: How do you feel about history, for example, the history that you've shared with us today?  Do you feel it's important, not important?  Why did you agree to do it?
Speaker 2: I think history is very important because if you don't understand your history you're doomed to repeat it and so I think having a good heritage, I mean, one of the challenges in being African American and particularly from the South is a lot of times your history is cut off.  It's either cut off because records weren't kept or people had to move around a lot.  And I've always felt some envy at people who could do family trees back to the Mayflower very easily and they knew even before the Mayflower who this person was and, and so I think you know for my children [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam] hopefully or their children or their children's children when they see this they will feel some connection and tie that, that I can't feel because I can only go back a generation or so and I think that's very important in grounding who you are and feeling good about who you are.
Story_ID: 482900
Speaker 1: Well you're too young to think about your legacy--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and I won't even ask you what your--but what is it you want to be remembered for in life?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered for someone who was committed to excellence in everything that she did, really doing her best and trying to achieve her best in whatever she got involved in and want to be remembered as someone who lived a full life.  And by full, I mean it had many aspects, it was wife and mother and corporate executive and friend and aunt and cousin and all of those things 'cause I think people who live uni-dimensional lives miss out and want it to be a multidimensional life.
Story_ID: 482901
Speaker 1: Has it been, and I asked this off camera, but I wanna ask it on camera, easier being a woman or African American, or harder being a woman or African American, however you take the question?
Speaker 2: You know, I can never answer that question because I can't separate the two.  I am an African American woman.  When I get up every morning and look in the mirror, I see an African American woman, and that's very much my heritage and very much who I am.  So, I can't say it's harder or easier being one or the other because I am both and I always will be both.
Speaker 1: Well, for example, the, Your Link to Health--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --does that help all women or only African American women?
Speaker 2: It will help all women.  The information that we provide will help all women.  Our particular organization, The Links [The Links, Incorporated], which focuses on helping African American women has made a decision to focus on African American women, women of color because this is a group that disproportionately is impacted by health issues, like diabetes, and heart problems and stroke, and so making sure that this population gets the same information that many women in the majority culture get is of the upmost concern to us, but the information itself is generic and can help any woman who receives it.
Story_ID: 482902
Speaker 1: When you look back over your career can you list some, just one or two highlights, what have been things that even to this day you look at as remarkable?
Speaker 2: That is remarkable--
Speaker 1: Give me the birth of your children [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam], I'll take that out (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --your husband [Archie Elam] I'll take it out.
Speaker 2: Oh, birth of my children was remarkable, twice, getting married to a wonderful man who loves me dearly and I love dearly with the same values and goals and commitment for the future is remarkable.  Being appointed an officer of GE [General Electric] is really remarkable.
Speaker 1: And the first African American--
Speaker 2: Female.
Speaker 1: --woman, yeah.
Speaker 2: African American female was very remarkable (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you, when you're appointed, when you, when, when that appointment is made do you meet with that board?
Speaker 2: No, what actually happens is you get a call from the chairman.  The board meets, you don't even know that you're a nomination, the board meets and the chairman calls you after the board meeting is over.  In my particular case it was during the Turin Olympics [2006 Winter Olympics, Turin, Italy] and our board was over there and the chairman's number came up on my caller ID that was in my office and I knew that they were in Turin [Italy], and I said oh this can't be good if he's calling me from Italy.  This has gotta be bad (laughter), and I got a pen and a paper 'cause I'm thinking this is gonna be bad and you know he said, "Congratulations I wanna let you know that the board has appointed you an officer of the company," and I went, "No," (laughter) and he said, "Yeah."  I said, "No," and he just started laughing and I said, "Wow."  And you know what I did, it's funny, I had two meetings the rest of the day, which I didn't cancel, though many people would have just said I'm done, I'm going home.  My boss called me, Bill Conaty [William Conaty], who was the head of HR [human resources], he was over at the board meeting and obviously he knew the chairman had gotten through, so he called and said I'm thrilled for you, you deserve it, you're doing a great job blah, blah, blah. This really grounds you. So it was a Friday, I went home.  We had a blizzard coming, it was February 8, 2006, there was a blizzard coming to the Northeast and my kids told me their snow boots didn't fit and so we got in the car and here I am an officer of GE on the floor at Walmart crawling amongst the snow boots to find snow boots that fit; so there you have it (laughter).
Story_ID: 482903
Speaker 1: As far as mentors, can you just list them again for me, the people who've, who've helped you along the way.
Speaker 2: Sure, I would start with Wiley Harris, big mentor, hired me into the company.  Anne Abaya [Anne Nohara Abaya].  I worked for her for a couple of years, strong mentor, strong sponsor, dear friend now.  Marc Saperstein, who recently retired was the head of HR [human resources] in GE Capital where I was recognized in me that I had runway and was willing to push to make me realize that, push to make the right job opportunities open.  Carol Anderson, who I worked for, who just, is just really a really smart, smart, smart person and taught me about thinking four steps ahead, you know going into a meeting and don't just think about what's gonna happen now, think about all these other things that could happen and all these other things somebody might ask you, you know learn that from, from serving her, big advocate.  I would say my former boss, Bill Conaty [William Conaty], whose, whose retirement has been announced, strong advocate for African Americans, supportive of everything I've been trying to do in the job, making it, himself available to me.  If I said we're gonna try something with an African American sorority.  One of the things I didn't mention, we started a program with Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, a leadership program, where we select African American female executives in GE [General Electric] to mentor a select group of collegiate Deltas, and we've hired a bunch of them.  This is over the last four or five years.  You know so when I go in to talk about this, and he doesn't really know what Delta Sigma Theta is, having faith in me that I trust Deb [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam] and it's gonna be okay.
Story_ID: 482904
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I have one last question and you have a thirty-second answer and this will end the interview.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which is tougher: being an officer, president chief officer here, or being a mother at home?  And honestly which is tougher?
Speaker 2: Honestly, being a mother at home, being a mother at home absolutely because children are real people, (laughter) I mean you, you know you, you get one shot at raising your children.  One of the women I admire most in history is Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis because she always believed that if you botch up raising your children, the rest of this doesn't mean anything and so with that you get one shot, you get one shot at fifth grade.  You either get it right with your kid or you don't.  I love what I do at GE [General Electric].  Can I work somewhere else, sure I could, not planning on it, but sure I could.  I get one shot with my kids [Katherine Elam and Alexandra Elam], that's why it's harder 'cause it's gotta be precise all the time.
Story_ID: 482905
Speaker 1: So this is my wedding day, February 27, 1993, me, my husband, Archie Elam, we're at Pilgrims Rest Baptist Church No. 2.  It's a Saturday afternoon, and the church is in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: So, this is me and my mom in, at the Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] twenty-fifth anniversary of the--uh oh--of the Fairfield County [Connecticut]--
Speaker 1: Can you give your mom's name just because (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, sure.  So, this is my mom and me.  My mom is Jeanne Cunningham Augustine and me.  We are at the Fairfield County Alumnae Chapter of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated twenty-fifth anniversary.  It is 19- I'm sorry, it is 2004.
Speaker 1: This is me, Deborah Elam [HistoryMaker Deborah A. Elam], Deborah Augustine at the time.  I am about five, four or five years old in front of my parents' home in my father's wonderful flower garden in New Orleans.
Speaker 2: This is me in my backyard in New Orleans.  I am about two to three years old here.
Speaker 1: This is my college graduation from Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  This would be May of 1984.  My father, Henry Louis Augustine, Sr. [Henry Augustine, Sr.], is on the left.  My mother, Jeanne Cunningham Augustine, me and my brother, Jonathan J. Cunningham Augustine [Jonathan Cunningham Augustine].
Speaker 2: This is me on Easter Sunday with my Easter basket at about age three in front of my parents' home in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: This is my mom and me out in our front yard one fall day in our matching red outfits.  I am approximately three or four years old, so it would be in the mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: This is my father and me in my parents' living room, home.  I am about seven years old, so it's about 1968.  My father is Henry Louis Augustine, Sr.  We are getting ready to go to church.
Speaker 1: This is me on the left and my husband, Archie Elam.  This was taken in February 2007 at the Krewe of Louisiana Mardi Gras Ball in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: This is the Krewe of Louisiana Mardi Gras Ball, February 2007.  On the left is me, my husband, Archie Elam, followed by my mother, Jeanne Cunningham Augustine, and my brother J.--Jonathan J. Cunningham Augustine.
Speaker 1: This is me and my two daughters, Katherine [Katherine Elam], who is now known as Katy on the left and Alexandra [Alexandra Elam], now known as Alex on the right.  This is Christmas 2004 in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, at my brother, J. Augustine's home.
Speaker 2: This is at, this is November 2006 at the Martin Luther King Memorial [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial] groundbreaking in Washington, D.C.  My husband, Archie Elam, me, Laurence Fishburne, the actor, and his daughter [Montana Fishburne].
Speaker 1: This is the Kentucky Derby, Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky, in May of 2006.  I am on the left, and my husband, Archie Elam, is on the right.  We are about to enter our suite.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me that was taken in 2006 for the annual report for the Fairfield County Community Foundation board [Fairfield County's Community Foundation, Norwalk, Connecticut].  I'm a board member there, and this picture was taken for the annual report.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and our chairman, Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt], chairman of GE [General Electric].  This is at our global leadership meeting in January of 2005 where I won the chairman's award for external focus in my efforts of bringing GE's name out externally in terms of our diversity programs and practices.
Speaker 1: This is just a picture of me that I use professionally for various speaking engagements.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me receiving the EPIC Award from the White House Project at the United Nations [UN] in May of 2006.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me being awarded the EPIC Award by the White House Project at the United Nations in May 2006.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and Carol Evans who is the president and CEO of Working Mother Media and Martha Stewart at the pre-event reception for the EPIC Awards of the White House Project, which was held at the United Nations in May of 2006.
Speaker 1: This is me in June of 2006 representing GE at the Black Enterprise awards luncheon for the top forty companies in diversity.  That is, on the left is Butch Graves [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.] who is the president and CEO of Black Enterprise.
Speaker 2: This is me at GE's global leadership meeting in January 2006 speaking to the top six hundred leaders of the company on diversity and where we were and how we were doing.
Speaker 1: This is me lecturing at GE's famed Crotonville, the John F. Welch Leadership Development Institute on Diversity and Inclusive Leadership [sic. John F. Welch Leadership Development Institute; General Electric Management Development Institute, Ossining, New York] and how we use it as a strategy for growth in the company.
Speaker 2: This is the cover of the March 2005 Network Journal [The Network Journal] magazine.  They recognize every year twenty-five influential black women in business.  I am on the cover with other professional women from IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], from the National Urban League, and from another non-profit organization.
Speaker 1: This is the cover of the October 2004 issue, '5 [2005], sorry, 2005 issue of Time magazine, which did a feature story on leadership in your midst.  There's a fea- there's an article which features me.  This is also the same article, and there's my photo.
Speaker 2: So the top picture is my dad, Henry Louis Augustine, Sr., and me.  We are in the living room of our home.  It is summer, and I am approximately four years old.
Speaker 1: The bottom picture is out in front of Dillard University in New Orleans.  It is an Easter Sunday.  On the left is me in a white suit and blue hat.  My brother, J. Jonathan Augustine, and then my father Henry Louis Augustine, Sr., and my mother Jeanne Marie Cunningham Augustine.
Speaker 2: These are pictures of my two daughters, Alexandra Jean Elam on the left.  In this photo, she is eight years old.  And Katherine Marie Elam on the right.  In the photo, she is ten years old.  They are both figure skating competitively.  This is in April of 2006.  That's Katherine, K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, and Alexandra, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-A.
Speaker 1: So, so this picture is my mom, Jeanne Cunnin- Jeanne Marie Cunningham Augustine.  The picture is taken out in front of one of our houses in New Orleans, Louisiana, and the picture is probably taken in the mid to late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: This, now you know what on this one the date is actually on the back of this picture.  This is a picture of my mother, Jeanne Marie Cunningham Augustine, and my father, Henry Louis Augustine, Sr.  They are out at a church convention, one of the Baptist conventions.  This picture is taken in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And this is my wedding day, February 27, 1993.  This is my father, Henry Louis Augustine, Sr., on the left, and me.  We are in the living room of my parents' home in New Orleans, Louisiana.
