Story_ID: 482220
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure, and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Harry James Elston [HistoryMaker Harry Elston], that's Harry, H-A-R-R-Y, James, J-A-M-E-S, Elston, E-L-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Could you give your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: November 4th, 1938, Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November the 6th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently, right now?
Speaker 2: You're in Studio City, California.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a singer, songwriter with Friends of Distinction.
Story_ID: 482221
Speaker 1: Now we're going to ask you a few People magazine type questions that get us to know who you are on a personal level.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food--I like soul food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Thanksgiving.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Idlewild, Michigan (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Ain't nuttin'.
Story_ID: 482222
Speaker 1: Want to go back down to your lineage a little bit.  Tell me about your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Earnestyne Cooksey [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays].
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about her background as a child growing up; do you know about her life as a child growing up?
Speaker 2: A little bit.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit.
Speaker 2: She was the only girl and had five brothers.
Speaker 1: Can you state all their names, your uncles?
Speaker 2: Alvin Cooksey, Leonard Cooksey [ph.], Sonny Cooksey [ph.] (laughter), Uncle, Uncle Leonard, Al and Sonny, Uncle Leroy [Leroy Cooksey (ph.)], and I can't think of my other uncle's name.  It don't matter--they dead (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay and she was the only girl out of those?
Speaker 2: Five boys, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was life like growing up for her do you think?
Speaker 2: She, she was a little cutie pie, and she--spoiled of course, and being the only the girl and then she moved to Oakland, Oakland, California
Speaker 1: At what age was she had moved to Oakland?
Speaker 2: Well, it was after she and my father [Leonard Elston, Sr.], my father divorced.  So she probably you know twenty-something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, how, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mom?  My mom was on it.  She, she was married to a musician at one point and very fashion conscious.  I mean she, she passed away 2001 I think, and man her clothes, she dressed.  She was the bomb, she--
Speaker 1: She was very fashionable.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes very fashionable.
Speaker 1: How about her personality outside of that?  What kind of lady was she?
Speaker 2: She was funny, she was funny, didn't take no mess, didn't take no mess and was, was straight up honest, loving, you know.  We, we see, we were--they, when my father and my mother divorced we were like two, three and five or something like that.  So I didn't see her until I was fifteen again (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was kind of getting reacquainted, you know we were in San Diego [California] and she was in Oakland and we went up to, to Oakland and hung out and stuff and then I went in the [U.S.] Air Force after, after graduating from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna come through all that and go down a straight and direct line.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and did she share any stories with you about, about anything that you can recall even as a, even prior to you know during that time period when you reacquainted, did she tell you any stories about her life or anything?
Speaker 2: You know just that they were, when she met my father they were very young.  She was sixteen, I think my dad was eighteen you know when my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] was born and--probably some stories that I don't want to get into (laughter), you know how--you know but, you know, her family lived here and her family lived here and my father's family lived you know, close.
Story_ID: 482223
Speaker 1: My dad, my dad was a player.
Speaker 2: Tell me about your--what, what was his name?
Speaker 1: His name was Leonard David Elston, Sr. [Leonard Elston, Sr.].
Speaker 2: And where was he born?
Speaker 1: Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 2: That's where he grew up also?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Now as a child what do you know about his background?
Speaker 1: He was the only boy out of four girls.
Speaker 2: Total opposite?
Speaker 1: Total opposite, yep, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay, name your aunts on that side?
Speaker 1: Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Elston (ph.)], Aunt Leah Mae [Leah Mae Elston (ph.)], Aunt Faye Helen [Faye Helen Elston (ph.)], yeah, Aunt Faye Helen.
Speaker 2: It's one more you said?
Speaker 1: Maybe I had an aunt that I didn't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That--it's just three of them.
Speaker 2: Now you were getting ready to describe your father--describe him for us now how was your father?  You said he player.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, but see I didn't know this until later on, because see my daddy was a church going man, but you know some of your heaviest players could be in church (laughter), if you know what I mean (laughter), but he was a good man, good, good dude, man.  Good heart, he, he was the first black what they call frame man at the telephone company in San Diego [California], so he was like a pioneer and.
Speaker 2: What was that job, what did that job entail?
Speaker 1: That job--hooking up stuff inside the, the phone company for people you know to hook up their phones outside, and like I said he was a pioneer.  He got my cousins and stuff jobs there you know.  He set an example and he was a god-fearing man, a good man and hardworking dude.
Speaker 2: Did he share any stories with you?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, they use to--I remember down in San Diego, well in, in Texas.  I had, I had an uncle who was a gangster.  He reminded me of Denzel [Denzel Washington] in (laughter)--
Speaker 2: In 'American Gangster.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah his name was Uncle Rayfield Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 2: Now who was he, on what side?
Speaker 1: My dad's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Their family name was Johnson.
Speaker 2: And I mean this dude had a phone in his, and he had white women that he would flaunt around with--in a convertible.
Speaker 1: What--now, now what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was back in the--hey man you got '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know he was a bold dude man, and I, I maybe I met him you know but I--his reputation preceded him.
Speaker 1: What--was he your father's uncle or great uncle to you or was he?
Speaker 2: I think he was an uncle to my father.
Speaker 1: Okay so he'd be your great uncle?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and my dad you know he went to church and he worked on the railroad, he worked on the railroad.  You know it ain't too many jobs you serving the stuff you know what I'm saying and he told me a story (laughter).  He told me a story (laughter) once, he says, and he told me this like in the last five years.  I said, "Dad you know your, your little stuff is squeaky clean" you know.  He said, "No son, I had a couple of experiences," and he was telling me about he was somewhere, maybe in Arizona or something and he had a layover, and they hooked up with these, with these ladies and dad missed the train (laughter).
Speaker 1: To work, he was working.
Speaker 2: Yeah, dad, dad (laughter) missed the train man and somebody covered for him and saved his gig, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then when he, see when we came out of here from--we drove out here from--my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] and my, myself and my father we drove out here from Texas and I remember getting stuck in the desert and digging out the tires and stuff, it was cold and stuff you know, but he played ball with us.  He was a musician, not by trade, but he could play the piano.  All my family could play the piano, you know by ear and stuff and oh he sang in the choir, choir director and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 482224
Speaker 1: So basically he, he was the one that raised you, pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so that was the first--this was a single, this is very unique because this is a black man raising the children.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now he did get married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again to, to, to my stepmother.  Her name was Margaret [Margaret Elston (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Tell about--tell us about her?
Speaker 2: Now Margaret, she's a good lady, she's a good lady.  She worked for a department store in, in San Diego [California] called Walker Scott [Walker Scott Department Store] and I think she was a seamstress or something like that you know.  Black people didn't, she wasn't on the floor (laughter) even in San Diego, but she was a hardworking lady. She died of diabetes and that's, that's where I got my first taste of how ravaging that stuff can be to your body you know.  I use to give her insulin shots and stuff like that, but she was very supportive and my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] and I we were athletes, you know we played football and baseball and all that kind of stuff and of course we went to church every Sunday, every Sunday.
Speaker 1: So she was kind, she was the second mother to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And did you all really embrace her as that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes I remember.
Speaker 1: Well actually being so young was--how soon did he marry her?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were, we were toddlers.
Speaker 1: So she really was like mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's and see I had a little thing for my real mother [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] until I got the complete story.  You know 'cause you know, we got this saying, "No one knows where the nose goes when the door is closed," and you know in them families you got some secrets skeletons and all that stuff.  So as we--when, when, when I re-, re- reunited with my real mother you know I asked her certain questions you know.  "Why did you and dad you know break up?"  And she explained that my grandmother was, was quite possessive and my daddy was a momma's boy, okay?
Story_ID: 482225
Speaker 1: Well that's good, because now I wanna talk about those grandparents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know both--how far back can you go in your ancestry?  Can you go to great-grandparents or how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: I can go back pretty far in Dallas [Texas], I remember they didn't live on a farm.  They kind of, of lived in the city but they had horses and cows and stuff like.
Speaker 1: Now, now, who would, who would, this be?
Speaker 2: This was my, my real mother Earnestyne's [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays], her parents, her side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, her mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and do you recall ever seeing them and talking to those people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, it was like--his name was--oh wow--uncle--Grandpa Jefferson [Jefferson Cooksey (ph.)].
Speaker 1: That was your mother's father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Earnestyne's father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hope I getting this right (laughter), and he used to--I mean I seen cook--kill possums and cook possums and eat possums.  Hey man, I--one day, one day I'll never forget this.  The possum was laying on the kitchen floor, alive, and they just put the stick on his neck and (makes sound).  Wow, you know and then and then (laughter) and then chickens.  Me and my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] (laughter) got BB guns for Christmas, bam, bam, we're shooting these chickens (laughter).  So, came time to eat, people were biting down (laughter) and biting into the BBs.
Speaker 1: Aw man.
Speaker 2: They wanted to kill us man (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so this, this in your grandparents' home, you can recall this?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how about your grandmother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Okay, on my father's [Leonard Elston, Sr.], let me see.
Speaker 1: On mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, Grandmama Rosie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandmama Rosie, now she was--oh, lord she was something she--I loved her.  She--I met her got really acquainted with her when I moved to Oakland [California], but she was you know had a big ole house and, and her sons you know they took care of her and stuff like that and she married a longshoreman, his name was Art [ph.].
Speaker 1: So the two of them weren't together at this point, the grandparent weren't?
Speaker 2: No, no unh-uh. No, they split up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Art had married Grandma Rosie?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep in Oakland, had a big old house in Oakland and, boy you think--I went to--I might be hopping, but I'll never forget.  I was going to Oakland city college, and my uncles they would always let me drive their cars.  Man, I was the bomb, I'm driving DeSotos and Fairlane 500 [Ford Fairlane 500], a different car every day then my daddy, my stepfather [William Mays], he would let me--we gotta talk about my stepfather too, he would let me use his car.  So they probably me and my sister [Evelyn Elston Olier], we--they thought we was rich.
Story_ID: 482226
Speaker 1: Let's back up a minute then.  Okay, so mom [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] went to Oakland [California].  She also remarried?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I wanna come back through to the grandparents but I want to definitely deal with your step- with your stepfather, that's important.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name was Willie Mays [William Mays].
Speaker 1: Willie Mays.
Speaker 2: They called him Tat, Willie "Tat" Mays.  He was--you had Willie Mays on the San Francisco [California] side and you had my daddy, Tat Mays, on the, on the Oakland side.  He was a professional--he played ball.
Speaker 1: He played professional baseball?
Speaker 2: Baseball with, you know, Bingo Long and them kind of cats.
Speaker 1: In, in the Negro League?
Speaker 2: Yeah in the Negro Leagues yes, yes and he, he managed Joe Morgan, Frank Robinson, Vada Pinson, all these guys were, not Joe and Frank and them, but Vada and those guys use to come by the house and a cat named Joe Gaines and--but everybody loved my dad, he had a base--they played at Bushrod Park, this is in Oakland, and so he was manager.
Speaker 1: So you met him when you were about fifteen or so?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and right away you embraced him and kicked it off good with him?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep me and Mays we were cool.  We had a little, a little you know growing pains--see I was in the [U.S. military] service then and I know you wanna get back to that later, but and I would come to visit, I was at Travis Air Force Base in Northern California [Travis Air Force Base, Solano County, California].  So I would come to Oakland to visit so that's where we really hooked up.
Speaker 1: What do you think the difference was back then, now you we talk about so called dysfunctional families and things of that nature, what do you think the difference was then as opposed to now?  Now you see a lot of strife and animosity with people when they have different fathers and mothers.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's a different feeling nowadays, what do you thing the feeling was?  Is it the same kinds of things that we have?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: As they call it, as they call it the, the baby mama's drama stuff.  You all didn't have--how was it back then?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no.  Because Mays, he embraced us, he embraced (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody kind of worked together?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and then--now we were, we had our differences when I played ball for him, when you play ball for your daddy, boy that's hard.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know.
Speaker 1: But as far as the, the overall?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh it was cool man, he, he taught me how to play tonk, I know, he taught me how to drink, you know.  Turned me onto [HistoryMaker] B.B. King back in the day and the kick, the--you know after the baseball games everybody would come to the house and playing cards and all that stuff man it was great.
Speaker 1: So, so he made you a worldly man, taught you the ways of the world?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yes he did, in Oakland, chocolate city you know.
Speaker 1: Because you thought dad down south was kind of squeaky clean, but not really?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, really.
Speaker 1: Especially when you all got away probably (laughter)?  Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes (laughter) and he was different, totally different from, from my daddy, Leonard Elston [Leonard Elston, Sr.] and Willie Mays, but the--good people, good, good people.
Story_ID: 482227
Speaker 1: So now back to the grandparents on your father's [Leonard Elston, Sr.] side?
Speaker 2: My father's side, okay.  I had--my, my grandmother she was sort of a domineering-type of a lady you know and her husband he split.  Oh, he got, he was later, he--them kids he couldn't hang you know, and you know when you're young you don't understand these types of things and then as you talk to different members of your family and they explain the different personalities.  Because my mother [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] being a little independent, fast lady she, she didn't want to hear that stuff from my--from his mother you know, 'cause she had her own thing going and they were so young.  You know, and then my daddy, being the player that he, that he was.  I remember I use to be a player myself (laughter), but maybe I got that from him you know what I'm saying, but I didn't know a lot of these things until we moved up and got, you know, old enough that we could, you know, communicate and talk about it.
Speaker 1: You could put two and two together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 482228
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory growing up?  What can you recall, the earliest thing that you can--in your mind that stands out?
Speaker 2: The earliest thing probably in, in Dallas [Texas] in, in you know you don't under--you don't understand like the little corner grocery stores.  It was always owned by a white man. I didn't understand that.  I never questioned it, but as I grew older you know that's how I was. Cat owned the store, owned the shoe store, the clothing store like that.
Speaker 1: So you can recall having questions at an early age--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --about why--we're all black around here but the man that owns the store is white?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right so you can recall that, how old were you when you think these questions popped up?
Speaker 2: Man, I was young and then when we'd go back, so maybe six, seven or something like that.
Speaker 1: And, and you're already curious then as to what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --this was about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 482229
Speaker 1: Growing up, what was life like in your house, because you had a stepmother [Margaret Elston (ph.)] and you know the--with all these kids here--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what was life like?
Speaker 2: Life was--actually my, my dad [Leonard Elston, Sr.] was pretty strict, he was strict you know.  Dad, my sister and brother always called me--what did they call me, the, the pet (laughter), like teacher's pet?
Speaker 1: So how many siblings did you have?
Speaker 2: One brother, one sister.
Speaker 1: Tell us their names?
Speaker 2: Leonard Elston, Leonard Elston David, Jr. [Leonard Elston, Jr.], and Evelyn Yvonne Elston [Evelyn Elston Olier], and I'm the middle and my brother still lives in San Diego [California] and my sister, she's in Las Vegas [Nevada], and we were cool man.  We went to church and we helped my dad.  He, he had different you know part time jobs and, and that responsibility thing you know we'd be at the park man with the boys hanging, he come by honk, honk--in the car and go help him for a few hours after work and stuff.
Story_ID: 482230
Speaker 1: What--now what street did you live on in San Diego [California]?
Speaker 2: Dig, now we first we lived in what they called Frontier Housing [San Diego, California].
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: This was like, it was the projects, but you had all kind of nationalities in there.  It ain't like Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know and, and it was government you know because you know you had the [U.S.] Navy and all that down there, but that's, that's how I grew up and I didn't have the prejudices.
Speaker 1: Oh you didn't?  Tell us about the San Diego at that time?  Now this would've been in like '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: No, yeah well wait.
Speaker 1: Forties [1940s] going into the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah okay--I'm trying (laughter).  You, you're good--on it more than me man, but I remember, I remember playing ball with all kind of cats man, and we'd have cats--see when you, when you--back in those days, if, if a white dude came up to you and he had a southern accent, you know you kind of--you know you--that barrier went up.
Speaker 1: And it's very possible because San Diego for those that don't know is a, is a naval town.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And people from all over the--
Speaker 2: All over the world come.
Speaker 1: --country--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but then man I'll never forget this boy named James Eaton [ph.].  This boy could--muscles your boy could play some ball and he was, he was cool you know, and then I had another cat.  See, I didn't know what a Jewish person was until I was nineteen years old, nineteen years old.  I mean it just, you know because it was Japanese--I grew up hey, I, I was raised with--my best friend back there was a Mexican dude named Tony Deharano [ph.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I learned about menudo and chorizo and tacos 'cause we fifteen miles from San Die-, from Tijuana [Mexico].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying, and that.
Speaker 1: Straight through National City [California] and you're there.
Speaker 2: Nat- hey you know (laughter), and, and that was a whole trip San Di- Tijuana because you were like, in like in a third world country and then you'd come back.  We'd go over there--I'd, I think I bought my first piece of sex over there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: In Tijuana you know.
Speaker 1: And, and we'll get to that in a moment too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But--
Story_ID: 482231
Speaker 1: So what was the neighborhood like, the sights and the sounds and the smells since it was so racially, racially diverse (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Di- um-hm, oh.
Speaker 1: What, what can you recall if you just were to sit here and think about it?
Speaker 2: Okay I recall, I recall Fordham Recreation Center [ph.].  You played baseball, basketball, track and everything.  That's where everybody mixed, and that was great, that was great.  You know you would walk there, five minutes from the house and then, see I was--they use to call me, I'm black surfer dude 'cause we'd go to the beach all the time. We right there at the beaches and stuff learning to swim and, and going on outings, (Unclear) Mountain, Palomar Mountain and, and Cuya- Camp Cuyamaca [Cuyamaca Outdoor School, California] and all that kind of stuff.  It was, it was cool, and so, so I, I--what I really, really appreciated about it is like being able, you know not having the prejudices and stuff you know.
Speaker 1: So, so you would say in your opinion San Diego [California] pretty much was pretty open?
Speaker 2: Well to a degree, I remember one time I had this, this little white dude and his sister, blonde hair, blue eyes, and we were cool, we were cool.  One day went to play miniature golf on Midway Drive, I'll--this is, this is, this is you know.
Speaker 1: How old would you have been you think then?
Speaker 2: Twelve, thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They went to play golf, they wouldn't let me in.  I said, "Oh, that's okay, that's okay."  And I'm leaning over the fence, they're playing miniature golf, I couldn't go in, you know.  Now, that was--then right up the street was a movie theater, Point Loma [San Diego, California], we--everybody went to the movies and stuff you know, but you just had those pockets, you know, you know go to certain areas and do certain things, things happened.
Speaker 1: So you had to work through that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we're--
Story_ID: 482232
Speaker 1: We're gonna come up to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right now I wanna stay in this--early years, your, your elementary school years.
Speaker 2: Okay, elementary.
Speaker 1: What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went, I went to Midway Elementary School in San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: Midway Elementary?
Speaker 2: Midway Elementary, diverse you know right there in the middle of the--I guess, I wanna say projects, but you know what I'm saying, and that was cool.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that really influenced you as you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep it was Ms. Hostetter [ph.] and Mr. Lee [ph.] you know and--you know when you're a kid you're looking up to your teachers and stuff like that and then as you get older you know you, you learn certain things and, but the you know for the most part it was, it was pretty cool.
Speaker 1: How did Mr. Lee and Ms. Hostetter influence you because what about them influenced you?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So there was some--a few racial things you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but you--I'm going to take you back to school.  So those teachers, how did they influence, well what about those teachers influencing you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were like--they were like very supportive and we were talking elementary and so and you know if you struggled or something like that they were there and they would communicate with your parents you know and.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was an average student, student.  I had trouble with math you know, and, and retaining stuff you know, but once I locked in I was okay.
Story_ID: 482233
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well behaved?  Mischievous?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--no I was, I was--like I told you my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] and sister [Evelyn Elston Olier] called me the spoiled one or the teacher's--daddy's [Leonard Elston, Sr.] pet you know because I was pretty obedient.  Now my brother could be a little, what do you call it, you know when you don't obey your parents, whatever you call it, and my sister was spoiled of course, but I was in the middle, and I, I tried to do the right thing for the most part.  Now, if I got--if I went left I, went left.
Story_ID: 482234
Speaker 1: So you were a average student and, and a pretty good--pretty good kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was athletic, sports, sports--we was, we was bad, me and my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.], we was bad, man.
Speaker 1: And which sports did you play?
Speaker 2: We played football, baseball and track, played a little basketball, played basketball later on 'cause I was a shorty, but I use to run hurdles, and--
Speaker 1: Track and field, everything?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah man.
Speaker 1: Did you have any dreams or aspirations in, in elementary school like possibly to be a professional athlete or did you have any particular dreams?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and what were they?
Speaker 2: I don't want to jump ahead but one of the reasons I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was to play pro ball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: But in elementary school you kind of saw that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah man because see we, we had a lot of cats that I went to school with and they went on to college and, and world famous track, track guys or football guys, the Powell, the Art Powell, Charlie Powell, these cats, you know they were a little older, but to--hey you had to, you had to compete, you know what I'm saying.  San Diego [California] was, San Diego was the bomb.
Speaker 1: So okay, so you're in San Diego and, and you stay there for all of your?
Speaker 2: I left when I was seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 482235
Speaker 1: And before we go there, now you said earlier your father [Leonard Elston, Sr.] was about some church, you all went to church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aw, heck yeah man we went to Bethel Baptist Church [San Diego, California].
Speaker 1: Every Sunday?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday and sometimes you had to go back in the evening, and then sometimes you'd go in the BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America] meetings on Tu- you know what I'm talking about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Describe your experiences in church?
Speaker 2: The church was--see the church kind of turned me off to a degree.  Number one, I never was a Bible reader, you know bible studies (makes sound), but what turned me off from the church was the preachers and their little shenanigans around the church and I'm saying, "Wait a minute, you're preaching this you know and something's happening." I mean the preachers had, had kids you know out of wedlock and stuff, so how you gonna tell me what to do?  You know what I'm saying?  And you know this stuff is going on?  Then my whole family, my aunts and they were on the usher board and the choir and, and these kind of things--you wanna do something with him?
Speaker 1: No, go ahead.
Speaker 2: All right, and but we were a very religious family on my father's side all right?  Now my mother's [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] side (laughter) I don't know if they knew what a church was--I shouldn't say that (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you hadn't gotten there yet?
Speaker 2: Not gotten there yet.
Speaker 1: So, so.
Speaker 2: You're on it man.
Speaker 1: So, so you knew the church?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew the church.
Speaker 1: And, and you--now you have questions because number one you have certain questions: why is there a white man owning the store in our neighborhood?  And number two: what's up with the preacher doing everything that he telling me not do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, not to do, exactly.
Story_ID: 482236
Speaker 1: So now, did you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: Yes, went to junior high.
Speaker 1: In San Diego [California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) San Diego.
Speaker 1: And now what, what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: That's, that was Dana Junior High [Dana Junior High School; Dana Middle School, San Diego, California].  Now you hip to Point Loma [San Diego, California] in San--?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you know they had money over there.
Speaker 1: Right, now how'd you get over there?
Speaker 2: You just, you know you when you graduated from Midway [Midway Elementary School, San Diego, California] your next--on that side of town was, was Dana Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Now what year, this would've been about what, 19--?
Speaker 2: Well I graduated in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: From high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah from high school.
Speaker 1: So let's go back, this would've been about four to six, seven--seven years prior to that maybe?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so we'll say about '49 [1949].
Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now let's talk about in '49 [1949] to, and you as a young junior high school kid.  Now '49 [1949], music--what's on the radio in '49 [1949]?
Speaker 2: Oh in '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Bebop was starting right?
Speaker 2: Bebop, yep, yep, yep and then we use to listen to--I wanna say [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price, and Fats Domino and Count Basie, 'cause then my dad [Leonard Elston, Sr.]--they'd, they'd have jam sessions at the house and then them preachers, them preachers that I saw at church [Bethel Baptist Church, San Diego, California], now they'd be sipping and tipping (laugher) and stuff like--and I'd say oh, yeah (laughter) you know and this is in, in the projects [Frontier Housing, San Diego, California] and stuff, okay?  And Dana, Dana Junior High School was next you know, but it, it was so weird man because you would walk through the nicer part of, of Point Loma to get back to the ghetto or the projects, whatever you wanted to call it you know and, and just making this clear, it's a whole another level--the, the ghetto or the projects from the East Coast and you know 'cause hey.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Hey, this was cool you know what I saying compared to some of the stuff--you know those cats from Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois] had to go through.
Speaker 1: To this day it's still a little bit cooler (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, okay being that you were there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but playing the sports and, and surfing and going to the beach and swimming and all these activities.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in junior high?
Speaker 2: Oh, the names?
Speaker 1: Yeah, who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: Anybody we would know or recognize?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one guy he went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] he was a world class sprinter, his name was Bobby Staten and, and see like in San Diego we lived you know over, over that, that Point Loma in that area.  Then you had Logan Heights [San Diego, California] which is what we call that, in town, and you go over in town you know they looking at you strange and stuff, but cool you dig.  And then we moved over in town, that's another story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but we had our own thing going, going over, over in, in the projects, you know.  Joe Vincent [ph.], Joe was a--Joe turned out to be a producer for television.  I remember he, he was stage manager for the Cannonball Adderley's show before Cannon died and he had the--us [The Friends of Distinction] on there you know, then Gloria Vincent [ph.] his ex-wife she did stuff in television and stuff and then you had--when I went over in town there's another, another group of, of cats who were successful who played pro ball and stuff, but over, over in the projects, yeah my cousin Bobby Staten and--I'm trying think of some scholastic people, but I think I met them later on after we moved from over in town.
Speaker 1: So in junior high you're still very much involved in sports?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yep, yep.
Story_ID: 482237
Speaker 1: Are there any other activities going on?  Are you starting to get into anything else (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah singing.
Speaker 1: Okay now tell us about that, how did that start?
Speaker 2: Of course you doo-wop, okay.
Speaker 1: Now who were the top groups now (background noise) in 1949, you know in 1949 or so who were the groups that you all were listening to?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay, okay 'cause I'm looking at you (laughter), you cool, I'm cool.
Speaker 2: So who were some of the groups you were listening to?
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: In, in high, in junior high [Dana Junior High School; Dana Middle School, San Diego, California]?
Speaker 1: Four Freshmen [The Four Freshmen], The Hi-Lo's, Count Basie you know my parents would, would listen to--it was like what you call good music you know, but it was diverse.
Speaker 2: So you had the doo-wop groups?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the doo-wop groups?
Speaker 1: Now you had James Brown; you had The Penguins, Harvey and the Moonglows.  Saw Harvey [Harvey Fuqua] in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] a couple of weeks ago.  I--you know I've know Harvey for a while you know but, but then when you meet these cats that you listened to The Spaniels, Jackie Wilson, aw man, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price, Little Richard.
Speaker 2: So, so you're listening to all this and, and you're playing sports--well you know junior high is a phase where things start changing.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Your, your voice gets a little lower and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: So now, now you're going to do something else with singing.
Speaker 1: Singing.
Speaker 2: So how did the singing thing begin?
Speaker 1: The singing thing--we had this vocal group called--was it the, The Belvederes [ph.].
Speaker 2: Now when you say we who are we?
Speaker 1: My brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.], my brother could sing his butt off.  Jesse Belvin, remember Jesse Belvin?  Jesse--my brother sound like Jesse Belvin, and Joe Vincent [ph.] and J.D. Gibson [ph.].  We had this group called, the, the--I just told.
Speaker 2: The Belvederes?
Speaker 1: Belvederes.
Speaker 2: Now, now did you all just decide you could sing and because you've been playing sports and--?
Speaker 1: Sports, playing sports, when you wasn't playing sports you hung out and then you started (singing), "Ah do, do, do--." "Hey man sing that song," blah, blah, you know.  My, my first gig, The Belvederes--oh, wait let me tell you this story.  The Belvederes--we're singing at--well I'm jumping ahead.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior high with the music though?
Speaker 1: Junior high with the music, that wasn't you know we'd do little talent shows you know stuff like that.  Nothing--a career you know, it was into--when I was in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah we're gonna come to there in a moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But did you just--when you started signing did you realize, I like this, or when you started singing in junior high school or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was, was there something in the back of your mind?
Speaker 1: Church, church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Singing in church.  Now didn't do a whole lot of singing in church 'cause I didn't like going to church (laughter), you dig?
Speaker 2: But we had to go?
Speaker 1: Go to (unclear) and then like family, my, my brother and my sister [Evelyn Elston Olier], we use to sing, do a little, do little things and with that musical background from--remember my--if you was in my family and you couldn't play the piano, you couldn't sing, "What?"  (Laughter) You know stuff like that.
Speaker 2: So it was very natural, you didn't have to think about it?  It was just around you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, unh-uh, around me, exactly.
Story_ID: 482238
Speaker 1: So you're in high school and you got, you have different thing- I mean you're in junior high you have all kind of things going, you're paying sports and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're singing in the groups and now it's time to graduate from junior high and go into high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To--okay.
Speaker 1: Now what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Okay, went to Point Loma High School [San Diego, California], and you know about that.  Now Point Loma High School this is where you know you, you, you know you getting another level.
Speaker 1: It, it's about 1952 now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Somewhere in thereabouts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah 'cause exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: About 1952.
Speaker 2: I went to, went to--and Point Loma High School was a, was a you know a highly regarded school, but it was, like I say man, it was so--again now, Dana High School, Junior High [Dana Junior High School; Dana Middle School, San Diego, California] was over in that area and so was Point Loma so you still had to walk through them rich neighborhoods to get to the hood (laughter), you dig?
Speaker 1: So you're about fourteen, fifteen now and going into high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Point Loma High School.
Speaker 2: Point Loma High School.
Speaker 1: You've been known as an athlete?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell me about your experiences at Point Loma?
Speaker 2: Point Loma.
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers?
Speaker 2: I can't remember too many teachers at Point Loma because I only went to Point Loma for about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we moved over in town.
Speaker 1: Who influenced you at Point Loma, or did anything influence you?
Speaker 2: Naw, man, because it was like, it was like--it was a little, little prejudiced over there.
Speaker 1: Tell us about it?
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: Any particular experiences?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh this girl, I'll never forget this white girl, and she used to sit, you know, right next to me and stuff.  It wasn't that many blacks, but let's start there.  It wasn't that many blacks but you know if you--you was black you played some sports and you got a little, a little play, but this girl told a joke and I don't know the whole crux of the, of the joke but the last words was, "You sho' is," and the class just fell out.  And I knew what she was talking about but I didn't on let on, "Oh, what is that?"  Well you know I was, I was embarrassed man you know I might have been the only, only black kid in class, or if it was two of you know and these kids had money.  Their mommies and daddies was doctors and lawyers and all this stuff.  So you had to, you that thing but you didn't trip on it, you didn't trip on it.
Speaker 1: Now in '52 [1952] California's climate in San Diego, Point Loma is very different from what's going in, in Birmingham [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh, heck yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and various places.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is before Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're already going to an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did you see things or hear on the TV and the radio about all this trouble, or, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and how did you feel when you saw that?
Speaker 2: Well, being that, that--being raised with all diversity of--you didn't trip on it too much because your friends, they didn't care, you know what I'm saying?  And, and like I said I didn't know what a Jewish person was 'til I was in the [U.S.] Air Force and, and then my, my homies, my Hispanic brothers you know what I'm saying.  Stayed spending the night over there, you know I'll never forget one time, one time Tony Deharano [ph.] he was talking to this cat.  He said, "Aw, shut up you black Mexican."  I didn't what that was about (laughter) you know what I'm saying until later on you know, but I knew Tony was cool.  Matter of fact I saw Tony two months ago, he had a big old party and for everybody we went to junior high school, but now this cat he could, he remembers all of that stuff you know, but, but naw it--for the most part you know, I didn't trip, I didn't trip because--oh, one of the most influential guys was a, a gentleman by the name of Coach Ted Wilson.
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: No, he was in, in junior high and elementary [Midway Elementary School, San Diego, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Coach, now Coach Wilson, Coach Wilson was the bomb, he--this cat he had muscles and stuff you know, but coach was so cool and it, it kind of--if I had any preconceived things about a white man, Coach Wilson was cool, you didn't have this stuff with Coach Wilson.  He didn't play that, you know, and he was fair you know what I'm saying, and that was good.
Story_ID: 482239
Speaker 1: So in high school, you're s- you're an athlete, you got a little music under your belt.  Now does music heat up in high school for you now?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah that's when--
Speaker 1: The Belvederes [ph.] got together?
Speaker 2: The Belvederes, now this story, we're singing at--now I'm in Lincoln High [Abraham Lincoln High School, San Diego, California].  Okay, Point Loma High School--
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: One year, then we move across town, daddy [Leonard Elston, Sr.] builds a house.
Speaker 1: In town?
Speaker 2: In town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Logan Heights [San Diego, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of off of Ocean View Boulevard.
Speaker 1: So dad's doing pretty good.  Now, he's building a house?
Speaker 2: Building a house yeah, we.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: Some--yep, yep but you on those numbers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we go over, we drive over and look at the house and the framing and stuff.  We're still you know over, over there in, in the beach area but we're coming over to look at the house, 'cause we couldn't wait to get over there.  And man, so we moved there, two-bedroom house, still there, nice home--that's another story, too--but so we get to, to--then I go to Lincoln High School.  Now mind you, Lincoln High School is Marcus Allen, Terrell Davis.  We were before them, Percy Campbell [ph.], there was this--they was some bad hombres, the Campbell boys.
Speaker 1: So, known for its athletic prowess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Lincoln High School, to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, we go, we go to Lincoln High School and across the street were the Campbell family and the Campbell family was very diverse.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Campbells?
Speaker 2: The Campbell family, yeah, you had Percy Campbell, you had Donald Campbell [ph.], we called him Duck.  We had Julius Campbell [ph.], Julius--see, see that was, that was the weird thing, Julius was a scholar kind of a cat, very, very heavy dude.  His brother Percy was a hell of a black quarterback dude and played baseball and stuff, and he was one year older and I looked up to Percy.  Then you had Otis [Otis Campbell (ph.)], Otis got killed, somebody hit him in the head.  He was like eighteen, badass athlete.  He could've been a pro and his brother Duck and then we had Poncho [ph.] and, aw man, this is, this is--there's a park there called Mountain View Park [San Diego, California], so that's where you learned--you cracking playing football you know no pads you know (laughter) and baseball and stuff you know and sitting there and drinking some wine or something like that and a little--had a girlfriend lived across the street from the park, she was fine.  And but then the Campbell boys and then J.D. Gibson [ph.] and Curtis Tucker [ph.], all athletes, ran track and stuff and Curtis, Curtis' mother was a school teacher and I think his daddy was a lawyer, diverse, a Mexican family, white families all in this neighborhood.  This is when we moved over in town and, and then Ocean View Boulevard was the--you've probably been over there you know that was the stem you know, and we walked to school you know about, maybe a mile or so to school and buying tacos, rolled tacos, three--ten cents apiece, nine cents apiece you know that's our--.  See another thing, if you're in San Diego [California] and you couldn't cook tac- cook tacos oh, hey, hey, shoot you had to learn to throw down some tacos.  Everybody I know can throw down come tacos you know but that was cool, because you got Tijuana [Mexico] there so when we went to Tijuana we would like--they'd have these stands.  We wouldn't go in the restaurant.  I want tacos off the stand and you could drink.
Speaker 1: Those are the home cooking ones?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you could drink 'cause even if you were under age you could drink?
Speaker 2: Yeah man, you walk--and they call you: "Partner. Hey, partner."  And you drink Oso Negro and you--the cat would have it behind, in a liquor store he'd have it there, "Hey, partner" (imitates drinking).  Now I'm fifteen, fifteen years old drinking like a fish you know (laughter) and that was Tijuana and that's--
Story_ID: 482240
Speaker 1: So you got that going on with The Belvederes [ph.], now tell me about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Belvederes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, The Belvederes, we're singing at a senior breakfast.
Speaker 1: How'd you all get together again?
Speaker 2: The--neighbors, we played football together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With J.D. [J.D. Gibson (ph.)] and Joe Vincent [ph.], my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.]--Curtis [Curtis Tucker (ph.)], Curtis played keyboard.  So man we, we're doing this senior breakfast (laughter), this is cold.  So all the parents are there for the senior breakfast, "The Belvederes are gonna sing," blah, blah.
Speaker 1: You all had a little name at this point, or are you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little name recognition.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and there's another I'll--after that I'll tell you about that, but so man we go to this senior breakfast and J.D., J.D. Gibson, he had this laugh (imitates laugh) like that and my boy Joe would kind of sing off tune sometime.  Then we was doing a capella okay and we get to this breakfast and, "Ladies and gentlemen, The Belvederes."  So we come out on the stage and we started singing (laughter) and Joe, Joe hit a kind of a sour note (laughter), J.D. (makes sound) he did that laugh, I started laughing.  We couldn't stop laughing, we laughed and then, okay you know.  Our parents and stuff was out there, we couldn't stop laughing.  They closed the curtain (laughter) we staggered out the back door still laughing man, and me and J.D.--they was pissed off at--they wanted to kill us man, they wanted to kill us.  That--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you all had messed up the breakfast?
Speaker 2: Hey man, it couldn't--we couldn't stop laughing man (laughter), so then The Belvederes kind of you know we did what we're gonna do.
Story_ID: 482241
Speaker 1: And this cat his name--this guy's name was Proncell Foster.  So he had this group called Cell Foster and the Audios.  Now I'm fifteen, fifteen or sixteen now--no, probably fifteen and Johnny Otis, Johnny Otis came to town and then back in that day you had Etta James, you had Willie Mae Thornton [Big Mama Thornton], Big Jay McNeely, and now I'm doing this you know, (looks around) but there's the talent show.  He's looking for talent, we won the talent show.
Speaker 2: So Johnny Otis is coming through looking for talent?
Speaker 1: Yes, through San Diego [California], so we sang with Johnny Otis.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the group?
Speaker 1: Cell Foster and the Audios.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so--see back, back in those days--well see when you went to Tijuana [Mexico], we took pill, we was--we took pills, red devils and uppers, downers, yellow jackets.  You could walk in the pharmacy and do like this (makes sound) get a handful.  We'd take 'em back to San Diego and we take all that stuff man, and we didn't smoke no weed back then.  I don't know why, and my dad [Leonard Elston, Sr.] nearly killed me, but--so we, we recorded for Johnny, Johnny Otis.  And we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's back up for just one moment?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is singing becoming an important thing? I mean is singing something now that's really something you're looking for as an aspiration, or are you just doing it 'cause it's probably some women and some--?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, there was a song called 'Night Owl' (singing) "Ooh, night owl, (unclear)." So what I did back then I took the melody and I wrote, changed the lyrics and all the girls, all the girls went crazy over that man, ah man, I was.
Speaker 2: That's all it took for you?
Speaker 1: On high (laughter), and Melvin Southern [ph.] called him Tootie, my, my sister [Evelyn Elston Olier] eventually married him, he was in the group, and then we had, we had a cat named, we called him Mini Bull [ph.] and he could sing, and then we had another cat, he sang bass.  You know but we've--we hey, we was, we was the bomb in San Diego you know but we got this recording contract and we did a couple of shows.
Speaker 2: How old you were now, about fifteen, sixteen?
Speaker 1: Fifteen, yep, yep we use to come up to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and sing with Johnny Otis Caravan [The Johnny Otis Rhythm and Blues Caravan] and, and them cats didn't, they didn't like us.  The older cats.
Speaker 2: Here in, in your town or?
Speaker 1: In L.A.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, hey we San Diego and stuff, no, no I'm trying--I'll think of the group in a minute.  They had a name, but hey man I mean I'm with, with Etta James and--
Speaker 2: Did you ever hang out at Dolphin's of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Hey, hey look at him (laughter), yeah, as a matter of--Jackie Kelso was our producer.
Speaker 2: The great saxophone player?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Jack Kelso is a wonderful musician, still, still alive today.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Still playing music, so it was--
Speaker 1: Okay, Jackie Kelso, man and, and you know these--they took us under their wings and that's the first time I ever went in the studio.
Speaker 2: Did you record at Dolphin's?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well explain to the people what that was.  That, that was a record store and a recording.
Speaker 1: And a recording studio, Dolphin like you said Dolphin's of Hollywood.  Now they have a park or something, I haven't been there in a while but that, that's where we got our, our start.
Speaker 2: I, I was told, told that you could go in there and record a record a Saturday morning and Saturday night, it would be out and available.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Out on the street.
Speaker 2: And I think, I think it was the deejay in the window that played the stuff you?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  Ah, god man, we're going way back dude.  I, I might even think of, of the disc jockey, I know it was a disc jockey called Hunter Hancock he was a white dude but he played like, like--come on, my boy who does oldies now, Art Laboe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was before Art Laboe, Hunter Hancock, man and I think Hunter was up here, but anyway like you said you go in there that Saturday morning, Saturday evening you're stuff's--you didn't get no money (laughter), but you was on the radio jack.  So we did a couple of things with Johnny Otis and we recorded, but by this time I'm kind of in the mix.
Story_ID: 482242
Speaker 1: Who were the group that kind of--the group that said, "Now who are these young boys from San Diego [California]?"  Who were some of those groups that really didn't feel you?
Speaker 2: Man, I almost, almost, I almost said it.  I almost said it.  I'll think of it in a minute, but they didn't--'cause I guess we was giving them competition, because see, see it was the Johnny Otis Caravan [The Johnny Otis Rhythm and Blues Caravan].
Speaker 1: So it was a big show?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain that to us you know back in the day, nowadays it's all these individual acts and so and so but back then you had, you had a show, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, you had a show man, and like I said I'll never forget Big Jay McNeely, he would (imitates saxophone), and lay on the floor, kick his legs up.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was in the lineage of the honkers, like him and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --him and Phil Austin [ph.] and--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --guys like--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay
Speaker 1: And guys like that right?
Speaker 2: You know, you, you (laughter)--
Speaker 1: They weren't necessarily jazz musicians, but, but they were showmen, right?
Speaker 2: Showmen, yes, yes, and now, now they probably at home, they probably (imitates saxophone) scat like, but they had to make a living.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: But now (unclear) tell me you had, you had your other jazz artists too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, strict--hey, and we'll get to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got a whole--hey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah so we did, we did the Johnny Otis thing.  We'd come up to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and then my--I had an uncle who lived in Compton [California] and we'd hang at his house and stuff like that you know and then go on back to San Diego.
Story_ID: 482243
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now, during your time period in high school you were in school having this fun, but places like Arkansas they were catching the devil you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah man.
Speaker 1: --Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How were you all feeling when you saw this stuff on TV now and, and the governor [George Wallace] standing in the doorway?
Speaker 2: Doorway and stuff--now by that time I was up--I think I was up here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know there's another period, that's, that's a whole 'nother thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so let's kind of draw, put it together okay so the group is together.  The group has a little notoriety.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The great Johnny Otis is, is pretty much your backer--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and producer and promoter.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What happens next?
Speaker 2: And so.
Speaker 1: By 1954?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  We, we didn't do that for too long I think Proncell [Proncell Foster] kind of, he kind of--them red devils kind of took him somewhere else you know, and we, were--we were still athlete--he, Proncell was an athlete too but he was, he was one of them pretty boys.  See we had Marcel.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah okay tell us--how, how was the look back then?
Speaker 2: Oh high, shoot boy your had your Marcel, your finger waves and stuff like that.  You go down and, go downtown San Diego [California] get your hair done, and a week or so you'd go pay three dollars dollars and get it retouched.
Speaker 1: From what I'm told it wasn't an easy procedure to sit there a while and go through some lye.
Speaker 2: Man, you--lookie here and keep that hot water going (laughter), like in--what's that movie with Spike Lee and Denzel [Denzel Washington].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I forgot, yeah and, in a?
Speaker 2: 'Do the Right'--is it 'Do the Right Thing'?
Speaker 1: Or Mo- what was that.
Speaker 2: 'Mo' Better Blues'?
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, 'Mo' Better Blues.'
Speaker 2: Okay, hey where they stuck the head in that toilet--in that cold.  See you could, as long as you had the hot water you was cool to get that lye and stuff out, but man don't put no cold water and then you got to the point where you could do your own hair.  Aw, man, I'm, I'm--we called it conk (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, my, my daddy use to tell me he said it, it depends on how long you could stand it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stand it--to straighten your hair.
Speaker 1: They would ask you: "Can you hold--you cool, you cool, you good?"
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 482244
Speaker 1: Okay so the hair thing, go ahead tell us about it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, the conk, the Conkaline.  You had duke conk, duke conk was pink and then you had--yeah they had different types of conk you dig and, and depending on how much money you had and then you used the conk and you put it up in the dresser (laughter) and then 'til you needed to fire up again (laughter).  Now some of the boys like my buddy Joe Vincent [ph.], he never fried his head, but we fried, died, laid to the side, to the bone, I--had I'd of been thinking I'd a brought--had I'd known what you guys needed, I got a picture--I got little waves and stuff man, but and then, then as you got older you could relaxed it.  You didn't use no conk, you relaxed it you know what I'm saying (laughter), but man, you--I'll never forget like you're talking about that period where, "Brother can you hang on?  Can you hang on?"  And it burns and then you get a big ole scab man.  You was cool but you had that scab, and the girl haw, he conked his head, and then you'd be laying in bed at night sleeping and you turn over and the pillow sticking to your head (laughter), and my mama, "Boy, what's that on pillow?"  "Aw, nothing mama."  It'd be that pus coming from them scabs and sores man, and then, then you'd, you'd go to get the touch up and he'd be, he'd have to put some Vaseline or something on it to loosen it, to get it--the hairs away from the scabs man (laughter) and then you'd be bleeding and shit man (laughter).
Speaker 1: Trying to be cool (laughter).
Speaker 2: Trying to be cool, man.
Story_ID: 482245
Speaker 1: So anyway, okay so you had a little record contract down in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] so you're going back and forth between San Diego [California] and L.A. now?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so you're, so you're working up here on gigs?
Speaker 2: Johnny Otis Caravan [The Johnny Otis Rhythm and Blues Caravan].
Speaker 1: But, but you still gotta go to school?
Speaker 2: Gotta go to school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Five Four Ballroom [Los Angeles, California], you remember the Five Four?
Speaker 1: I've heard of those things.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Five Four Ballroom was, was--it was the place.
Speaker 1: Where was it located?
Speaker 2: In, in--shoot, Central.
Speaker 1: Oh, Central Avenue, yeah.
Speaker 2: Central Avenue, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now was Central Avenue as heavy as it had been because, 'cause it--maybe ten years prior it was real heavy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, naw, no it was.
Speaker 1: Starting to change.
Speaker 2: Decline, yep, yep.  We use to go down there for soul food and, and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: The Dunbar Hotel [sic. Hotel Somerville, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Dunbar Hotel, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had all those areas but, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was--I wasn't--I mean I heard of it later on but it was the Five Four, because you were scared to go the Five Four.  I never--hey man in the Five Four one night we was down there and a cat, just kicked me in my chest (laughter), (kicks) yackle.  I didn't do nothing (laughter) you know, but hey man it's--I mean now you see in San Diego we had the Trianon Ballroom [San Diego, California].  That's where I was telling you about James Brown and Jackie Wilson and The Coasters and The Platters and, and all those people would perform, so up here there was a circuit you know after I moved up here, but the Five Point [Five Points, San Diego, California] you kind of--you kind of scared to go down on Central.  You know until I got it to the loop you know what I'm saying.
Story_ID: 482246
Speaker 1: Now how did you get here, get here to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] permanently?  How did that happen for you?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, there's a period where I went in the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Abraham Lincoln High School, San Diego, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High school.
Speaker 1: In '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay now did you know what you wanted to do when you were?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As time--you see if you hung in San Diego [California] you either, you ended up knocking up a chick, having a baby, and you couldn't leave because everybody got a job at Rohr Aircraft [Rohr Aircraft Company; Rohr Inc.], North Island [Naval Air Station North Island, San Diego, California].  See the war--man in San Diego you had, you had them nets, you drive down harbor--what is it, Midway Drive?  You have them nets hanging over so the Japanese wouldn't know where to bomb.  I remember that stuff, man.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that what kind of net are you referring to?
Speaker 2: It's a net, it's a camouflage so maybe they think it's mountains, but they had it over the aircraft factories because you, you had North Island, Rohr Aircraft and, and maybe a couple of others and that's where hey, you know they're building, building that stuff for the war, you dig?
Speaker 1: And, and you were really aware of it during the Korean conflict [Korean War] right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah 'cause some of my boys went.
Speaker 1: Now this was World War II [WWII] you're referring to right?
Speaker 2: I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were young, you were up in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember this stuff you know, and hey man you, you get a--but then probably bam it was over with 'cause I remember, I remember the newspapers "Japanese Surrender," you know what I'm saying?  You, you know you don't--now that's when I was you know younger, but you know you don't realize like you do now.  Now, and now the Korean and Vietnam [Vietnam War] that's another thing.
Speaker 1: So now it's '56 [1956] you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: And you said you gotta get outta here or what?
Speaker 2: I gotta get outta here man, my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.] had, he had a baby, and he use to sing with the band.  I told you he could sing like Jesse Belvin, Jesse Belvin come to San Diego, him and my brother would duel, like have little duels.
Speaker 1: So he, so he's, he's kind of stationary now here?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he can't go.
Speaker 2: He can't leave, man my daddy [Leonard Elston, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And your sister [Evelyn Elston Olier]?
Speaker 2: My sister, she was still there.  She was going to college and stuff or, or--no she's still in high school, she's two years.  But you know that, "Boy, you better marry that girl" (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: That kind of a thing.  I--hey I am so blessed 'cause hey it could've happened to me.  I might of left, I don't know, but I split.
Speaker 1: So you went to where, where'd you go?
Speaker 2: I went in the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went in the Air Force, went to, to Lackland Air Force Base [Bexar County, Texas].
Speaker 1: Lackland, and that's where now?
Speaker 2: That's in San Antonio, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I spent my--did my boot camp there, then I went to Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 1: How did you like the service when you got in?
Speaker 2: I hated the service, I--I mean I'm coming straight from the streets, and I didn't like the, the discipline you know and then I couldn't do them socks (laughter) and then you know you had--you ever been in the service?
Speaker 1: No, but I've heard.
Speaker 2: Okay you know you got whatever you call the things where you--
Speaker 1: The cots when you go to bed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but then, and then they have inspection where your socks better be rolled right, your drawers better be rolled right and that thing better--they come and bam (laughter).  So they'd kick it over and your shoes better be shined, and, and some of that stuff cats would were gung ho and man and then, and then the cats, they called them TI [sic.], DIs [drill instructors] or TIs, the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] is, is TI, and we were DIs and them cats be out drinking all night and he'd come, "[HistoryMaker] Harry Elston, (laughter) you know Elston--." And man I, I was ready, I was ready to hey man, I was ready to go down you know but I hated the service.  As a matter of fact I got kicked out.
Speaker 1: Tell us about it?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so we go to.
Speaker 1: What was your job while you were in there?
Speaker 2: I was administrative, administrative.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a medical clerk and that's what--I had taken typing in high school up at Point Loma [Point Loma High School, San Diego, California] and--so I could type and, and see, it wasn't too many brothers you know, you'd be a cook or this or that or this, but stuff was opening up.  And so I--after basic I went to Seattle, Washington at Pier 91 called 2355 Perpron (unclear).  My job was, cats would come over, before they go to Alaska and Thule [Thule Air Base], Greenland and I'd have to type up their orders and I, I learned to type on this machine called an addressograph you know where they type the dog tags and stuff on.  Hey man, I could fly, you know 'cause I'd--you be on an eight hour shift and I worked from like twelve to eight and I'd sleep for four hours, and them other four I'd (demonstrates typing), that machine would be smoking Jack, and see on this base you had a [U.S.] Navy, Air Force, [U.S.] Army and Marines.  So it was kind of cool and cats had specialized jobs and stuff, plus you had a bar on there.  See in Seattle you have--on Sundays you can't drink.  Back then you couldn't drink man, so everybody was coming there.  It was cool, if you had the money you'd go on down there and hang out, and but I'd be shipping these cats.  It was kind cool because they would come in.  I guess that's how I learned you know public relations or just dealing with people and, "Hey man, how you doing brother, where you going?" such and such and such and I'd try to get their stuff right and I'm flying (demonstrates typing).
Story_ID: 482247
Speaker 1: Then now Seattle [Washington], Seattle was a trip.  Now, I ran into some prejudice there.
Speaker 2: Tell us about it.
Speaker 1: It's like--I went to s-, there was a ballroom down where all the acts would come to perform.  Seattle was wide open, that's where Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and them was raised and stuff, and so man I'll never forget.  I'm with this cat from Guam.  His name is--we called him San Antoine [ph.].  His name was Joseph San Nicholas [ph.] and then had this white cat from Yakima, Washington.  So us three, we was the three musketeers.  So we went to see this show, so man after the show you'd go to this little coffee place over there and there was--I didn't know nothing about prostitutes and stuff like that, but I will never forget there was this, this Asian lady and man she was drunk and drinking hot sauce and stuff and I said, "Aw hey, hey, no, unh-uh, you know don't do that."  I'm nice guy.  I said drink this milk, I think I bought her a glass of milk, and so I think I'm paying for it and this couple of white cats were there and so his buddy said, "Well let's go man," he said, "All right, man, I'm just sitting watching this nigger."
Speaker 2: First time for you?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Hey man my hair stood up, what?  And I said, "Aw, hell no."  So we got outside and I said, "Hey man," bam.  (Laughter) He cocked me, Jack.  I went down to my knees and we started tussling, by that time the police was coming so everybody split up with you, but I said, "Damn I wasn't hip to that now." In Seattle I was stationed there for a year, and Seattle was cool, Seattle was cool.  We, we got around, I met some buddies there and had a lot of Asian girls up there.  You know I'm fine, maybe that's why I got my little taste, all due respect (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But and then oh, one time this cat, his name was Buford [ph.], big dude and I think it was San Bernardino [California], good friend, but he must've had some Indian [Native American] or something in him 'cause when he drank his personality changed.  But he was after this girl, he was after this girl and the girl chose the boy.  So I didn't wanna you know, but I said, hey, you know.  This boy here, big.
Speaker 2: Big Buford?
Speaker 1: He was on my case man, "Man I'll kill you, I'll--."  And drunk and stuff on the bus and stuff and s- oh lord, you know.  I didn't hang out with him no more.
Story_ID: 482248
Speaker 1: But then so after Seattle [Washington]--where'd I go?  Oh, oh, oh Northern California, still in the [U.S.] Air Force, Travis Air Force Base [Solano County, California].
Speaker 2: So now was there any singing at this point?
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot to tell you, in the, in basic training at Lackland [Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas] we doo-wopped our butts off. This white boy from Mississippi, he started singing with us, and what it was--hey man what was cool about it the barriers were broken down by the music, and man it was, it was--we might have had a couple of white cats singing with us and it was cool.  So, so then I go to Travis.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, now had you been--how old are you now would you say about at that?
Speaker 1: I went in I was seventeen.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were near your mom [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays]?
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay so you were.
Speaker 1: So, so Oakland, Oakland, chocolate city.  See people don't know that but that's the West Coast chocolate city.  A whole ex- new experience man, a whole new experience, and see when--you know when you're in the service you got these cats coming from the East Coast and they're dressing and stuff like that and--quo vadis remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean we, we you got more--you dig, but hey man I got two haircuts a week (laughter) and--stuff wasn't growing, you just got your two haircuts a week, and then your uniform was--I--pride in that uniform, I was clean, and, and then when you go off base you know, you know you dress in civilian clothes and I'm adapting this East Coast style and then on the weekends I'd come--it was fifty miles from my mom's in Oakland and, ands we was in like Vacaville, Vacaville, California that's where Travis Air Force Base--big ole base man.  Now my gig there, now that I think about it you know I didn't realize it then, but I worked for colonels and majors and stuff, excuse me, right on the fight line.  So that typing I had to type all of this stuff and for, for sending cats to Guam, to Enewetak [Enewetak Atoll, Marshall Islands], to Hawaii you know but you had to type up them orders and your stuff couldn't be, couldn't be wrong, and then you'd type it up then you'd go to the colonel for him to approve it then you send it out.
Story_ID: 482249
Speaker 1: Another experience, this, this, this girl--there were two, two white girls.  One was from New Bedford, Mass [New Bedford, Massachusetts].  Her name was Claudette Morenci [ph.].  She was gay, hair shorter than mine and then you had this other girl, freckle-face girl she was some, dead down south, dead down south.  So I got this little thing you know, man she turned out to be the coolest girl in the world.  She was so--I mean nice as she could be and 'cause it was three of us in that office there.  Now Morenci, Morenci Claud-- Claudette Morenci, yeah so I'm going, I'm going to Oakland [California].  That's when I got introduced to marijuana.  I was grazing in the grass then Jack.  So man I had this buddy, he's dead, damn Fred died, but he had this, he had an uncle.  His uncle's name was Cadillac Brown [ph.], gangster, Denzel [ph.], but I was his nephew's boy. He had his woman, her name was mamacita; she was a junkie.  She'd be, she would boost in the daytime, boost for her habit and shoot up, get her a little stuff you know what I'm saying.  So you know the boys on the base [Travis Air Force Base, Solano County, California], nice cats you know.  "Hey man," and I don't know how the weed thing came up but I brought some weed back from Oakland.  Now when you go on the base if you don't have no decal on your car, you can't drive your car on the base and I hated this, this guard there.  He didn't like me and I didn't like him.  So I'm coming back there with this weed (laughter) in my pocket.  The dude gives me a ride, we turned to be okay, and I get back man and--see now Travis [ph.], you still had this prejudice thing. There was this beautiful girl, white chick from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So you know she was in a different kind of a mix.  She was the finest thing on the base.  We was cool, we never had nothing going, but man you'd be walking from the flight line to your barracks, they'd be hollering, "Hey nigger what are you doing?"  Blah, blah, blah.  Yeah man, hollering out the window and stuff.
Speaker 2: Is--this is 19--?
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 2: Not quite '60 [1960], fifty--.
Speaker 1: Wait, wait, yeah, yeah maybe--I went in '58 [1958] and they kicked me out in '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: 'Cause--so it's '50s [1950s], '58 [1958], '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and I'm looking you know but then she was fine, but the she was cool, you know we was just friends and so man so--I bring this weed back to the base.  So we go in the room and we smoke it.  The boy is doing (shows tattoo).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had several girlfriends; this chick's name was Guinevere.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he's doing--this, this old pachinko.
Speaker 2: Yeah, old kind of tattoo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah man with the needle and the thread and the ink.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--too, too, too and he got to the end, I said hey bud I.
Speaker 2: Can't take no more?
Speaker 1: G-U-I-N-E-V-E-R-E, hell naw (laughter), you stop there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I was so proud of this tattoo and stuff.  When I got back to San Diego [California] the girl was pregnant, but it wasn't mine (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But so man I, I played ball, bad, bad ass.  We was, we was second team all-[U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: You're playing ball and you're singing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but not that much singing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In, in when I was up there, and man (laughter) so I'm, I'm on the ball field--now this was the night before I done brought this weed back and gave it to my boys and stuff.  Man, there's a baseball stand and I see these--I'm in left field, and I see these funny looking cars drive up.  See in, in the Air Force it's OSI, Office of Special Investigations, and man I'm out in left field and there was--you know the side was retired, I'm coming in and I'm kind of--I don't know, I'm just checking stuff out and they said, "Airmen Elston [HistoryMaker Harry Elston], they wanna see you." Unh-uh, put handcuffs on my ass (laughter) and took me.  So then we're there they're interrogating me.  I said, "I don't know what you talking about man," blah, blah, blah.  And then--now I'm working with this girl who I gave the smoke to and the other cat.  They might have been plants, I don't know she was giving up a discharge, a gay discharge, 3917 and I don't know to this day, I don't know what went down.  Maybe somebody saw something but they said, "Well, okay Airmen Morenci told us--."  I said, "Told you what?"  You know I'm, you know so they showed me--I knew her writing from working in the office with her.  I still didn't cop.  They brought her in and she said, "Yeah, Harry--," you know boom, bam, straight to the stockade (laughter) twenty-eight days you dig.  I ain't never been in no jail in my life you know.
Speaker 2: And now you're in a military jail.
Speaker 1: In a military jail man.
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight days.
Speaker 1: Twenty-eight days (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 482250
Speaker 1: --Explain that, how, how was that for you?
Speaker 2: Actually, actually man I adapted, mentally I must've been eighteen by then, and I knew that I was wrong and it's hey (laughter), you do the crime, you gotta do the time, and I'd be out.  Now dig it, I'm a baseball star okay and you'd be out on the--picking up papers and the cat's drive by, "Hey Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Elston]."  You know you wave (laughter) at the dudes and then I know I remember--I remember a guard telling me, "Now Elston you, you know you ain't gonna mess with this girl are you?"  He thought I was gonna kick, kick her butt or something.  I said, "No man it ain't worth that stuff."  Anyway so I did my little twenty-eight days and man they had, when, when I got back to the barracks they had armed guards each side of my door.  What is this?  They didn't find--I didn't have nothing, they found--it's probably some tobacco in a roach or something like that, but I'm I done copped to it now so you know--you know what is, but you know this is back in--this is probably '60 [1960] man.
Speaker 1: Okay about '60 [1960] now?
Speaker 2: Yeah if not--so they threw my butt in the stockade and they wouldn't let me play no more ball and then four or five months later they kicked me out, 3917, and I was embarrassed but my mother [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays], my real mother in Oakland [California]--that's when I just stayed there.  I didn't go back to San Diego [California] and hey she's--I'm her blood son you know what I'm saying and they had a little stuff going on (laughter), you know what I'm saying but--so there I got kicked out now [of the U.S. Air Force].
Speaker 1: So in 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so now you really can't go back to San Diego and tell your father [Leonard Elston, Sr.] that, that you're kicked out for that?  He's not trying to hear that I'm sure.
Speaker 2: My sister [Evelyn Elston Olier] you have embarrassed the family (laughter).  I didn't speak to her for two years, I didn't speak--we didn't.  When I came back my daddy you know he embraced me and stuff like that you know.
Speaker 1: Your sister said you, you've embarrassed the (laughter).
Speaker 2: You've embarrassed the family.  I tease her to this day, 'cause you know.  I can't go there but (laughter), but I wear her out, and my brother [Leonard Elston, Jr.], my brother didn't do no weed, he was a drinker.  He drank you know to this day.
Story_ID: 482251
Speaker 1: So it's 1960 and things are now, you're--what are you gonna do next?
Speaker 2: I'm in Oakland [California] so I got a job at Children's Hospital of the East Bay [UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, California].  See because I couldn't apply for these other types of jobs.
Speaker 1: Because of 3917.
Speaker 2: 3917.
Speaker 1: That's dishonorable or?
Speaker 2: Undesirable.
Speaker 1: Oh, undesirable.
Speaker 2: Undesirable, you know but back then you basic--you could've--that was like a--what do you call it when you run?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave] and stuff like that and but I got a job, my uncles both of them worked at the--they were janitors, so I got a job washing dishes.  The Children's Hospital of the East Bay which turned out to be cool because they had student nurses (laughter), and then the player (laughter) that I was, hey you know what I'm saying.  I have a little, few numbers going on there you know what I'm saying, but I did that and then I went to college.
Speaker 1: But before you get there, okay and now that's in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay I have some research that says also there was a limo--a limousine driving job?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's here.
Speaker 1: Okay that's here okay.
Speaker 2: With The Temps [The Temptations]?
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, but '60 [1960] so, so you go to college, what school do you go to?
Speaker 2: Oakland city college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--Oakland styling city college, we was smoking weed and, and styling and driving them big cars to school (laughter) every day man.
Speaker 1: What was your supposed major?
Speaker 2: A supposed--administration, something in administration, but baseball.  This is when, this is when the scouts were looking at me, and, and to this day, there was this guy named Bobby Jaspar [ph.], he played--I was playing second, he was playing short [shortstop], they switched us.  He went to play pro, pro ball and I, I was kind of bad, you know, and but I had to work.  You say, hey, hey grandmamma's and them (laughter), they didn't--it ain't like you jus- they, they couldn't see you know like the.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Like you know mama [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] didn't mind--daddy's [Leonard Elston, Sr.] oh, that boy gone make some money, yeah son, but it--no boy you'd better.  You know so I couldn't, I couldn't do that then.  So I played ball around there with my daddy, against my daddy and but there was no music.  Now, that's when I got into, really got into jazz.  Aw man in San Francisco [California] the Jazz Workshop, the Blackhawk, aw man, this was when San Francisco was, aw man it was the thing man and I'd go see Horace Silver, Miles Davis, Cal Tjader, Cannonball Adderley.  That's why years later when I did Cannon's show man I'm still in awe--Nat Adderley [HistoryMaker Nat Adderley, Jr.], John Coltrane.
Speaker 1: Wes Montgomery.
Speaker 2: Wes Montgomery, I use to see Buddy [Buddy Montgomery], Monk [Monk Montgomery] and Wes.
Speaker 1: The Montgomery Brothers.
Speaker 2: The Montgomery b- hey man, look at you, look at you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm sitting like from me to you and you go to the Jazz Workshop man.  We have weed and stash your weed on the outside in case you get busted and I had a MG [MG Car Company Limited], convertible MG and my little East Coast tweeds and caps and stuff, man I was cool (laughter).  Then--
Speaker 1: Did you meet any of the jazz cats personally, did you meet?
Speaker 2: Not 'til later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got a Miles Davis story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but, but then the cats in the neighborhood they had a little band so I brought a flute, couldn't play a lick.  These cats (imitates orchestra) but they let me jam (imitates flute) (laughter) you know so that, that (makes sound) you dig, but that's when and Berkeley [California], Berkeley was happening man, Strawberry Canyon and the Lake Maridus [ph.], Oakland.  Hey man, Oakland was the bomb, Jack and it was, it was a whole new experience for me because it, see it was a West Coast flair, I mean East Coast flair, Oakland and then you had San Francisco and you know years later I played the Fairmont [Fairmont San Francisco, San Francisco, California].  I used to go over there man, but it was a whole eye-opening experience for me.
Speaker 1: And it was also moving into its civil rights thing around that time too right?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah, oh man Huey [Huey P. Newton] and let me see, let me see.  Oh, I gotta show you the book, but yeah definitely, the Panthers [Black Panther Party], aw man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is the '60s [1960s] so you're in college, you can't play ball and you can't--can't play ball and work at the same time.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So what did you do then?
Speaker 2: Okay, I moved to Berkeley and I'm working at the hospital and then this--my roommate, a cat named Charles Lee [ph.], he's dead.  He was a commercial artist, so we said, "Hey man, let's go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]."  So we hopped in the ride and moved to L.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, so I think that's my, my chocolate city experience.
Story_ID: 482252
Speaker 1: So you and your roommate decide that it's time to get out of chocolate city [Oakland, California].
Speaker 2: Chocolate city and moving on down to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay so you come back now you had experience 'cause you had been here many times before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I hadn't, I hadn't--
Speaker 1: You were younger?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I could--I didn't know what was happening.  We moved over, over near SC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] in this room, big old room.  And like I said he was, he was a commercial artist, and he got a job right away.  I didn't, man he, he was supportive and then and then he--this girl--he knocked this girl up and then he had to you know.  So I'm a burden, he--you know but I'm looking for jobs every day man, it was getting rough you know I'd go--we'd go over to my uncle's--over in Compton [California] to eat and stuff like that.  So man, I finally get a call for a job for Kaiser Permanente medical group, so I'll never forget this.  I had on my little suit and you know back in the day you had them pointed toe shoes?  I never knew what a corn was.  Man, I'm going for this job man and I go and you know the zones that you transfer (laughter), I didn't have enough money, then it was fifteen cents to make the zone change.  So they left me off, let me off on La Brea [Avenue] or something like that, it's, it's--so I have to walk to 3rd [Street], Beverly [Boulevard].  I'll never forget it Beverly and La Cienega [Boulevard]. Man that's a nice little trek--
Speaker 1: Nice little hike.
Speaker 2: --Jack with them pointed toed shoes on and I get there--sweating was running. (Laughter) They hired me, so I'm on Edgemont [Street] and Sunset [Boulevard].  So that was my first real gig.  Now remember--
Speaker 1: Now what was that job, what was it?
Speaker 2: A medical records clerk.
Speaker 1: Okay you're a little experienced on things like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah you know what I'm saying, but now prior to that you know you can always get a job as a, a bus boy or something like that.  So we were working at the Tail o' the Cock [Los Angeles, California], but that wasn't steady and that, and the place went down because all the brothers was there, they was stealing silverware (laughter).  The man, the man's stuff was depleting every day you know, but I got my little medical records clerk.  This was on Beverly and La Cienega.  This is where I would, you, you know the area?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: There's a, it's a drugstore there and I'll never forget one day, who drives up in a convertible, Diana Ross.  "Oh, hi how are you?"  She gave me a little play you know, but I didn't know what to do and Connie Stevens she was in there one day.  I got her little autograph and stuff, and, and years later I met her with Eddie Fisher when they were married.  I didn't you know, "You remember me?"
Speaker 1: So this on--the area now is called the Miracle Mile, isn't it?
Speaker 2: The Miracle Mile, well naw the Miracle Mile is Wilshire [Boulevard].
Speaker 1: Oh, 3rd and Beverly?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, 3rd and Beverly so by the Beverly Center [Los Angeles, California] now where, where, where all that is in the Beverly Center--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and all the big shopping center is now okay.
Speaker 2: Miracle Mile is all--always was--Restaurant Row.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, that's where Matsuhisa is down that way, Lawry's [Lawry's, The Prime Rib] and Benihana's [Benihana] but and Tail 'o the Cock was down there.  So I get this job there and then they move it, this was on Beverly and 3rd then they moved it to Edgemont and Sunset.  So I'm working there man, I must've worked for a few years and--
Speaker 1: This is 1961?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Damn man (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 482253
Speaker 1: I wor- I was working there and that's where I met--that's when I met Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore].  Now do you wanna hop to that?
Speaker 2: Tell us about the limo driving job with The Temptations?
Speaker 1: That's later.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: You want me to tell you now?
Speaker 2: No, let's go ahead and, and let's stay here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay the progression, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, so the--'cause that's a whole thing with Maverick's Flats [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and Jim Brown and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm, I'm working there and we go to a party one night and Floyd [Floyd Butler] sing 'Going in Circles' and another cat, a guy who I knew from San Diego [California], he dead.  A woman killed him in Alaska and--let's see.  See that knuckle there, we was fighting, bam.  Hit him, the knuckle is right there.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah my buddy, you know how that is and so we go to this party.  That's where I met Lamonte and so--we something was playing and started doo-wopping.  "Well, say man let's go out in the car," and--so we went out in the car.  Floyd had this big old Cadillac.  We're out there doo-wopping and stuff and "Hey man that's--," you know blah, blah.  So Lamonte said, "Well hey man, here's my address and phone number you know, come by sometime."  So I liked the vibe and went over there and we ended up roommates and I've been knowing him over forty years.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Lamonte was cool?
Speaker 1: Oh, Lamonte was cool, plus Lamonte was a photographer shooting all them fine ass girls (laughter) and now, now we was.
Speaker 2: Now, now was he already at Jet, was he doing some stuff for Jet?
Speaker 1: None not Jet, he was doing, he was doing stuff for the Miss Bronze California Beauty Pageant.  That's when, that's when I don't know when I met Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] and Fritzie [Fritz Baskett].  The group called, you know you got the Hi-Fi's in there right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's, that's when that started.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we moved over on Budlong [Avenue], 46th [Street] and Budlong called Hobo Flats.  The original Hobo Flats and lord, lord, lord we had it going on there, Jack.
Speaker 2: So basically that, that was the place for the, for the in-between job bachelor to come c- ?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, now I was still working and man I'd go to work and I'd come back in the morning, I was working nights, and I'd come back in the morning draws be over there, champagne glasses be over there, and I'm--but I'm going to work 'cause I gotta pay this rent and Lamonte he--see they had, he had a photography studio.  You probably heard this (unclear) man it's called Halmont Graphics.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he had the studio going, and see a photographer you can always work shooting them weddings.  Lamonte would shoot two and three weddings a weekend.  So he got that money, but, but that's the nucleus of the Hi--where the Hi-Fi's started.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So you and Lamonte lived in this place?
Speaker 1: Live--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Who else is in it, just you and Floyd?
Speaker 1: No this cat named--this cat--a lot, a lot of cats crashed there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But there was one gentlemen, he dead. His name is Booker Griffin [Booker Griffin, Jr.].  Now Booker, Booker's the one who introduced us to politics.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying?  He was, he was a politician, and he ran for office and Carl Stokes, Carl--yeah Lewis [ph.], I met Lewis the other weekend, but Carl Stokes and then we're, we're at Hobo Flats and Booker brings over Jim Brown.  That's where I first met Jim.
Speaker 2: Now this is, must be big for you because you are an athletic buff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And here comes Jim Brown.
Speaker 1: Here comes Jim Brown, "Hey big baby what's going on?"  And we hit off, we hit it off and then Jim is still playing ball, so man we're going to the Pro Bowl and, and all these kind of.
Speaker 2: You got a buddy in the NFL [National Football League].
Speaker 1: Hey, hey and then later on I meet all these other cats, but Jim--but you see, Jim dug us 'cause we had the finest girls in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], okay.  And I'll never forget Jim was, he wasn't no square or nothing like that, but see we had, we had these knit pants with bell bottoms, and you know you're little stuff be showing you know (laughter) and we'd buy one or two pair.  J.B., he'd buy the whole rainbow, you dig, and then, then we were doing the Miss Bronze Beauty Pageant, and after that, the party would be at our house.  Need I say more?  Now you figure all these fine girls man.
Story_ID: 482254
Speaker 1: So in '62 [1962] were, were you around when, when Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] met Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that 'cause I know he said to something to you about it, he had to say?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know exactly you know but Marilyn was like seventeen, fine and her daddy, both her mama and daddy was doctors, they lived in Bald- we ain't never been to Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] in our life.  So, but she sang so we, we kind of hooked up with Fritz Baskett and his St. Louis boys you know that's why I got hip to the St. Louis boys connection and, and we use to play football we used to--Manual Arts High School [Los Angeles, California], we'd climb over the fence and rack and I'd get my boys from San Diego [California] against the boys from St. Louis [Missouri], we'd call it the Wine Bowl (laughter) after, after the game you'd climb back over the fence, boy you'd be--shoulder hanging down go to the house and drink that wine.
Speaker 1: Thunderbird, and--
Speaker 2: Oh hey, Repel [sic. Ripple], Silver Satin, white port and lemon juice.
Speaker 1: It was about a quarter a bottle, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah man, but so we had the Wine Bowl, so then I don't exactly, the--Marilyn, Marilyn would probably tell me more so but we met Marilyn and see over there was Big Ron Townson [Ronald Townson] used to sing with The 5th [The 5th Dimension], a cat named Richard Truelove was, was who was Lamonte's brother-in-law, he could sing, a cat named Johnny Gold [ph.], a cat name McFarland [ph.], and--
Speaker 1: There was talent all in the community?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah man, and so we had--and our place was the spot you know.  We had, we had a cat named John Cook, he's a photographer, he lives in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] now, and John be shooting them nudes (laughter).  And then people, some people knew Stevie--one of these girls knew Stevie.  She, as a matter of fact she ended up writing a song for Stevie and then this one girl.  I was sweet on that white girl, I was fi- she was fine and I was sweet on her but she was in love with Lou Rawls, man.  So, so they lived right there on Crescent Heights [Boulevard] and I'll never forget this, we went over there and stayed all night.  I didn't get nothing, (laughter) so we come back and this girl tries to commit suicide.  Man, and, and the other girl called me back so I went over there man blood and stuff is everywhere.  Now, she had a sister that was dating this black cat who was a lawyer.  Now instead of her saying, "This is what happened, and this is what happened," she kind of clammed up, man they took us straight to the Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] sheriff's department and put us in jail.  So I'm sitting there man and I'm thinking I said, "Wait, wait I ain't done nothing," you know the girl we patched her up and I took her over--she had taken some pills and also tried to kill herself, so, so anyway they me, put us in jail man, and I said, "Wait naw, hell naw."
Speaker 1: Here it is 1962, '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Three [1963] yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And you're in jail, in jail on some charges you really don't know nothing about?
Speaker 2: Hey.
Speaker 1: In L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: In L.A., so I called a cat I said, "Hey man let me tell you what happened."  I told him what happened and he said yeah, okay, okay.  They let me out, she still getting chesty 'cause she got this brother who's her boyfriend who's an attorney.  I don't know what she was trying to prove, this was her sister, but so they--like I said they took my butt to jail, and Lamonte and them laughing at me and carrying on, but that's, that's when we first hooked up with Marilyn.
Story_ID: 482255
Speaker 1: And Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] and Florence [HistoryMaker Florence LaRue] both, Florence used to sing with us.  We had trio, me Florence and Floyd [Floyd Butler]; Ron Townson [Ronald Townson], me and Florence.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the group that you--what are some of the names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We never had no name yet.
Speaker 2: You, you just sung?
Speaker 1: Yeah we just sung and kind of experimenting you know and then it hooked up to the Hi-Fi's.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was Lawrence Summers, Fritz Baskett, [HistoryMaker] Lamonte McLemore, [HistoryMaker] Harry Elston and Rex Middleton.  Now Rex Middleton he was, he had the Hi-Fi's in St. Louis [Missouri].  He was older than us but this cat could do them voices and stuff and so that's when the, the nucleus of the Hi-Fi's started.
Speaker 2: So was it a serious endeavor or was it just something you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No it was--we sang six-part harmony.
Speaker 2: So it was time now for, time for music for in your life or, or--okay?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes yeah about.
Speaker 2: Is this about '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're still working at Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente] though, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm still working at Kaiser, yeah.
Speaker 2: And got a group on the side?
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we're getting, we're getting these little gigs you know here and there.  Now Floyd, Floyd Butler; Floyd was our driver, and Floyd had a Fairlane 500 [Ford Fairlane 500] convertible, with vibrasonic sound (laughter).  So our outfits were red sweaters, white shirts, black shoes and black pants, we was the Hi-Fi's, but we was getting a name for us man, we'd, we played this club on the Sunset Strip [Los Angeles, California] for months.  Marilyn said we only played there two months, we played at--it was called Mr. Conton's [ph.] and that where we kind of got established.  Now, I'm hopping a little bit, but I'm still before that limo.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So this is when Ray heard about us.
Speaker 2: Ray Charles?
Speaker 1: Ray Charles.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there was this gentleman--he dead.  He just died, matter of fact he died right after Ray.  He was with Ray for like forty years and his name is Vernon Troupe.  He--his brother, his cousin Quincy Troupe.
Speaker 2: The great writer.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The great jazz writer and historian.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so Vernon always wanted to work for Ray, man and he'd work for Ray for free.  See, I remember when Ray was bamming, slamming the, you know big time and I'd be over to the apartment, man.  His valet's name was Herb Miller and so Ray liked us and brought us down to the studio.  We recorded this song--you probably got it there?
Speaker 2: I can tell you.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: 'Lone'--'Lonesome Mood.'
Speaker 1: Bam (high fives interviewer) (laughter). 'Lonesome,' boy 'Lonesome Mood' and, and then that's when we hooked up and started going on tour with Ray and--
Speaker 2: And that song was kind of like a--'cause you, you were a six-part group right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So it, it was a very harmonic?
Speaker 1: All jazz, very--and six parts you, you know that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 482256
Speaker 1: Hey, hey man one time, one time there was a club at the end--end of Washington [Washington Boulevard], not the It Club [Los Angeles, California].  We used to sing at the club called the It Club.  John, Jack McClain's, J.T. McClain's It Club, I got to tell you a story about that.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna just take a shot, was that club called the Parisian Room [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 1: Parisi- no, no it wasn't the Parisian Room but, but--
Speaker 2: In that area?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Parisian Room was a little small you know; you had trios and stuff in there but we had six people singing, man.  I'm gonna think of it in a minute because Aretha [Aretha Franklin] and all them use to play there and one time Lambert [Dave Lambert], Hendricks [Jon Hendricks] and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And Ross [Annie Ross]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it might've been Bavan [Yolande Bavan] at this time.  I think Annie Ross had split, but Bavan--I think Bavan was Indian, Indian girl, but we came down there one time to see 'em man and we smoked (laughter).  I mean well you know?
Speaker 2: It was two different things correct, actually?  What you all were doing and what they were doing, because Lambert was--?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You all were doing bebop vocals?
Speaker 1: Yeah, man.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, oh okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well wait a minute, wait, not bebop.
Speaker 2: Vocalese as we call it?
Speaker 1: Yes, okay, okay you know.
Speaker 2: You all were pre-Manhattan Transfer?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes singing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Singing) "It's a blue world, dream when you feeling blue" and all that kind of.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that harmony stuff.
Speaker 2: It was tight.
Speaker 1: Tight man, (singing), "Long as were gone now" we're singing that stuff and we came down there one night and sat in, and--
Speaker 2: Jon Hendricks was there?
Speaker 1: Jon Hendricks yeah man, yeah--man I'm in awe too, you know what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: One, one of the greatest vocalists of all time.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, I was in the [U.S. military] service with his brother you dig?
Speaker 2: He was from Toledo.
Speaker 1: Toledo, Ohio?  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Now, now Oh- Dave Lambert got killed.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Changing a tire on the freeway, that hurt my heart man, but anyway you know, you know a lot of little egos, but we had six parts, we, we did good.  We got a gig there, I'm going to think of it sometime, but--then we played the It Club, and then there was this place called the Adams West, then it changed to the Kabuki Theatre [Los Angeles, California] and on the corner of Crenshaw [Boulevard] and Adams [Boulevard], so anybody in town from Miles [Miles Davis], to Cannon [Cannonball Adderley] to Dorothy Donegan when you finish your gig you know you hit--you make some money, you go to play the Adams West.  We were like the house group there.
Speaker 2: So that would've been on the northwest corner?
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, north, northwest, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause right now it's a church, now.
Speaker 1: Church, okay, golly yeah, okay, it use to be the Adams West and then the Kabuki.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a Latino church now.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hey man we use to we played there every weekend, Friday and Saturday night, so we were known around L.A. [Los Angeles, California] man, the Hi-Fi's and then we played with The Crusaders, all these--they--and, and aw man I've seen so many acts there you know, that's why--boom, boom you know.
Story_ID: 482257
Speaker 1: So prior, be- before we get too far you had a story about Miles [Miles Davis], that, that--is this after or before then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come up to that later on.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So now you all are the Hi-Fi's?
Speaker 2: Hi-Fi's with--Ray [Ray Charles], Ray changed the name to The Vocals.
Speaker 1: Okay and you are all on and you go on a tour with him for about a year, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a couple of years yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and just went all around the county and--?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And how about international, did you--?
Speaker 2: No we never did, no played Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] that's my first trip to Carnegie Hall and I was thrilled.
Speaker 1: So now all of a sudden you're in a singing group making money, singing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you really hadn't planned on it though did you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  It just evolved.
Speaker 1: Were you still trying to hold your job down, too, at Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente]?
Speaker 2: No (imitates beheading himself) (unclear), 'cause I mean you know going on the road and stuff like that and I'm trying to think how I supported myself.
Speaker 1: That was about '64 [1964].  So now, now let's talk about it 'cause nowadays you know the entertainment business we all know how much it's glorified, the money and the traveling.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us the truth about that going on the road with Ray Charles?
Speaker 2: Hey, hey Ray Charles, I, I, you know--all due respect Mr. C, but Joe Adams who's still living--I mean we was making $125 a week, out of the $125 a week--
Speaker 1: Did you divide it up between six people?
Speaker 2: No, no, we was making apiece but you paid your hotel and your food (laughter), all right?  You know man we--
Speaker 1: So it was gone.
Speaker 2: Hey man--now, we had the planes you know and Ray, had a plane called the Buzzard.  You probably know this man; Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] probably mentioned that.
Speaker 1: He had his own plane?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the Buzzard and he had his, he had his own, a little Piper, a little, whatever you call them.
Speaker 1: Piper Cub [Piper J-3 Cub] for himself, a Learjet (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep which--not no Lear, a Piper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It crashed and we had three--I need Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] to tell, two or three near misses.  One time we were in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and the snow and stuff--how you get on the wings?  Yeah, "Okay, we're taking off."  Now we had black pilots.
Speaker 1: Black pilots in 1964?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, black pilots.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Tom McGarrity [Thomas McGarrity].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, yeah give us some of their names?
Speaker 2: His name--he's from Pittsburgh, Tom McGarrity and this other cat, Tom was the chief pilot and then there was, then later on there was this cat who flew.  I can't think of his name right now but he got lost in, in the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: So we had people who were, who were non--at this point in '64 [1964] they were non-military pilots. They were pilots that had been, well, well possibly prior to.
Speaker 2: 'Til they got their training.
Speaker 1: But they were flying commercial.
Speaker 2: Commercial, yep.
Speaker 1: And private, and private runs for people.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and Tom, Tom McGarrity. Tom's family owned a funeral home and he was, he was a nice looking cat, as they say, light skindeded (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you all are taking off from Pittsburgh going to?
Speaker 2: Take Pittsburgh man, we (makes sounds) the plane goes up, (makes sounds) bam, (makes sounds), and it stopped and we got out, the big gulley down there man.  We'd been, we'd been dead man.  I got some pictures, I got some pictures.  You ever hear of Clarence McDonald?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Clarence keyboard, Clarence was with us.  Clarence started with us; that's a little later on, but a friend's story.  And so, and then one time we were--I'll never forget it, never--Knoxville, Tennessee.  He's like, "Yeah you gotta make this landing here, something's wrong."  The cat went over to the engine and opened it (makes sound) all kind of oil, you thought it was Arabian (laughter).  All that oil flew outta that thing man, and I think we had another little near miss but--
Speaker 1: So Marilyn is with you all?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so the, so the beauty queen is on the plane with you all?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes you see--I don't know if I should say.  Anyway, Marilyn was Lamonte's lady, and Fritzie [Fritz Baskett] was my lady, okay.  So Fritzie was seventeen, Marilyn was like eighteen.  She's still going to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], her mama say, "Well Ma--." Oh, oh, so we--oh, this is cool, this is cool.  Redd Foxx, now I know Redd, Redd Foxx's wife, they had a, a singing group.  It was three, three sisters, they were fine, Dimples and Peaches and such, and he was married to Peaches.  And I knew his brother, his, his brother-in-law from San Diego [California].  So when we got to Chicago [Illinois] the Sutherland Lounge [Sutherland Jazz Lounge, Chicago, Illinois], Redd was playing there so we go to see Redd, and it was a beauty pageant there.  It was doing something there.  So Redd got us a job there, Marilyn's mama, "Girl you get your--out at Sutherland who?  You better get your butt home and go back to school."  We couldn't do the gig, we was mad at Marilyn boy.  So we come on back to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] but, but Redd, that's where I really met Redd 'cause he'd come up to our hotel.
Speaker 1: You'd hang out with him?
Speaker 2: You'd hang out--yeah man.
Speaker 1: What kind of guy was he?
Speaker 2: Redd was cool, Redd was funny and in--Lamonte knew him first and he respected us you know but Redd was cool, got us the gig man.  No telling what would've happened to the Hi-Fi's you know had we got that gig there back east you know.  So like I said we played Carnegie Hall, you know you got pictures over there, I'll show you and Clarence McDonald was our musical director--
Story_ID: 482258
Speaker 1: It says you all were taking lessons from a vocal coach.  Who was this vocal coach?
Speaker 2: The vocal coach his name was Giuseppe Balestrieri.  He was cool, but his breath stunk (laughter).  "Sing, sing--." Oh, god brother (laughter), but Giuseppe was cool.  That was.
Speaker 1: And he was more concerned with you all having the right situation versus--he didn't care about stars, he wanted you to sing right?
Speaker 2: Sing right, yes, "Sing the note correctly, breathe correctly" you know, and then it was a gentleman--he gone--his name was Rene DeKnight and he was, Rene worked with us too but he was very, very instrumental in The 5th Dimension when they got their start, that's another.
Speaker 1: So in those days people just didn't--even if you had the natural talent, people, people believed in studying.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and developing and honing the craft beyond just the natural raw talent?
Speaker 2: Yeah because at Lincoln High School [Abraham Lincoln High School, San Diego, California] I sang in an octet.
Speaker 1: Eight people?
Speaker 2: Eight people and you know you had to, you had to know what you're, you had to know what you were doing.
Speaker 1: Wasn't it--where you couldn't follow somebody else's note and.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, man (laughter), so your ear, your ear tightens up you know and I--hey man I'm not real, realizing all of this stuff, but when we got there with Rex [Rex Middleton] and started singing these augmented.
Speaker 1: Fifths and things.
Speaker 2: Fifths, yeah man and six part, you know what I'm saying and singing in the cracks you know.
Speaker 1: So you all were prior to a Take 6 or a Manhattan Transfer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, man, yeah.
Speaker 1: You all were doing it back then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, man, yeah.
Speaker 1: There was a group I don't if you ever heard did--of, of the Double Quartet from Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: The Double Six of Paris [Les Double Six].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah the Double Six of Paris.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we use to.
Speaker 1: They were doing it all in French, all that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes we use to listen to you know compare you know what I'm saying and, hey man, hey we was bad, we was bad man and took pride.  I mean hey, well Mr. C, Ray [Ray Charles] you can't be short stopping out there with Ray, and you got David "Fathead" Newman.
Speaker 1: In the band on tenor?
Speaker 2: In the band, Clay, Clay, whatever it's Clay--I can't think of Clay's.
Speaker 1: James Clay?
Speaker 2: James Cl-, boy, James Clay, Phillip Guilbeau on drums from New Orleans [Louisiana].  That's the first time I went to New Orleans and had some of that file gumbo and Mason's Motel [Crescent Palms Motel, New Orleans, Louisiana], and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A total experience man, a total experience, you know.
Story_ID: 482259
Speaker 1: So is that '64 [1964] and then '65 [1965] what happened with the groups and, and The 5th Dimension and the Hot (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, '65 [1965], now Larry, Larry Summers, he's from St. Louis [Missouri].  Larry, I--if he sees this, he's an instigator, but Larry had a heck of an ear, too.  Let me go back a little bit, Rex [Rex Middleton], Rex could throw 'em down, Rex could throw 'em down and, and but, but Rex was--yeah man we'd play a club and get ready to get paid, and Rex then drew the money (laughter).
Speaker 1: And is out?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), well you may as well kick me in the butt 'cause I ain't got no money, that kind of attitude.  I remember one time, time we were doing a gig in Los Feliz [Los Angeles, California] or somewhere and we were coming back and we're driving and I had just copped some weed.  The police stop us and the police say, "Pull over there, pull over there."  And then when they, when they saw the sweaters we still had on our outfits and I go this weed in my pocket.
Speaker 1: Once again (laughter).
Speaker 2: Some more--so they said, "Oh you guys are, you're in a band."  Said, yeah, yeah, yeah; "Okay you know we were just, you know you had a tail light out so we were just stopping you," and he says, "You have any warrants on you?"  "Oh, no, no we don't have no."   He said, "Well, let me just run, let me just run a check on you guys."  This was Rex Middleton, Larry Summers and me.  He came back: "You don't have no warrants, hun?"  "Rex Middleton, three warrants; [HistoryMaker] Harry Elston, two warrants; Larry Summers one warrant, get in this car (laughter)."  They took us straight to jail over there on Pico [Boulevard], Pico and Rimpau [Boulevard], and so we're in this jail.  We're trying to get bailed out.  So Rex got the most warrants, but he talked us into when we did get the money, "Hey man y'all--."  He called us: "Hey sweetie, you, you get me out I'll take care of the rest."
Story_ID: 482260
Speaker 1: So now you're, you're, you're on Pico [Boulevard] and Rimpau [Boulevard] in the lock down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Rex [Rex Middleton] has an ingenious idea?
Speaker 2: But let me tell you about, yeah, yeah Rex has an idea, let me--I'm gonna go back.  It's like we're--before the cat came back with the warrants, "Elston [HistoryMaker Harry Elston], you got, Rex you got three--." I have this bag of weed, so man I'm trying to get this weed down my leg and try to be cool.  I got it down.  It hit the ground and there was some cardboard, I just covered it up before they took us to jail.
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right so we go to jail, so Rex is fast talking, "Yeah man look, I'll get you guys out man, just you know let me get out," blah, blah then I'll get the money.  Rex went home and went to sleep.  Me and Larry [Larry Summers] stayed in there another twelve hours.  We was hot when we got outta that jail hey man (laughter), you know--yep.
Speaker 1: So you got outta jail, I mean and back then these things were minor infractions, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, yep, yep.
Story_ID: 482261
Speaker 1: So we're going into '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: And there's something called the Versailles [sic.] or the group, the Versailles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Versatiles.
Speaker 1: The Versatiles, okay.
Speaker 2: Now The Versatiles, that was Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] and them.  It was like, it was like--we weren't singing by this time I'm working in Watts [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is like '65 [1965] now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I guess.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] so, so you off on the road with Ray [Ray Charles], that probably left, left a bitter taste in your mouth?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes exactly.
Speaker 1: About singing?
Speaker 2: Exactly, as a matter-of-fact Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] was working in Watts with me, Booker Griffin [Booker Griffin, Jr.], Booker got us jobs over there.
Speaker 1: Where were you all working?
Speaker 2: On Westminster Neighborhood--on 103rd [Street] and Beach [Street] in the dead of Watts.
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], now what was this, this agency you were working for?
Speaker 2: Riots. It was called the Westminster Neighborhood Association.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is pre-riot?
Speaker 2: Pre-riot, riot, riot right around the corner (laughter), okay?
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: So man, it's like, they called us bourgeois 'cause we lived on the Westside [Los Angeles, California].  So my, my gig--my gig was to go to Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California] down Nickerson Gardens [Los Angeles, California], and recruit kids to come to school there.  The catch was we pay 'em, pay 'em to come to school.  So that's when I met a lot of the cats from over there.
Speaker 1: How did you pay them?  There was government funding?
Speaker 2: Government, government funding.
Speaker 1: What was it like? I mean what, what did they pay them?
Speaker 2: Money--it might have been thirty dollars a week.
Speaker 1: So their parents was like yeah, you going to that school (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, and get 'em off the streets and Marilyn was an administrator, I was an administrator, Booker Griffin, Daphne Dumas with her fine self was an administrator, but they called--I mean think of this, you know Marilyn and them back in the day, Daphne and Marilyn both fine and we coming, Marilyn driving her little, little brown Pinto [Ford Pinto] over there and then we, we do our gig and then we'd go back to the Westside.  "Hey, Westside," and ragging on us you know.  We ended up--well we got a few of the girls--we had a few girlfriends over there so we ended up renting a house in Watts.
Speaker 1: You and who now?
Speaker 2: Me and Booker and a couple of other cats.  We, we just--they chipped in money.  Caldwell Black [ph.], Caldwell was a bad basketball player but we would rent houses over there.  Okay you, you want a little attention--is she in the mix?  Oh--you see, she in the mix?
Speaker 1: No, it's all right.
Speaker 2: Okay, quiet--and so anyway so we worked there and then the riots boom, the riots started man.
Speaker 1: Now, now you were there in the--now you had--you'd been in a singing group and traveled the world.  Now all of a sudden you're working in an agency?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a riot is getting to break out.
Speaker 2: The riots broke out man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that day and that experience and?
Speaker 2: I remember, I'll never forget this, now we had moved from Hobo Flats and we were living in Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] and we was stealing (laughter), we was stealing boy, and--are we getting ready?  But man, it was like four of us in a car, over there near Manual Arts [Manual Arts High School, Los Angeles, California] on Vermont [Avenue] and Vernon [Avenue], man them National Guards said get outta that car.  The cat open your legs, and he pow, pow.
Speaker 1: What exactly started the riot, do you recall?  I, I mean of course for you know for those who don't know the actual (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This one, it, it had something to do with the policemen (unclear), I can't remember exactly.  Watts riot--but I'll think of it probably after you leave but I can't think of it right now, and man the cat open your legs.  I said they're open man.  I'll never forget he had a billy club, bam, bam--hit me, and he put an M1 rifle right in my temple.  Man, I, I don't know why I wasn't scared, and they looked in the car.  We were like coming from the movies or something and came down there to see what was going on?
Speaker 1: You worked there every day pretty much anyway though still, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep but this was--yeah, me and Bobby [ph.] stayed, we were still working there I believe, but.
Speaker 1: This is '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, but anyway man, and then (laughter) we stealing tuxedos (laughter).  They're breaking into everything and, and we're coming behind 'em.  Man I had boatloads of, of tuxedo pants, forty-five in the waist, I couldn't wear em.
Speaker 1: So, so wouldn't you say that was easy because pretty much you had been a good kid all your life and something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But wouldn't you say that in the midst of turmoil and stress that the average person.
Speaker 2: Opportunistic.
Speaker 1: The average person their, their whole mentality changes?
Speaker 2: Except for Floyd [Floyd Butler], Floyd's woman wouldn't let him out the--, "You'd better not go out there," and that punk stayed home (laughter).  We.
Speaker 1: So you had all the tuxedo pants?
Speaker 2: Tuxedo, man and I'll never forget stop or I'll shoot.  I'm hurdling fences (makes sounds).
Speaker 1: You're an athlete you're cool.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah with tuxedos (laughter).  I ain't stop.
Speaker 1: Because, because you're thinking you can use these and so forth?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm gonna sell them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna sell them to my boy's daddy, he work at, at Tail o' the Cock [Los Angeles, California].  So gave, gave it to his--later on gave 'em to his--the boy's daddy, he ain't paid me yet (laughter).  I could've got shot  you dig?  So, so the Watts riots.
Speaker 1: The riot's going on--
Story_ID: 482262
Speaker 1: And now, Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] still wants to sing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah and--
Speaker 1: And take pictures?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So he forms a group called The Versatiles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Versatiles. Okay, now Booker Griffin [Booker Griffin, Jr.], this cat named Corky [ph.], Corky's grandmamma had a house over on 9th Avenue in Jefferson [Jefferson Park, Los Angeles, California].  You ever, you ever heard of Mean's Tacos [ph.] over there on 5th Avenue and Jefferson [Boulevard]?
Speaker 1: I've seen that area, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was just twenty five cents apiece, boy the best tacos in the world and so Ron Townson [Ronald Townson]--you know who Ron is right?
Speaker 1: 5th Dimension [The 5th Dimension], yeah.
Speaker 2: We called him Sweets.  Ron lived on 11th Avenue.  So man I would see Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] and Lamonte going over there and Billy, Billy Davis [HistoryMaker Billy Davis, Jr.].  Now I remember when Billy first came to town.  Billy had a conk, I tease him about.  Billy had a conk, some overalls and a guitar, you dig and I came back with Lamonte's brother Duck [Donald McLemore] from St. Louis [Missouri] and I met Billy then you know and, but they, they were going over to Ron's house, and I told Floyd [Floyd Butler]--Floyd was working for the Urban League.  I said, "Man what they doing over there?"  We didn't know but they was practicing.  So, remember Mike Warren [Michael Warren] the basketball player?  Michael--I'm jumping a little bit.  Michael use to laugh at us when we were rehearsing at the house and then we had microphones and he'd laugh.  I, to, to this day I say un-huh Michael you was laughing at my butt, but lo and behold Floyd and I, Floyd was working for the Urban League.  So I said, "Man you know we ought to, we ought to put something together."  So the girls would come through there and they'd have some musical background on their application.  Now Jessica, Jessica Cleaves, Jessica was seventeen.  I'll never forget Jessica couldn't see, her glasses were that thick and there's always cracked, you dig it and hanging down and stuff (laughter) and then we knew Barbara Love [Barbara Jean Love] but I didn't know she could sing.  So they came over and we hooked up and that was the nucleus, Clarence McDonald was keyboard player.
Speaker 1: And what were you all calling this group now?
Speaker 2: We didn't have no name yet.
Speaker 1: Okay so you all were doing that, but around the corner Lamonte had something else going on?
Speaker 2: The Versatiles.
Speaker 1: Okay and I read somewhere that they sent him to Detroit [Michigan] with that, to go to see [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy or something?
Speaker 2: Did not, he didn't go to Detroit, he went to Motown [Motown Records] right here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so, so that was later on?  It had to be later because they hadn't got here yet--
Story_ID: 482263
Speaker 1: So it's 1965 and you've decided to put another little group together, you and Floyd [Floyd Butler] and, and some- who else was in this band?
Speaker 2: Well Clarence McDonald was there, he was our, he was our keyboard player and vocal arranger, and Jessica Cleaves and Barbara Love [Barbara Jean Love].  So thi- about this time this is when we were living over on, on 9th Avenue and Ron Townson [Ronald Townson] was around the corner they was sneaking and singing.  And we said, "What they--you know what they doing?"  But we just kind of got our little stuff together and, so, so about this time, Jim Brown, Jim had been on the scene.  So Jim would come by the house, and he'd hear us singing, and he'd bring Bill Russell would come by there, Fred Williamson, all these cats you know played ball and stuff so Jim would say, "What you gona do man?"  I said, "I'm trying to do this."  He said, "Well don't just try," he said, "Do it."  So okay and Jim said--I said, "Hey (unclear) you gonna have to pay to Clarence McDonald for rehearsal," and we didn't take no money.  Okay man, so he would pay Clarence fifty dollars a week.
Speaker 1: So now did Jim Brown decided to be the producer or the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah our manager.
Speaker 1: The investor, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was checking it out to see how far you know if we was really serious, but you know when you start paying this money (laughter) and you know and I'd have to hound him down to, to get this money you know every now and then, but he would pay, and matter of fact Jim bought me my first Cadillac.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So--so and then pretty soon he explained that he was starting this production company called the BBC.  It stood for Brown, Bloch and Coby.  Now Coby [Richard Coby] was a lawyer, a big time lawyer there 9255 Sunset [Boulevard], I'll never forget it.  Rogers, Cowan, Paul Bloch was--worked for Rogers, Cowan and Brenner at that time and then of course Jim Brown.  So man hey hooked this stuff up and, and we had instant publicity because he worked for Rogers and Cowan, and we would, we would fart and it would be in the papers you know.
Speaker 1: So was there a name of the group at this point?  Was there a group name?
Speaker 2: We, we were--once we started P- Paul said, "Well you guys gotta have a name."  So I'll never forget we was with Paul's big ole house in Beverly Hills [California] and I came up with Distinctive Friends and then they tossed it around and Barbara came up, "No, we should say Friends of Distinction [The Friends of Distinction]."  Bam.  That just clicked (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It rolled better, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it rolled better, and that's how that got started.
Story_ID: 482264
Speaker 1: Let's hold up for a minute, at the same time where you're putting The Friends of Distinction together, you started something called the Negro Industrial and Economic Union [Black Economic Union]?
Speaker 2: Okay, Jim Brown, Jim Brown, Booker Griffin [Booker Griffin, Jr.], John Daniels, owns Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California], it, it was his idea but they needed Jim's name and, and--
Speaker 1: Celebrity (unclear).
Speaker 2: Celebrity, yes, yeah, and you see Jim was you know we had offices out there on Vermont [Avenue], 82nd [Street] and Vermont and Walt Frazier, not Walt--Flea, Walter "Flea" Roberts [Walter Roberts] and, and Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabar] came down there every now and then, but Mike Warren, Curtis Rowe, all these cats who played basketball for UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and after the summer they would come and work for Jim.  So I met all these cats, you know we was cool.  So Jim had this organization; it was the NIEU, Negro Industrial and Economic Union, and when--at that particular time you had CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and green power and all this stuff, but Jim would focus on the money.
Speaker 1: Because one of the reasons because that was '66 [1966], '65 [1965] Watts [Los Angeles, California] had been torn up at this point (laughter) right?
Speaker 2: All tore up into the floor--from the floor up, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was time to do something?
Speaker 2: Something and he dealt, he dealt in you know getting the money, and he had the celebrity--you know.
Speaker 1: In your opinion was--is there a big distinction the way athletes, professional athletes use to--especially since they had big money but not nearly the money that's out today, but they still had more of a passionate desire to do something?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, much more because, hey.
Speaker 1: They didn't have half the money (unclear).
Speaker 2: Half the money because in, in the off-season (laughter), they'd be working down there to you know, you know.  Walt, Walt went to--played for Miami, you know the Dolphins [Miami Dolphins] and but I like I met John Wooten and, and all these football players, man you know.
Speaker 1: Bill Russell?
Speaker 2: Bill, big Bill, Bill--I, the, the pictures it, it--we had this, these plaques that they, that Paul [Paul Bloch] had made up.  It said Chuck Connors is a friend of The Friends of the Distinction.  Tony Curtis is a friend of The Friends of Distinction--Patty Duke, Bill Russell.
Speaker 1: So you all had some serious (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hey, hey. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --endorsements for this group, The Friends of Distinction?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what's--
Story_ID: 482265
Speaker 1: What's going on, on the other side now with, Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] and Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] and Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Davis, Jr.] and all of them, what are they doing while you all are doing this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay, they're doing their thing, and they recorded as The Versatiles okay and by this time, they, they were working with Johnny Rivers--what's that record label, Jimmy Webb and that thing, but this is a little prior to that.  They hadn't take off, but it was funny because we both selected Laura Nyro songs.  We didn't know, and they didn't know and so we went to--I'll never forget they went to the Troubadour [West Hollywood, California], and I'll never forget Jessica [Jessica Cleaves] say, "Damn we gonna blow them out the water."  I said, "Jessica be quiet you don't saying stuff like that" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Especially these are friends of yours?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter).  Hey Jessica was eighteen then, you what I'm saying and so but hey boom, they took off like a rocket, but we wasn't far behind okay with, with Paul [Paul Bloch] and that influence and stuff and so of course we were compared and stuff like that you know.
Speaker 1: Okay so both groups are out and, and we'll just call it friendly competition.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So now what year, this is '66 [1966] or so and tell us about John Daniels and the Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Maverick's Flat; Maverick's Flat is a historical landmark as we speak.  Now this is when I was the limo driver for The Temps [The Temptations].
Speaker 1: Okay tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Okay, Maverick's, we're down there building Maverick's--bam, bam, bam putting wa- (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you are all are actually putting it up?
Speaker 2: Putting it up, putting the wallpaper on the wall and decorations.  I don't know if you've ever been in there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, you know that, that stuff is thirty, forty years old.  So, The Temps open Maverick's, I am the limo driver.  John had a couple of Jaguars so we couldn't get 'em all you know in the--?
Speaker 1: In the Jag?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah so I'd take David [David Ruffin] and Eddie [Eddie Kendricks] or somebody you know.  They would, they play Jordan [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], Centennial [Centennial High School, Compton, California] and another school out there and then they would--after they'd play the schools then they come to Maverick's.  So I'll never forget it that's when I met Blue [Melvin Franklin], you know he dead, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis Clayborn Williams] and all of 'em, and we was cool and they didn't know we sang or nothing, and so I'm driving--I'll never forget one time, we're out at Jordan High School.  Now the kids are going crazy and I had no idea of, of how mobs and crowds could get 'cause we didn't have that kind of stuff with Ray [Ray Charles].
Speaker 1: Because at this time Motown [Motown Records] had several stars.
Speaker 2: Hey, hey Stevie [Stevie Wonder].
Speaker 1: Diana Ross, Stevie, The Temptations.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves, all, everybody.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, so the plan was okay look, when you finish--this is at, at one of the high schools, I vividly remember this.  When you finished the gig you'd go back to the gym, you know, you know they had gyms there. Then when the crowd cools down you come in the car and I'll pick you up.  David Ruffin--goddammit if David didn't take his butt right to my car, and here come all of these kids just swarming.  I didn't know what to do, they breaking off the antennas.  It's a wonder I didn't kill somebody.
Speaker 1: This is John's car (laughter)?
Speaker 2: John's car, I floored it (makes sound) and left the rest 'em.  I had to get David outta there man, and David, David always did have a little ego thing going, you know, yep, yep.  So that, that's when I was their limo driver and I met them and--.
Story_ID: 482266
Speaker 1: Now I want to discuss Maverick's Flats [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California] because you know I've seen it a hundred times and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, from what I've heard I've talked to people like, like say [HistoryMaker] Robert DeBlanc--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he, his perspective is a few years later--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --like as we enter the '70s [1970s], but according to him that was the spot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], that was called the Motown of the West so to speak?
Speaker 2: Hey man it was--as a matter of fact Crenshaw [Boulevard] was the black strip.  Hey I remember, I mean Marlon Brando, Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar], Robert Culp, Bill Cosby, these cats were young.
Speaker 1: Tony Curtis.
Speaker 2: Tony Curtis, they all hang out there--Jean Seberg, Michael [ph.].
Speaker 1: On Crenshaw?
Speaker 2: On Cren-
Speaker 1: At Maverick's Flat?
Speaker 2: Maverick's Flat, Jack, no alcohol.
Speaker 1: A club with no alcohol?
Speaker 2: You had a dress code, and it was like--I'll have her; I'll have her (laughter).  You know I told you I was a player (laughter).
Speaker 1: And it was all about the music, though really?
Speaker 2: Oh, now coming back to the music I mean, oh Gladys [Gladys Knight], Funkadelics [Funkadelic], The Temps [The Temptations], The Tops [The Four Tops], everybody played there.
Speaker 1: And I've heard that also John Daniels had a, had an eye for talent, he would see people.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, John Daniels.
Speaker 1: And see people and say, "Now that's a group right there?"
Speaker 2: Yes, yes you probably--a lot of people don't realize is, you know this the clap (claps) (makes sound).
Speaker 1: Soul clapping?
Speaker 2: Soul clapping--that, that evolved from Maverick's Flat, Maverick's every night jam, jam man and of course now you know them, them beauty pageant girls I was telling you about, they would be there.
Speaker 1: I heard Don Cornelius, Cornelius would come down with a 'Soul Train' move and say, "Okay that person dance, and that person dance."  He would pick 'em for 'Soul Train'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah now this was, this was after me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Like I was on the road and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Right so you were, you were on the front part of it?
Speaker 2: Front part, but now speaking of Don, I knew Don in Chicago [Illinois] when 'Soul Train' was on three networks, and me and Don was cool, you know we'd sit up and talk that.
Speaker 1: It was in black and white?
Speaker 2: Black and white and his--that's before he got his teeth, 'cause he was (laughter), he was a little raggedy about the grill.
Speaker 1: So, so you all had this going down and you got a lot of the, the late '60s [1960s] groups and the club is hopping.
Speaker 2: The club is smoking.
Speaker 1: It's, it's--everybody's there and it's the place to be.  All the celebrities are wanting to come down--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and I guess back then paparazzi wasn't a big problem.  Nobody you know, people kind of--
Speaker 2: Well you had, you had, you had then them there but, but it wasn't no, no way like it was today and then you--and see John ran a tight ship and, and I don't know if you've ever been there, and you had went upstairs--man they had rehearsal halls and everything, John had office.  See, John also made movies; John was a movie producer.
Speaker 1: He's a producer.
Speaker 2: He, he was a star of the movies.
Speaker 1: So you, him and, and Jim Brown?
Speaker 2: Booker, Booker Griffin [Booker Griffin, Jr.]; Floyd [Floyd Butler] was there--Floyd and I sold the first subscriptions to the organization, knocking on doors.  Now you figure this back in the '60s [1960s] and you're asking somebody for some money (laughter) and you got Roy Wilkins of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all these cats coming from a different perspective.  But Jim was, was out there, you know he was in the movies and he had made the transition, and I use to go, I use to go on set with him.  I've been on the set--'The Dirty Dozen,' 'Ice Station Zebra,' 'Rio Conchos,' you know that's where I got, I got my little feet wet, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: In the movie business?
Speaker 2: In the movie business, and he brought me my Cadillac, so I had to take it you know, Rock Hudson and all those cats you know but they respected Jim tremendously.
Speaker 1: So now the organization had, we'll say their own venue of Maverick's Flat because from what I was told it was the second black-owned business on Crenshaw?
Speaker 2: Well, well you had, you had barbershops and stuff like that, then you had Total Experience [Los Angeles, California] up the street and then there was another club over in the Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] we use to hang out there, but Maverick's had the class, now the Total, the Total was cool but it didn't have the class or the clientele that the Maverick's had.
Story_ID: 482267
Speaker 1: Why do you think that's been so hard nowadays to recreate across the country?  There, there's no place really--there are a few spots that you know are trendy, but what do you think has happened to make this--that's not the case anymore?  What you all described and I've heard it from several people and it was cool, it wasn't a bunch of--I'm sure it wasn't a bunch of fighting and things like--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no no, but one night I'll never forget this.  See, see Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California] is here and the Black Economic Union office was right adjacent to it, and this cat--I knew this cat and he was a nice cat and he was, he was in there.  He was macking to this girl and he went maybe to get a Coke [Coca-Cola], it wasn't no drink, a Coke or something, and another cat was macking to her and she kind of you know went this other cat.  So the--I'll never forget, the door to the economic union was open and we're standing out there and the first dude, that dude got his--he had a Corvette.  He got his Corvette and he drove up on the sidewalk like I was telling you in the news, and he hit that dude.  I saw the dude flip, whoa bam, he landed on his head.  A big old knot came on his head and this guy (makes sound), and he sped off.  Later on, the same cat who did that shot--coming out Stocker, shot his mama-in-law, and his daddy-in-law and his wife. He didn't--
Speaker 1: How much later on?
Speaker 2: Years, a few years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it's, it's like--and then, then the riots we'd be over, over Lamonte's [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore], and this cat would bring food, but he always had money and stuff, but what he was doing, he was ripping off cars, them eight tracks and, and selling 'em but he would bring--'cause you know we--you had a curfew in the riots, you, you know you couldn't get outta there, and this cat would--and we, I said years later me and Clarence [Clarence McDonald], 'cause it was Clarence's friend.  I said boy that crazy fool you know?  And the cat went to prison and stuff, so, so I'm working for Earvin [Magic Johnson]--this is another story, Magic--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm at Golden Bird [Golden Bird Chicken, Los Angeles, California] and I'm getting some chicken one day and I see him, I said, "Aw man I hope this cat don't see me."  "Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Elston]--" (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was years later though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But still you knew.
Speaker 2: Hey man, how you doing?  Yeah, I didn't tell I worked right across the street.   Hey that crazy fool, I don't know where he is, but Maverick's man, it's like--I remember one night Marlon Brando came down there, and this girl I ended up--we lived together and she was Mi- Midora [ph.] and she didn't take mess.  If you weren't dressed right you ain't coming in here.  Marlon, I don't care who you are.  Marlon and Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar] came--it was Marlon or Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones]?  It might have been Quincy--one of 'em, but anyway they came and she wouldn't let 'em in.
Speaker 1: So at that point Marlon Brando was in the same level as, as Brad Pitt or somebody, it was that kind of a start (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, yes, and, and you know we was hippies, we was--he's probably high smoking whatever.  So, so somebody said do you know who that was?  That was Marlon Brando.  So this cat, a friend of mine named Henry Kinja [ph.] he ran down the street.
Speaker 1: To catch the guy.
Speaker 2: Catch him, brought him on back in there and cooled it out you know, but see then and then Jim [Jim Brown] owned a part of Maverick's for a while and Jim come in there, go to the box office (imitates flipping through bills) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Businessman (laughter).
Speaker 2: Businessman, now there was this guy, there was guy.  You remember back in, in Mississippi where they had this--these cats they didn't take no mess, I forget what?
Speaker 1: There was a movie called the 'Deacons of Defense' [sic. 'Deacons for Defense'].
Speaker 2: Deacons.
Speaker 1: Of Defense.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, well this cat, his name was Ernie [ph.] and man Ernie--Big Ernie came to town Jack and he was a Poncho and 'cause he'd come up, they had to get him out of Mississippi or they gone kill him and he would come in there with Jim, he was Jim's shadow, and it turned out he later on in life he turned out to be (makes gagging sound), but anyway it was that kind of a thing you know and Mav- hey it was the bomb; it was the bomb (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now--
Story_ID: 482268
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now you all singing also at Maverick's Flats [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California] while?
Speaker 2: Not then, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so you just working for the organization?
Speaker 2: Working--yeah Black Economic Union (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a couple, couple of years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: So '68 [1968], '69 [1969] the music thing kicks back in for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's, that's when we put you know The Friends [The Friends of Distinction] thing.
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the, the 'Grazing in the Grass' and, and 'Going in Circles' and--?
Speaker 2: Okay there was, there were, there were a group of--Jessica [Jessica Cleaves] introduced us to Jerry Peters, Skip Scarborough, Anita Poree, Greg Poree, David, David Crawford, oh John Barnes [ph.], and they, they had like a little clique.  They were young.
Story_ID: 482269
Speaker 1: So now you've been doing Maverick's Flats [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California] for a couple of years and now the singing group is back together and it's, and it's Friends of Distinction [The Friends of Distinction]--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you all decided what you're gonna pick it back up now and--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so, so we, we did The Friends thing and we got the name, so we went in--I wrote lyrics.  I don't what attracted me to 'Grazing' ['Grazing in the Grass'], but I, I wrote these lyrics and it was called 'Flaking in the Grass.'  So Stew Levine [Stewart Levine]--they were head of Chisa, Chisa publishing company [Chisa Records].  So we went in did a demo, I paid for it.  I must've had the two dollars, 'cause I paid for it, Clarence McDonald's playing and you trio--probably three cats, but I took it over there and--, "Flaking in--? Get out of here."  And I said--my feelings, my little feelings were hurt plus I had spent that money and so then I changed flaking to grazing.
Speaker 1: Where'd it come from?  You just don't--it just came.
Speaker 2: Flaking?
Speaker 1: No grazing, after you had decided to change it?
Speaker 2: From the record.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You know from Huey, Huey.  It was written by Philemon Hou, South Africa and Hugh Masekela of course is South Africa.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So and, so when I came back with grazing, they, they loved it and that was, that was cool you know.  So boom, we did the demo and that's--so okay we did that and then Jim [Jim Brown] was really putting the BBC [Brown, Bloch and Coby] together and so we--there was this, this night club called The Daisy [Beverly Hills, California].
Speaker 1: Hold--I'm going to hold you right there for a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now that concept to take an instrumental song and put some words to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was the concept that you had to borrow from the early things like John (unclear) when they would take the solos?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So you had a--so a lot of groups might have been straight R&B and I understand but you had a one up with your jazz experience, right.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: So you put words to a--to an instrumental song.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nowadays you know with the so-called smooth jazz they're doing it in the other direction?
Speaker 2: The opposite way, yeah, yeah, the.
Speaker 1: The opposite way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah the music to lyrics.
Speaker 1: You know but you are ahead of your time, you put lyrics to music (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: You know, that--okay that, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So go ahead.
Story_ID: 482270
Speaker 1: So th- there was this club called The Daisy, it was in Beverly Hills [California], and this, this club was the bomb.  I mean Frank Sinatra, Peter Lawford, the Rat Pack and all them cats, Sammy [Sammy Davis, Jr.] and so Jim [Jim Brown] and Paul [Paul Bloch] they set it up for our, our showcase.  So we had on these little, we had some bad little outfits some little vests and white shirts and the girls had on what they had on.  So we went down and threw down.  Man, they loved it.  The next day I'm talking to six record companies, and Jim sent me out by myself. Not Floyd [Floyd Butler], and I, I don't know what to say to these people, man.  So it was just a vibe thing, it was a vibe thing and after that maybe it was the second, I got a little chesty you know I kind of, yes, uh-huh and (laughter).  Hey, we done had six record companies, you must be saying something.  So went up to RCA [RCA Records] and there was this guy, his name was John Florez, he was a staff producer, but John was laid back and quiet and stuff, and I liked that demeanor about him.  So I--so later on that evening Jimmy said, Jim--his, his favorite word, "What's up big baby?"  And I said, "Well man I like, I like RCA. I like John over there."  He said, "Hey."  So we signed with RCA, now dig it, we--and here's--now at this time Jerry Peters and Clarence McDonald and Greg [Greg Poree] and all these people, you know Skip [Skip Scarborough] we're writing songs, they're writing songs for us and of course 'Grazing' ['Grazing in the Grass'] and man we go (laughter)--this is the scary part.  We go--been singing with just the keyboards right, so we go into the studio.  It's a booth, and what we're doing is, is you know just laying down stuff so the band you know how it is, get the feel for the stuff, but there's a hundred musicians.  Man my little booty tightened up so tight boy, man (laughter) and you know these (demonstrates playing violin) you know what I'm saying and the French horns and the oboes and you know--hey, we did it.
Speaker 2: And they're on the clock.
Speaker 1: On--yeah, aw man a hundred musicians you know.
Speaker 2: And they're on the union clock.
Speaker 1: Hey man, now the arranger, his name is Ray Cork, Jr., and matter-of-fact I, I was gonna look him up in Phoenix [Arizona], 'cause both John and Ray are from Phoenix and I never met him.  Never met him, nobody had met him.  We never heard his music until we went in the studio, and did that album, and he th- he threw down.  To this day people talk about his arrangements man.
Story_ID: 482271
Speaker 1: And so you're--you all are all of a sudden propelled into a whole new arena, it's for real now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hey, it's for--
Speaker 1: So now what's going on, on The 5th Dimension side, what are they doing at the time?
Speaker 2: The 5th--okay The 5th, we went to see them at the Troubadour [West Hollywood, California] and they would--this cat called Bones Howe he's a producer, and Johnny Rivers record company, Soul City Records and (singing), "You gotta go where you wanna go," I think that might have been--well they, wait The Versatiles did--when they were The Versatiles they had like a turntable hit around L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and stuff but when they got with Bones they changed--he changed their name.  I guess Johnny Rivers might've changed it and they, they kicking butt.
Speaker 1: Had you ever heard any stories, it's been told that when to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy when he was out here and Berry Gordy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Berry Gordy said, unh-uh.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yep Berry did--Hal Davis, and Marc Gordon.  Marc Gordon was, had--they were staff, both staff producers at Motown [Motown Records] and, and Marc ended up marrying Florence [HistoryMaker Florence LaRue].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But yeah Berry, "Get outta here," (laughter) you know that's, that just showed or go you know.
Speaker 1: Because he was in his style, he heard his style.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And that, that was a whole 'nother thing.
Speaker 2: Hey and we was, we was, I always call it CCCC, clean cut, colored kids from California.  That was us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were cleaner than us.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You dig, so, so but, but we, then, then it was ironic that they did the 'Stoned Soul Picnic' and we did 'Eli's Coming.'  I think we did another Laura Nyro's--Laura Nyro tune, but Billy [HistoryMaker Billy Davis, Jr.], they met Laura in New York [New York] and then 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] came out and we all went to see 'Hair,' and that's when they--Billy lost his wallet, and the cat MacDermot [Galt MacDermot] found his wallet in, in the taxicab in New York and says, Billy said, "Well I'll come and get it, but why don't you come to the show?"  And they--and they, the one who did 'Hair,' they heard "Aquarius" ["Medley: Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In (The Flesh Failures)"], they recorded it--bam, bam, bam.
Speaker 1: That's how that occurred?
Speaker 2: That's how that occurred.
Speaker 1: A lost wallet.
Speaker 2: Ye- a lost wallet, let, I'll let Billy tell you that.
Story_ID: 482272
Speaker 1: Now okay, so you have a hit, we know that, we know that 'Grazing in the Grass,' which I played a million times.  People ask you to play on a gig you know, "You play 'Grazing in the Grass?'" you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So, then after that a few months later you had another hit, now that was number--let me see can I get my facts straight here.  That went gold and was a top five on both the soul and pop charts in the United States, peaking at number three, right.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that?
Speaker 1: It went huge?
Speaker 2: It was huge.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then, but then 'Going in Circles' went beyond that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now who?
Speaker 2: Well, naw, naw, 'Circles'--'Grazing' went higher I think on the pop charts than, than 'Circles.'  Hey, you know okay who cares you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: But on the soul charts, 'Going in Circles.'
Speaker 2: Is that still going--'Going in Circles'--we didn't select 'Going in Circles' as a single.
Speaker 1: Who wrote that song?
Speaker 2: Jerry Peters and Anita Poree.
Speaker 1: Jerry Peters, right.
Speaker 2: We didn't select it, it was the public (laughter), the public made it a hit, and we had, they had to put it out.  See RCA [RCA Records]--when I talked to Cuba [Cuba Gooding, Sr.], Cuba, in Main Ingredient [The Main Ingredient] or, or New Birth or some of them cats, we always called RCA the, the act killer, 'cause they didn't know what they was doing, you know and then we got caught up.  Okay, you got 'Grazing' and, and you had the pop people, then you got the R&B people over here.  So they started fighting over us, but they--we still wasn't you know, we didn't what the heck was happening. We're working, working on the road; we weren't getting into no politics and that kind of you know messed up some things.
Speaker 1: Do you think that possibly you all were a bit more accepted in the black music--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: --than The 5th Dimension--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --because of songs like 'Going in Circles'?
Speaker 2: Definitely, definitely.
Speaker 1: Because what was their acceptance in the black, in the black populace, was it, they were glad to see 'em, but did they really feel the music but you know?
Speaker 2: Well, okay you had 'One Less Bell to Answer,' which is you know a big, big song.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But the exposure--I mean they had their own television show.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The exposure thing, that was it and then.
Speaker 1: The balloon song.
Speaker 2: 'Up, Up and Away.'
Speaker 1: 'Up, Up and Away' yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.  Now it's so weird, our first gig, and this don't happen, our first gig was with Tom Jones when he first came out of the box and we were six--we were six days at the Greek Theatre [Los Angeles, California] and that was (unclear) that was kind of shaky.  That means when I say that I mean we didn't what to--you know Tom Jones, but he selected us you know what I'm saying, and we went on a six-week tour with Tom.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 'Not Unusual' ['It's Not Unusual'] time right when he's, when he's.
Speaker 2: Oh, Tom was hot as--
Speaker 1: Huge.
Speaker 2: --little sisters (laughter).
Speaker 1: Black jumpsuit and all, he's all that right?
Speaker 2: Hey, hey, yep, yep, Tom was and he was a nice cat, nice cat. And then it was funny, I'll show you the book.  We closed after our little six days that we go on the road, The 5th are coming in there right after us man.  It was.
Speaker 1: Wow that's something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now let me talk about the song real quick because we know that royalties go around.  Hugh Masekela, did, did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and what did he say about you doing his song?
Speaker 2: Huey loved it.
Speaker 1: Because actually up to that point had he been a major--I mean he was in the jazz circles maybe, but.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--it just, well what it did or what it does (laughter), they thank--Hugh thanks me all the time.  Man, Philemon [Philemon Hou] he passed away.  Philemon was a little cat, nice as he could be.  I met him a few times you know and he was thrilled, but yeah, Huey told, he told Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore].  Lamonte told him, met him somewhere in the airport and he said, "Man Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Elston] said, you know, 'Thanks for letting him record the song.'"  He said, "No you thank Harry," you dig because it gave the song another, more longevity.
Speaker 1: So now you're moving into the '70s [1970s], and The Friends of Distinction are hitting it; they're doing stuff. Now you got the released 'Real Friends.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now at that point what was going on in the group because I think Charlene [Charlene Gibson] came in?
Speaker 2: Charlene--Barbara [Barbara Jean Love] was pregnant.  We did a, we did a promotional tour, before even--I mean it was after Tom, promoting we was six weeks.  Man we're going here and bam, bam, bam and then Barbara's little stomach boop.  She pregnant, so we had a bass player, Stan Gilbert, and we're looking for a girl, man we had to get a girl quick.  And he said, "Well I know this girl from Milwaukee [Wisconsin]" and blah, blah, blah--Charlene Gibson.  Gibby, Gibby came on the scene, fit right in. RCA--we're in New York [New York].  RCA had a brand new studio, it's--a studio that floated and they were advertising this, this studio.  So that's where we did 'Real Friends' album and that's when she did "Love or Let Me Be Lonely" and "Crazy Mary" and all of that stuff there.  So Charlene fit right in.
Story_ID: 482273
Speaker 1: Now in the '70s [1970s] music is changing now.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: I mean 'cause, it's, it's becoming a real problem for jazz artists at this point.
Speaker 2: Oh, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so because disco is coming in.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And another kind of funk, not just James' [James Brown] funk, but now it's getting.
Speaker 2: The Funkadelic.
Speaker 1: It's getting, it gets Sly and Family Stone [Sly and the Family Stone] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Family Stone, yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: People are mixing up Jimi Hendrix, the jazz--Miles [Miles Davis] had a record out 'Bitches Brew,' he's playing.
Speaker 2: Aw, that.
Speaker 1: He's playing all kind of electric music and how about Miles? You had a story about Miles.
Speaker 2: I personally want to hear that from my experiences with Miles.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, we're at--you ever heard of the Sugar Shack?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now the Sugar Shack is like everybody plays at the Sugar Shack in Boston.  I mean and, and Boston's so diverse, you had cats in the car (snorts), you know (laughter) doing that and shit.  So one night--oh, I one time, one time this, this is when I first got my taste of girls.  I sang, "Didn't I blow your mind--." Ah, man, oh lord have mercy Jesus, I had to kick 'em off.  So anyway Miles was there.  So Miles came in--Miles Davis in the club, Miles Davis in the club.  So after the show here comes Miles back to the dressing room.  "Hey man y'all some bad MFs man, yeah, yeah man, but you know man y'all should play some instruments and stuff like that.  Y'all wanna hit this?"  (Laughter) Wow.  So we sat up there and tooted up an eighth of cocaine with Miles man.  So Miles--I'm gonna keep it clean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Miles he says, "Man your, your bass player he's bad" something such you know.  Now the bass player played with L.T.D., his name is Henry Davis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He said, "And that girl over there," her name is Linda, he said, "I wanna do it to her, and I wanna do it to him."  But I (makes sound) you know (laughter) I didn't know what the hell to do.  Me and Floyd [Floyd Butler] looking at each other, so, so we done tooted up the man's cocaine and we going back to the hotel.  We're at the hotel and I'm putting my key in the door.  Who's two doors?  Miles is right there, the girl's with me.  So that's my Miles Davis story.
Speaker 2: I got you.
Speaker 1: That's my Miles Davis story.
Story_ID: 482274
Speaker 1: So your--the '70s [1970s] is coming on strong, 'Love or Let Me Be Lonely.'
Speaker 2: Yes, yes Skip Scarborough.
Speaker 1: 'Whatever' was another tune.
Speaker 2: 'Whatever', 'Whatever' was recorded in Las Vegas [Nevada].  We're playing The Flamingo [The Fabulous Flamingo; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and we would, we would do the gig at night and then come there, that's why we called it 'Whatever' (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Time Waits for No One'.
Speaker 2: 'Time Waits for--' Neil Sedaka.
Speaker 1: Okay so you all were having a string of hits now and the group is doing good.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: We go to 1971, 'Friends and People.'
Speaker 2: My favorite album.
Speaker 1: "I Need You" is on that.
Speaker 2: "I Need You."  Now that, that album there, that was just Jessica [Jessica Cleaves], Floyd [Floyd Butler] and myself but to me it was, it was you know your, your bubble gum stuff over here.  This was as Skip would say ethereal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back just a little bit to the, to the 'Going in Circles' that song nowadays still--you have people all over the world--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --trying to get up there and rolling on the floor trying to--let's talk about Floyd doing it.  Was Floyd singing lead on that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now that was a, that's a strenuous tune to do a lot, all of--you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah but from falsetto to baritone.
Speaker 1: Yeah from baritone back and forth, first of all for those who are not really musically inclined the range.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To go from baritone to a, to a straight false that was really up there, how did he deal with that every night on the road?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Floyd, Floyd was smooth, he--I got a joke, but I remember one night Floyd, we was somewhere and we was singing and Floyd's kind of easing out to the girls.  I said, "Butler, don't go out there."  He eased, they grabbed his ass and glasses was one way (laughter) you know, but, but you know one thing I can say about that group of people, the egos were--no egos whatsoever.  I mean, "I don't want to sing 'Circles' tonight."  "What?"  You know, "I don't wanna sing 'Grazing' ['Grazing in the Grass']."  We, we had--then we realized hey man this what the people came to hear, so you had to sing 'em, but, but everybody handled it, everybody handled it, everybody handled it quite well.
Speaker 1: And how was the love for other groups because at that time you had The Stylistics and what was his name from The Stylistics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who you're talking about, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah I mean you had some, you had some real talent, a lot of groups out.
Speaker 2: A lot of groups out.  Well, see I think I, think what kind of distinguished us was the crossover, you know now of course with The Stylistics crossover, but--crossed over but that was like--like we'd be in up in RCA [RCA Records] with The Main Ingredient, New Birth and that's when Donald McPherson, (singing) "Spinning around," you know it was before Cuba [Cuba Gooding, Sr.] okay, and Jimmy Castor Bunch [The Jimmy Castor Bunch].
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah Jimmy was up there man, Zulima [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, what Jose Feliciano, and then you--see, they didn't--they were classical, it was a red dot, the red label stuff you know and we were the first ones that kind of--John Denver, John used to open the show for us man (laughter).  I remember John bringing his first baby to the concert but they had to, they had to act quick because you had this classical stuff and then you had--Sam Cooke was there, Jesse Belvin was there, then you had some country, country artists over there, Elvis [Elvis Presley].
Speaker 1: And the whole industry was different at that point.
Speaker 2: Different, different.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, so here we come not R&B, we're crossover, so they had to, they had to get their little stuff together, but they messed up.  I'm sorry, they, they, they messed up 'cause they, they got into that political stuff and, and we were caught you know in, in the crevices man.
Story_ID: 482275
Speaker 1: So you're going through 'I Need You' and you all are doing all that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know 'I Need You' (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so within a short span you all had a 'Greatest Hits' album in 1972.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The 'Greatest Hits,' that, that's within a five-year period, wow.  So now, '73 [1973], you and Floyd [Floyd Butler] join Dianne Jackson and Daniel McCormick, Dani McCormick?
Speaker 2: Well I.
Speaker 1: 'Love Can Make It Easier.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Love Can Make It Easier,' that was, it was like, it was like things were a little raggedy, a little shaky, so we had a big meeting with, with RCA [RCA Records], and they say, "Man we want this, we want a fold out album," and hey man they was flying in cats from New York [New York] to photograph and everything.
Speaker 1: 'Cause back then it was very important the album cover.  I remember being a kid, the album cover was, was the whole.
Speaker 2: The, hey man.
Speaker 1: 'Cause Earth, Wind, and Fire had a mean one.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes now Earth, Wind and Fire I'll never forget, and I'm diversing a little bit but I remember we came off the road and Jim [Jim Brown] said, now this was Earth, Earth--they hadn't kicked off yet, but they was, they was doing it but they had like Sherry [Sherry Scott], Fathead [David "Fathead" Newman], and a couple of other people, this before Philip Bailey and, and the other cat and I don't know.
Speaker 1: Al McKay.
Speaker 2: Al McKay, now I don't know them, but I know Maurice [Maurice White] and Verdine [Verdine White] and his brothers cause as much stuff as we used to do and, but (laughter) so, so Jim said, Jim said, "Maurice wants to produce you guys," and we didn't know what to do you know.  I mean, I didn't know that you could have different producers.
Speaker 1: Yeah that whole concept hadn't really hit the industry.
Speaker 2: Right, right so we, "Well, man we wanna stick with John [John Florez]," so we turned him down.  Maybe that's why he ain't never let us work with him to this day (laughter), you dig?  But then he did The Emotions you know, but Maurice--Jim managed Earth, Wind and Fire.  Jim ma- the--The Monkees, Michael Nesmith, Jim they were all in our stable you know what I'm saying?  So.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.
Speaker 2: So Jim, Jim had his you know had his (unclear) on, on the stuff.
Speaker 1: A lot of different stuff, he was a true businessman (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Didn't Jim have a grocery store at one time or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know, as my uncle would say, "Not that I knows of."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Maybe in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 482276
Speaker 1: So now, what happens between we'll say--when does the group finally hit its peak and then go in another direction from, from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the de- declination?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay man we did this big album--this album cost some, some money.  You know you pay, back in the day you paid one hundred fifty, two hundred grand for an album, you know that's some--so we had this foldout album and, and they didn't push it.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that album?
Speaker 2: 'Love Can Make It Easier.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Love Can Make It Easier,' they, they didn't push it man and "Ain't No Woman" ["Ain't No Woman (Like the One I've Got)"] is on there, "Love Can Make It Easier" which people like to this day, "Easy Evil No" [sic. "Easy Evil"] that song, but they didn't push it and man all they had to do is push it, 'cause they'd spent some money.  So then that makes you, you know they.
Speaker 1: Well was there a reason you think they didn't push it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a reason they didn't push it.
Speaker 1: What was that reason?
Speaker 2: They didn't push it, straight up.  They didn't know what the heck to do and, and maybe you and you know you have a transition of--you know them, them execs they be you know--I remember the time we use to go to RCA's [RCA Records] office and the cat, the president, but my feet on his desk, What's happening brother, because of Jim [Jim Brown].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You did and we had that inside thing you know to them, but and they were like changing promotional men.  If you're promotional back in the day--if the promotional, people ain't into you, then they don't push it.
Speaker 1: So you think that's when the industry started changing internally as far as the head A&R [artists and repertoire] man, these jobs start developing in the record industry.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Versus back in the day you had the owner of the, the company and his talent man.
Speaker 2: Hand on, hands on.
Speaker 1: And that's pretty much it, but now you getting these other jobs.
Speaker 2: Yes, egos.
Speaker 1: And people like a [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold and, and.
Speaker 2: Yeah Larkin.
Speaker 1: And, and these, these people are not--now it's lawyers--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and it's stuff, it's stuff going on now.
Speaker 2: And see a lot of people don't know, Larkin was over at Columbia--Capitol [Capitol Records], he worked for, I think he worked for Floyd [Floyd Butler] with Floyd at the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a HistoryMaker by the way.
Speaker 2: Is that right, okay, I, I--so we record this song "Check It Out."  You hip to Tavares?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was their first hit record.  That song was written by Floyd and Billy Osborne of L.T.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was that got them out the box, and then that, then people started you know they started covering our songs you know 'Circles' ['Going in Circles'] a lot of people you know did 'em and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And the record wasn't really pushed so.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So now, so now where, where are The Friends [The Friends of Distinction] at now?
Speaker 2: So, so now, so now they decide, so now they decide, you guys are going to New York [New York].  So we go to New York, they put us up in you know hotels and stuff, but we had an apartment there and Ray Harris, Buzzy Willis, Tom Draper--these are execs at RCA you dig, and like I'm going to RCA every day like you go to a job man--boring.  And then we had this, this, this producer-arranger-conductor, and he had some, some strange songs.  So we were there man, we worked on like three different albums, the soundtracks.
Speaker 1: Is that the one that had the strange title, 'Reviviscence - Light'?
Speaker 2: 'Reviviscence - Live to Light Again.'
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now what was that about?
Speaker 2: Hey man, (singing) 'Reviviscence - Live to Light Again.'  He (unclear), hey man he use to fly Nat Adderley's son off--cats.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Nat Adderley, Jr.
Speaker 2: Yeah, fly the cats in from Virginia, Kentucky, Chicago [Illinois], all these musicians you know spending our money.  That record, that record, Daisy [ph.] might of bought two of them (laughter), you know what I'm saying, didn't do nothing, didn't do nothing, man, and that--we lived there for a year and you figure man, they would fly us back, first class, three times a year for holidays.  Man, we got to go home, I got to be with my family--fly us on back.
Speaker 1: Now really what, really now of course they were doing it, but when we look in retrospect, wasn't it your money they were doing it with?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So now a lot of times when we hear about the so-called--
Speaker 2: Recoup.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what it was.
Speaker 2: Hell yeah man, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what happened, so, so you went on with this for a while, so then.
Speaker 2: We went on for a while and, and stuff wasn't happening man, and see we got, we got caught up.  It's, it's funny man how stuff--we got caught up.  We were working and, we were working; we had gigs and stuff.  We--now we had a twelve-piece band like Tower of Power.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they was bad from San Francisco [California].  What were they called, I can't think of it?  H.P. Riot was the name of the band.  Young cats and our manager knew them so he brought 'em so we got 'em you know, give 'em experience and stuff, and man we're in--this is pre--to me this is Katrina before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  We're in New Orleans [Louisiana] and so they had this night club called the Crash Landing [New Orleans, Louisiana] a plane crashed and they built a night club around it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was hot, but man this, this was the, the crowning moment.  We go--it started raining, said we gotta go out to the Crash Landing; it's New Years.  We drive as far as we could and then we get in a row boat.  We row boat as far as we can, we wade in, that could of--should've told you right then (laughter), it was bad news man.  We wade in water this deep (demonstrates) to go in there.  It was about eight people in there and, and they should've know Katrina was gonna happen way back then man, and we, we use to play the Fairmont [The Fairmont New Orleans; The Roosevelt New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] down there man, the Mardi Gras and all that kind of stuff, but hey just went downhill, and then after New York and that didn't happen and they wasn't promoting the stuff you know, they just dropped us and that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 482277
Speaker 1: So then you returned to California?
Speaker 2: Returned to California and I hooked up with, that's when Magic [Magic Johnson] was, was just--you had--okay Wally Amos, Famous Amos, Wally was hot and, and my manager was working for Wally and matter of fact Wally kicked us out of his office (laughter).  He was mana- get outta here.  He had Franklyn Ajaye, the comedian, there, and--but my manager he, he learned some stuff from Wally and them Magic Cookie so he started from Famous Amos, so he started the company Magic Cookie Company [The Magic Cookie Company] so by this time Magic was coming to the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers], so they use to put cookies on top of Magic's locker, "Man, man these cookies sure enough good" (laughter), you know.  Anyway make a long story shorter, we signed Magic as our spokesperson and--
Speaker 1: For the cookies?
Speaker 2: For the cookie company, man it was--hey man I, I was general manager, director of operations, I was an executive without a tie.
Speaker 1: Suited and booted, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But hey I--my gig I'd go, I'd pay people and, and we had six stores.  They were in the Bullock's department stores, and it was cool, it was cool.  Then we had a, a campaign with 7-Up and it just--it fizzled and we lost all the money.  Then the recession, you know in the '80s [1980s] that's when the recession started man and (makes sound), downhill.
Story_ID: 482278
Speaker 1: So the '80s [1980s] left, left you with some jobs and just standard corporate job that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, with, with Magic Cookie [The Magic Cookie Company].  I use to, we had a--okay we--it's so cool because that's when the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] was throwing down.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I would be down in the Forum [Inglewood, California] and it'd be Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar] and Wilkes [Jamaal Wilkes] and, and Green--A.C. [A.C. Green] and all those guys, and Magic [Magic Johnson] never said anything about, "Be cool" but he--you know I didn't flaunt it you know what I'm saying.  Because when I first went down I use to wear this costume. I had a big chipmunk head and, and--it was a chocolate chipmunk and a--and a thing around here and we use to walk around the Forum giving out cookies, Magic Cookies and Magic's picture was on the, on the thing but that didn't go over too well in the stores.  They weren't ready for Earvin's picture in the stores.  So, and I did this Magic Cookie thing about--I did it at a fair, someone would promote a fair then I did it.   I said, no but I hired somebody to do to it and then, but you had watch him 'cause he'd be up at the top, he'd be done rolled down them stairs.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The cookie thing.
Speaker 2: The cookie thing was cool man.  I got a lot of experience in the, in the business.
Speaker 1: Marketing?
Speaker 2: Marketing end of it yes, yes, then in retrospect--see we had cookies.  Mrs. Fields [Mrs. Fields Famous Brands, LLC] was just getting ready to come out.  So I use to spy, "Hey Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Elston] go over there and buy--."  I'd go over there and buy some cookies (imitates eating), 'cause I use to bake them cookies.  Hey man I was--I got a mark here now.  I use to--in them convection ovens, flying them cookies outta there and then Jerry [ph.]--we would use all natural ingredients, all natural ingredients.  Nobody uses all natural--you can use 'em if you gonna sell 'em the same day or tomorrow, but man we'd go to--when, when we had Ralphs and all these groceries stores lined up man.  We'd go in there and put them cookies in there.  Put 'em on a Monday, Thursday them cookies come out looking like the elephant man, (laughter) (makes sound) all them--you know it wasn't, it wasn't happening so then we had to put down the Ghirardelli's chocolate [Ghirardelli Chocolate Company], and we had to use artificial peanuts and stuff like that.  I learned stuff like that 'cause, because you need the shelf time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know and all the companies use it, and then you have--also--man a couple--cats would come in there and put your cookies to the side and put theirs right in front of there you know.  They may have something to with the manager and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And several cookie companies too I believe at that time.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--okay you had Famous Amos.
Speaker 1: It was the one out of Texas 'cause I know it was a guy who was doing some music management, named Tony Jones [ph.] and he had something to do with a cookie, I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: It's a ringing a bell, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay but hey man we had, we had like eight different cookies and man I'd come, I'd come to, to downtown Bullock [Bullock's Wilshire, Los Angeles, California] sometimes, it might be six chemists in there (makes sounds), "Well, let's see if we can make this work."  J's paying, steady paying that money man, but we had to--then the recession came--whop.
Story_ID: 482279
Speaker 1: So it's--so through the '80s [1980s] now, we get to '90 [1990] and an unfortunate thing happened: Floyd [Floyd Butler] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Floyd, yeah, Floyd, Floyd and I had a falling out and we didn't--see we'd know each other since we were five, and we, we had a big, big ole house up in Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] and Floyd was doing something and I was working for Magic Cookie [The Magic Cookie Company] and somebody came in with a record deal and I can't remember exactly what happened, but it pissed me off and I said, "Friends don't do this to friends," and I said, "I'm out."  So I split and we didn't speak for a couple of years and then we--Floyd was, he was working with Dianne [Dianne Jackson] and Mike and, and Michael Wright [ph.] and I would come down, come see him.  You know we were--and he would, "Hey, well Harry's [HistoryMaker Harry Elston] in the house club to sing."  I ain't sang for six months boy and I might be drunk or something or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or something.
Speaker 2: And I said, I said, "Bubbles you can't do that man, I you know I can't throw down like this," and we were cool.  So we decided--he got to talking to me, "Harry, man look, we--now let's put this together you know.  So that particular day I was at his house in Simi Valley, not Simi Valley over there--Sun Valley [Los Angeles, California], and Floyd had cats and I'm sitting out by the pool 'cause I can't have them cats, I'm allergic.  So I was living with Lamonte [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] up on the Hill, and Floyd he came back over there.  So that night we're talking and stuff and then he (makes sound), he said something.  He said, "Man, I don't feel right."  I said, "Well lay down," and he was sweating, put a towel on him and he said, "No man, I can't--," bam, fell over.  I'm 911--took 'em about 45 minutes to get there and they were doing all this kind of stuff but he never came--I didn't think he was gonna pass away man.  I'm, I played ball that day and I got on my baseball stuff and I'm looking you know, I'm waiting for the paramedics man and they never would come, well they just took a long time and he didn't make it.
Speaker 1: So do you think, do you think that out of all the times for that to occur, you being there it was ironic to close things out properly?
Speaker 2: It was weird man; it was weird and then, and then we took him to Encino Hospital [Encino Hospital Medical Center, Encino, California] and the, the fireman he was a nice cat but I heard him on the phone.  He said, we have a male, black male, fifty-two massive heart attack.  I said, "Aw shit" you know I still didn't think he gonna--I'm thinking they gonna get him to the hospital and revive him because Floyd, had--his mom, his mom died on a boat cruise of a heart attack so he had--
Speaker 1: A heart problem--a genetic.
Speaker 2: Heart problem.
Speaker 1: A genetic.
Speaker 2: And then Floyd had ballooned up big time and he was Jenny Craig [Jenny Craig, Inc.] and then he was taking some heart medication so I think the combination, and so I'll never forget coming out of the hospital.  I had to call his wife, so I called her, dig it and so, the, the by this time she's on her way and, and the fireman he came out and he looked at me he says, "I'm sorry he didn't make it."  By that time she drives up so I gots to be cool you know, and, "Hi Susan [Susan Curtis] how you doing, well Floyd blah, blah, blah."  By this time I know he's gone, but I ain't--you know, I let the doctor.  So the doctor says, "How you doing Mrs. Butler," and just he says you know, "Floyd didn't make it." Ah, you know she goes through her thing and but she was you know by this time I'm, I'm, I'm devastated you know what I'm saying.  So that was that, man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was that.
Story_ID: 482280
Speaker 1: So the year later you decided to put the group back together?
Speaker 2: Not a year later, a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Well in '90 [1990] The Friends of Distinction, it said Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Elston], Pattie [Pattie Brooks], Drake [Drake Frye].
Speaker 2: No that was--a year--shoot I waited--Floyd [Floyd Butler] died in '90 [1990], I didn't put it back 'til '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when we did our thing in Maverick's [Maverick's Flat, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Patti and Ghee [Ghee Browne] and me and Drake, Drake Frye, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you, so since, since that time period you moved from the '90s [1990s] into the 2000s, what's been going on with The Friends of Distinction now?
Speaker 2: Well we, we hung, we hung around for a while and nothing was really, really happening man I mean spending all this money on uniforms and bios and public relations people.
Speaker 1: 'Cause now the industry's changed, it's, it's CD based and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So much, man, hey what, what do they call it, when you, outta sight, outta mind.  You know, and people would know the song, they wouldn't know the name.
Speaker 1: Of the, of the band of the groups?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it was hard?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So it was hard, it was a hard sale?
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and I'm thinking, well what's going on man, why can't--, you know, 'cause I'm seeing all these other groups working and carrying on you know and I said, well maybe, well maybe we got a bad rep, I don't know, but anyway Pattie, and Drake and Boce [Boce Robinson-Mitchell] and, and Van [Van Jewel] and--you know we worked for, we worked for a while you know went to the Philippines and Pacific concert, worked Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and but you know what I said, "Okay we work Vegas, work in MGM [MGM Grand Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada].  We will work this gig for the exposure and the experience," but they was working us like Kunta Kinte you know what I'm saying and I said, money--and so we got ready to go the Philippines, and Drake had a problem leaving the country, had a child support problem.  So that's when Gino [Gino Henderson], the guy that you said you think you'd seen him around.  We were talking and something came up I said, "Yeah we--I got to get this guy to go to the Philippines."  He said, "I'll go man," you know I said, "Yeah?"  'Cause I knew he played guitar but I didn't know he could really sing you know.  So we checked him out and boom we went and so Gino hung, so then I got back and Boce wanted to go and I said, "Let me just--let's change--let's, let's change a little bit."  And that's where I met Gino brought Berlando Drake and Wendy Smith Brune and who are currently with me now and we've been together a little over two year and we're touring and Gino's no longer with, us so we're, we're looking for a male singer.
Speaker 1: It won't hard to find one I'm sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah we, yeah.  So you know hey man I've been blessed, song is--I got a commercial running in Florida, it was Burger King, Old Navy and I've been totally blessed man.
Story_ID: 482281
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, how do you feel about the way that you lived your life and what's important to you now?
Speaker 2: Well Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] has this, has this saying, highly, highly bl- no, "I'm blessed and highly favored." I definitely feel that man because some of the things I have done, some of the things I've been through and to be thirty-nine and my--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, all right sixty-nine you know I feel totally blessed and I look at, it's like life is too short.  I don't, I don't have time for grudges.  I do not stress.  I got on high blood pressure medication about eight years ago and the doctor told me, and I've learned to, as much as I can to curtail that stress and so now it's like the people who are--Wendy [Wendy Smith Brune] and Berlando [Berlando Drake] they, they bring experience you know, they bring sincerity, they bring knowledge, they bring talent you know, and we work together.  A lot of times I mean people would work with you but, but they work as a unit, we work as a unit and it's a lot easier and so that's, that's, that's where we're at.
Story_ID: 482282
Speaker 1: For those that are gonna go into entertainment, the entertainment business today, what's your advice to them?
Speaker 2: I would say, be prepared for whatever, you know, because it's ups and downs in this--in life and of course this business.  Try to be in control as much of your, your stuff as you can.  You might have to relinquish, but always have say for how much and how long, you dig?  'Cause you could have--'cause if it ain't working, hey, bye or they tell you bye, you know and you still, "Hey, how you doing man?"  You know you're still friends or you--because you respect, you respect people as human beings, you know what I'm saying and, and have your program together as much as you can, have control and just go on and do it.
Story_ID: 482283
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: What do I still want to do that I haven't done yet?  I don't know, I mean, I mean maybe go to the moon--no, no (laughter) you know.  No man it's like I'm, I'm happy in my marriage, you know what I'm saying.  I've one, one son and I'd like for our relationship to be a little bit more on the one, but I don't have no, no guilt because I tried to do the right thing you know.  My parents [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays and Leonard Elston, Sr.], they lived to a ripe, ripe age.  Now I'd like to do that, and then but healthy you know.  Try to be--stay in shape as I possibly can.  I ain't no fanatic you know but I can still ball, you know I can still throw down a little bit and, and--hey, actually--no this is what I wanna do.  It's like I don't have to make a ton of money you know, but I want to reach a level you know where we you know it's like Jim Brown use to say, what is, "Romance without finance has no chance."  Okay, so I'd like to be, live comfortably, not--I'm too old to be working all them, you know hopping all over the country and stuff, but work and, and your people that you're involved with they're happy and, and you creative juices can still flow.  I, hey I don't mind going back in the studio.  I don't mind, you know I got some stuff, it turned me off a few years ago.  I went in and produced some stuff and nothing happened you know, spending this money and stuff you know and, and then like you said the business has changed so much and I realize it takes money to, to make money and you know be in control of your, your masters you know.  I'm gone check that out, and get stuff revert back, but, but basically man I have done you know a lot of things that I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Any regrets?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I regret not letting Maurice [Maurice White] produce us (laughter).  Hey man some, some things that happened in life that you--when you're young you know you make some decisions that, that weren't wise at that particular time, but it's like if you are able to, to own up to it.  You know say, yeah, yeah, yeah boom.  But basically man I have friends, I have family and my health is pretty cool, and I'm all right.
Story_ID: 482284
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for African Americans in the future?
Speaker 2: That we be more supportive of each other and, and I understand hey I don't hate about these young cats making all this money.  I know that, that some of 'em do some foolish things, but everybody does, not only African Americans you know, everybody does.  So I, I when it reaches a level where you know it's like you treat it like anything else.  It's, it's a--you, you need money and food and stuff to survive and it gets in it's proper perspective you know.  A lot of people be hating and jealous you know what I'm saying but I think that people like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], people like Beyonce, people like Babyface, Jay-Z, P. Daddy [sic. P. Diddy; Sean Combs], Prince you know--Michael [Michael Jackson] gonna get his little stuff together, I hear that they're, they're you know that the family's getting back together and stuff like that you know and, and do the right thing you know that particular issue.  In Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] I see a lot of--you know go to a lot of parties and affairs and The Friends [The Friends of Distinction], we still you know, we still get our props, we still get our props man, and that, and, and this music thing is like you know when your peers respect you, you know that's sometimes that's, that's better than money.
Story_ID: 482285
Speaker 1: What values do you consider the most important in a person?  What value or values?
Speaker 2: The character, the truthfulness, conscientious--is that the word I wanna use?  When you are concerned you know, concerned about other people?
Speaker 1: Compassion.
Speaker 2: Compassion, bam, compassion and respect, things like that.  You know Richard Pryor used to say, "You treat a person--."  He used different words, but he you know--you treat a person the way you want to be treated most of the time you cool.
Story_ID: 482286
Speaker 1: So how do you want [HistoryMaker] Harry Elston to be known in the--after you're gone, what's your legacy?  How do you wanna be, be remembered?
Speaker 2: Remembered?  You know as a decent human being, you know my little contribution to the, the industry you know.  You know, leave somebody with a couple dollars (laughter), don't have 'em fighting over it, you know what I'm saying, but just you know as, as you know like I got some friends, some true friends, and as long as they say I'm all right, you know that's cool with me, and people that get to know you.  You know once they get to know you, they see where you're coming from.
Speaker 1: Well I wanna thank you for this interview and thank you for the life, the music and all the things that you've done for us when we didn't even know you were doing it for us.  We appreciate it, thanks for the interview.
Speaker 2: My bad.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I mean my pleasure.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It ain't your bad (laughter).
Story_ID: 482287
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my step- oh, this, oh.  This is a photo taken in Encino [California] out back in 1970 something.  This is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Name everybody left to right.
Speaker 1: Let me see, left Floyd Butler, right [HistoryMaker] Harry Elston--what's that girl's name--I can't think of her name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, wait a minute--Diane.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: That's Floyd, that's Harry, that's Maxine Anderson [ph.] and that's Diane Wright, and that's taken up on the Hill [Baldwin Hills, Los Angeles, California] at Lamonte's [HistoryMaker Lamonte McLemore] house.  We didn't get into that man.
Speaker 2: Willie Mays, Willie "Tat" Mays [William Mays], he was the Willie Mays of the Oakland [California] side and then you had the original Willie Mays on the other side. This is my mom Earnestyne Mays [Earnestyne Cooksey Mays] and they're both--they left us a few years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Put 'em down sideways like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Turn it later, okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is you know sheet music for 'Time Waits for No One' and written by Neil Sedaka and Howie Greenfield [Howard Greenfield].  This was one of the songs that we recorded of Neil Sedaka.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Char- should I say the names?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just say.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh yeah.  Yeah who's in the group at this time?
Speaker 1: That's the two cats at the top, that's Floyd Butler, Harry Elston, Charlene Gibson and Jessica Cleaves.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This photo here is our first recording with Ray Charles on his Tangerine label [Tangerine Records].  The song is called 'Lonesome Mood.'  From left to right we have Lamonte McLemore, [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo, Fritz Baskett, Rex Middleton, Ray Charles, Harry Elston and Larry Summers.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: This is a studio shot of on the left that's Lamonte McLemore, that's Marilyn McCoo and that's Harry Elston at the studio in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one?
Speaker 1: This here is 1964 Miss Bronze Northern California Beauty Pageant put on by the Mr. Howard Morehead and we and we, the Hi-Fi's sang at that affair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one?
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna turn this off.  This is the Hi-Fi's at the Bob, Bob Hope, Bob Hope special at the Beverly Hilton of course in Beverly Hills [California].  That's Lamonte, Marilyn, Harry, Rex Middleton, Fritz Baskett and Larry Summers with the short, short pants on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  They are short (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: This is when the Jay Leno Show when Nobu [Nobu Matsuhisa] was a guest there and that's his daughter [Junko Matsuhisa] on the left, I can't think of her name right now but that's Jay Leno, that's Nobu that's his wife, Yoko [Yoko Matsuhisa].  There is my wife Yukati-san, that lady's a publicist and that's me with that on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was taken in Central Park in New York [New York], that's Floyd Butler, Jessica Cleaves, and Harry Elston from the album 'Real Friends.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a current Friends of Distinction [The Friends of Distinction] taken about two year ago, that's Berlando from--Berlando Drake from Chicago [Illinois], there's Harry Elston, there's Wendy Smith [Wendy Smith Brune] and the gentleman is Gino Henderson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is taken in Las Vegas, not Las Vegas, I'm sorry, Henderson [Nevada] and that's my wife Yukati Hirata [Yukari Hirata-Elston], that's [HistoryMaker] Billy Davis, Jr., our neighbor Benny Clay, Marilyn McCoo and Harry Elston.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is from Sepia magazine, I don't it's no longer in existence, November 1969, that's when we came out of the box.  That's Barbara, Barbara--oh, oh--want me to tape it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Sepia magazine, November 1969.  It cost fifty cents, that's Barbara Jean Love AKA Christie Anzi [ph.], that's Harry Elston, Jessie Cleaves and Floyd Butler.  This is the cover of the 'Grazing' ['Grazing in the Grass'] album.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Ah, this is one of my favorite--hey, you on it man.  Oh, oh.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, when.
Speaker 2: This is in Lake Tahoe and this is one of my favorite photos, and I can remember some names but not all of 'em.  There's Lamonte with--Lamonte McLemore with the bat in his hand, there's Ron Townson [Ronald Townson] next to him.  I don't know that guy but in the middle with the hat that's Richard Roundtree, Earl Woolridge, Floyd Butler, the sound light man and there's me with the bandanna off, on the bottom there's Little Anthony and the Imperials and Billy Davis, Jr.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's Little Anthony [HistoryMaker Jerome "Little Anthony" Gourdine]?
Speaker 2: That's Little Anthony, we called him Little Agony (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
