Story_ID: 5586
Speaker 1: My name is Clarissa Myrick-Harris and I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer. We have an observer, Mr. Malcolm Berkley. And this is Thursday, March 25th, 2004. And we're in the corporate headquarters of UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.] in Atlanta, Georgia. And I am interviewing today Ms. Evern Cooper. Good morning--good afternoon now, it's after lunch. Good afternoon.
Speaker 2: Good afternoon, Clarissa.
Speaker 1: Would you please start by stating your name and spelling it, please?
Speaker 2: Sure. Evern, that's E-V-E-R-N, D. Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell us what the D stands for?
Speaker 2: D stands for 'delightful,' no. D stands for Delores (laughs).
Speaker 1: Delores. And would you spell Delores, please (laughs)?
Speaker 2: I got you (laughs).
Speaker 1: You did (laughs).
Speaker 2: D-E-L-O-R-E-S.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Thank you. And the date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Now you got me (laughs)! June 2nd in Clarendon, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Ah, Gemini.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's right, I'm Gemini as well. That's great, yes. And would you please tell me your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Sure. My occupation is a vice president. My title is President of the UPS Foundation and Vice President for Corporate Relations for UPS.
Story_ID: 5587
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow. My favorite food. Jesus, I don't know. Turkey burgers, I think.
Speaker 1: Turkey burgers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I like those too. They're good.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah,  turkey burgers are my favorite food. I had to think about it, but I think turkey burgers.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the fall. You know, it's not too hot, it's not too cold. And I absolutely love the changing of the seasons and the autumn leaves and--.
Speaker 1: So do I. Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's--of course, but I, I think it's ironic that, you know, brown for a number of reasons, because it's a stately color, but I think more importantly, it doesn't show dirt (laughs).  So, I mean, it quickly grew into being my favorite color, and to end up working for a company that just--it made it even more so my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Yes. Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Anguilla because you have an opportunity to get away, you know, no phones. So I would say Anguilla. Second to that--and just before you get to Anguilla--Saint Lucia. But I would say Anguilla.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your favorite saying--a favorite phrase that keeps you going?
Speaker 2: "Make it happen and make it fun."
Story_ID: 5588
Speaker 1: Now I want to get into your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And we'll start with your parents.  What is your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Vivian Gibson--Vivian Laverne Gibson.
Speaker 1: Would you spell her name, please?
Speaker 2: V-I-V-I-A-N.
Speaker 1: And Gibson?
Speaker 2: G-I-B-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was actually born in Roe, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me.  August '32 [1932]--August the 8th, 1932.
Speaker 1: And what has she told you about her childhood experiences growing up in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, probably--my mom was a born entrepreneur.  And she was always a--she was a visionary, a businesswoman.  And I can--I think the one story--there are a couple stories I remember--Mom would always have to--she grew up on a farm, and along with her other siblings. She had three sisters and one brother.  But, you know, the normal chores growing up and having to do the--feed the chickens and things of that nature.  But then, then her, her desire--and she loved to play the piano, but I think probably the one funny story she told me about is when she was thumbing through--and back in that day, you can imagine--she was thumbing through a, a catalogue.  And she came across a baby grand.  And so she actually ordered the baby grand piano, not thinking, you know, I guess that they were gonna take her seriously.  And she talks about--maybe a few months later--that her father saying, "Gal--," he's calling, and she's call--he's calling.  And she [sic, he] said, "Do you know anything about this truck?"  So he--she looks out there, and she said--here's a truck--a Steinway.  She will never forget it.  And she saw the name on the side and she says, "Oh, my God."  She said,  "Yeah, Daddy, but I, you know, I didn't think that they were going to actually like take me serious."  And, and he said, "You really want this piano?"  And she says, "Yeah, I do."  And Granddaddy told him to unload it from, from the truck.
Speaker 1: How wonderful.
Speaker 2: So--and I remember that.  And then I, I remember about her talk about her little scrapes she'd have, like jumping from the schoolhouse and, you know, things like that.
Speaker 1: Jumping from the schoolhouse?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The schoolhouse, yes.  She had a younger sister that always got into scraps.  So my mom, being more or less, you know, the, the, the--making everybody get along, kind of got pulled into some of those things, so.  And I would never think about--I would never have pictured my mother in that environment, but I think those were some of the things.  And, and growing up on the farm with, with my grandfather and my grandmother and, you know, the differences.
Story_ID: 5589
Speaker 1: And what about your father?
Speaker 2: My father--,
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name is Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D, Gibson. And my father was actually born--my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson], he calls her a country girl--she was born in Roe, Arkansas and Dad was actually born in Clarendon [Arkansas] or more so in the city, so to speak, but I think that was only probably ten miles--ten miles from each other. And Dad grew up and--somewhat different from Mom. And he--and, you know, Dad was a hard worker and, you know, lived in the city and had one--actually, he had--he was the youngest of three siblings.  And again I think Dad--again, the work values and ethics. Dad was a strong--he was brought up a strong family man and instilled family values in all of us.  And to this day, really is--carries on in me.
Speaker 1: Great, great.  Did he ever tell you any childhood stories, memories--stories about him growing up, you know, in the city?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You know, Dad never--was never a big storyteller. He was more like a doer, but I would think that probably some of his stories centered around the fact that Dad became a butcher by trade. You know, he talked about how he, he had to work when, when everybody else, you know, had the ability to play and, and things of that nature. So those are probably stories that, that Dad would exchange. I think he told--tell more stories about my mom than he told about himself.
Story_ID: 5590
Speaker 1: Well, how did they [parents, Alfred Gibson and Vivian Gibson] meet?  Where did they meet?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they met at a--at a-at a function, you know, a church function, is how they actually met.  And he would call her the, the rich country girl and, you know, he was the poor city boy.  But--'cause my mom actually grew up on a farm.  And it was called--and I don't know if you heard about it--it was called--used to call--they called it Riceland Rice.  And my grandfather actually was the--was the first black man really to open a bank account in, in Roe, Arkansas and at that time had--was a large producer of rice. And that certainly was unheard of for an African American--,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Back in that day.  You know, even Granddad was an entrepreneur in which he would rent out parcels of his land for, for some people during the hunting season to allow them to hunt on the property, so.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever tell you stories about their experiences being really a well-to-do family in that area, especially during that time period, Jim Crow South?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You know, I don't think that she really felt that she was--or knew that she was well-to-do because my grandmother was tight as she could be.  And, you know, certainly, they kept that suppressed.  I mean, they knew that they lived on a huge property and, you know, and they could go out and the chickens and the cows and, and all the cattle, and the watermelons.  And so, you know, I--to this day, I think it was probably on in life when Mom maybe realized--or even maybe when she met Dad--that they were blessed to have a little bit more than others.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about life for African Americans socially during that time period?
Speaker 2: You know, for--it was more family because the adjoining--the adjoining land, my, my grandfather's brother also lived on it.  So I think most of it was more like a family-type.  They really didn't do too much socializing outside of family, with the exception of the church.  And they devoted most of their time and life in the church.  As a matter of fact, I can recall my grandfather and--gave the church its first big piece of land--its second piece of land, one in which the church was built on.  And the second was for a cemetery. And I'll never forget that Mom had told me when we went back a few years ago for a recent funeral, and she had never shared that with me before.  And Grandfather had said, "Gal, you know, I wonder who's gonna be the first to be buried on that piece of property?"  It was my grandfather.  It moved me.  It moves me as I think about it today.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes.  And your father's parents?
Speaker 2: My father's parents were--I would--were not as--did not have the same wherewithal that my, my mom's parents did. You know, lived in the city in a little shack, a little shanty, so to speak, you know, with the outhouse.  And even though my parents had an outhouse, it seemed like a different outhouse.  And my grandmother just loved clutter, I mean everything she collected she, she'd put it in bags. I mean, you'd go in her house and she'd have hats in brown paper bags, you know, tacked up on the bedroom--tacked up on the bedroom wall.  But my grandfather was--my granddaddy, Joe [Joseph Gibson]--was, he was a reader and he was a philosophier [sic, philosophizer], and I--I mean he, he, you know, he liked to sit back and pontificate a lot, sit back in his rocking chair.  And I'll, I'll never forget the two of them loved to snuff. Oh my God, that's when I first learned--and I would never want to be around the stuff, spitting in those spittoons.  And I used to have to go and go empty 'em out. Oh my God, I mean that--I remember it. But, you know, I think Grandfather too was real responsible for me in realizing, being the oldest of four siblings and the first--probably second grandchild--but I would say probably the most fondest--but Granddaddy, as I would be growing up, even--'cause my parents would ship me back to the summers--back there 'cause we moved away when I was two years old, but would ship me, ship me back to spend the summers with them.  And I remember Grandfather telling me that, you know, even after I got married, he said, you know, "Gal, let me tell you something. You always have a little something put back for yourself."  I'll never forget that. And that was surprising to me coming from my grandfather.  He said, you know, "You always want to be true to your husband," he said, "but always be prepared to take care of self."
Story_ID: 5591
Speaker 1: What about your ancestors, beyond your grandparents. Now, do you know anything about their experiences?
Speaker 2: You know, very little, other than the fact that on my, my, my father's [Alfred Gibson] side, my, my grandparents were really descendants from the Cherokee Indians.  And, you know, we--we're just--have started just really to getting into our--you know what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Genealogy?
Speaker 2: Genealogy, yes.  So, I mean, past that, I mean I--about Cherokee Indians and that was pretty much it.  And, you know, my--and my mom's [Vivian Laverne Gibson] parents just coming from a long list of laborers.
Story_ID: 5592
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories growing up?  First of all, you said you--your family moved from Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Right, when I was two years old.
Speaker 1: And where did you move to?
Speaker 2: Moved to Detroit, Michigan.  I think like any other blacks during that time, my parents moved up north seeking to have for themselves a better quality of life, moving out of that environment.  And it's those skill sets that really was the foundation in which--I mentioned my mom being an entrepreneur earlier and my dad learned to be a butcher by trade,  well, they both quickly moved--they moved to Detroit, and my dad [Alfred Gibson] got a job working at Chrysler [Corporation] as a--in the factory and quickly moved up the ranks, and went into management. My mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] was a cashier and, oddly enough, she also became a shop steward.  Well after a period of time, they saved their monies, and they opened up a local neighborhood grocery store, and then later a fish market.  And that's really where my first work ethics began to be--get shaped because after school, unlike most kids, I would have to report to, to the family store and I would be the cashier and the stock girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are your--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And then of their small--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 2: Staff.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then, of course, Mom was the bookkeeper.
Story_ID: 5593
Speaker 1: Well what are your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of growing up was family, you know, just--we always had a, a very close family--family dinners, you know, kind of--we were probably the, the black Ozzie and Harriet ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet,' 1950s/1960s television comedy]. I mean seriously, we would have the family dinners, and, you know, that was a big thing for us.  And, you know, sit down at the dinner table, and I would love to--. I was very open with my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson]. I told my mother everything. My mother, even to this day, was like my girlfriend, my best friend.  And, and even my father [Alfred Gibson]--I had that real special bond.  And--but I also remember the sense of responsibility.  Being the oldest, you know, I had to always make sure that, you know, when they went off a lot of times I had to keep my younger siblings.  And it was so funny because I think during that time period I, I was--received a name from my brothers and sisters.  They would call me 'Sergeant Carter' because I actually--I absolutely kept them in line.  And so I, I remember--and to this day they talk about Sergeant Carter.
Speaker 1: I bet that 'Sergeant Carter,' was a referral to--?
Speaker 2: Me.
Speaker 1: And what--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And the fact that the discipline that I bestowed upon them.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They had to walk the chalk line.  Said, "Oh God, here comes Sergeant Carter."
Speaker 1: Is that the 'Gomer Pyle [U.S.M.C.,' 1960s television comedy] Sergeant Carter, yeah (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly.  So--but, but that was funny.  So those are probably the things that I, I most remember.  But, you know, I think more importantly, I also realize what good kids we really were.
Story_ID: 5594
Speaker 1: Now tell me more about your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: My--I have--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Their names?
Speaker 2: My brother that's under me, that's two years younger--I'm, I'm--two years under me, his name is Harold.  And Harold was always the studious type.  You know, he, he went--he couldn't dance, you know.  He--this child couldn't dance a lick, but he was always in the books.  And, you know, when other kids were out playing, Harold would be sitting on the steps in his books.  And, you know, and it even shows today because, you know, he--over time Harold--well, let me back up.  When he--it was kind of like when he got to be in junior high or middle school, just before he went into high school, it's amazing because he went--he transformed in--from like this caterpillar into a butterfly.  The boy began to dance, you know, and his nerdy act like cleaned up, and it was just absolutely amazing.  But he still was probably one of the smartest young men I know today.  And even at that time, he had his values, he'd know what--he knew what he wanted to be.  He wanted to be a doctor, and he's a doctor today.  And he became the youngest scientist at Johnson & Mead Pharmaceutical [sic, Mead Johnson Pharmaceutical] and, back in Indiana, the rural part of Indiana, and, and then my sister--my sister's name is Joanne.  And Joanne being--I guess you might call the third child--the middle child--she was one of those that--she was always a fighter.  She was the scrapper, you know, there's always one in the family.  And she was always the one that got into trouble and got me into trouble, and, you know, over time.  She would fight.  This girl would fight all the time.  It didn't matter.  It, it didn't take too much for her to fight.  And--she was a dancer and joker--practical joker and talented in that way.  And then my youngest brother, my baby brother, his name is Patrick, Patrick Henry.  And Patrick Henry, obviously, being the youngest of the four children, you know, there was a slight difference between us, but I remember Patrick--this child, he--it didn't matter.  He would always--he was prone to be in accidents.  And if there was a ball anywhere--if it--as a matter of fact, they began--at Outer Drive Hospital [Lincoln Park, Michigan], they knew him by name, he was there so much.  He must have had a stitch on every part of his body.  And you can better believe, if there was a ballpark somewhere, and a--there was a fly ball that went astray, it hit Patrick.  And to this day, we tease about that--but so, that's pretty much it about my siblings.  And he--Patrick, today, Patrick became a--we,  the three of us ended up graduating from Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]--my, my two brothers and, and then myself.  And my sister at that time always felt that she was the black sheep of the family, but, you know, she, she did something different in which--she became a mother.  And, you know, so she had a, a, a different path.
Story_ID: 5595
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in southwest Detroit and, and--which was pretty close to what you call Lincoln Park [Michigan]. And at that time, I, I mean I distinctly remember, it was during my--both my elementary--well, actually, all the way through, through high school and the--could not, actually, there was a school that--in Lincoln Park--that I was not allowed to go to and really had to be bused with the other black kids.  And I could have actually walked to Lincoln Park to elementary school.  So I, I kind of remember, remember those days.  But again, you know, southwest Detroit was that family--that--your typical neighborhood, you know, where you, you had other moms and dads were your moms and dads.  And so if you got in trouble, you know, you'd be spanked by Mrs. Jones down the street.  So it was a nurturing environment.  But I guess the one thing that probably stood out about me most, I was the only girl in my age group.  So I immediately also became a tomboy, you know, 'cause I didn't have anybody else to play with.  And--but I think that paid off, you know, in the long run, because to this day my brother [Harold Gibson] would pit me against any of his--any of his male friends when it came to sticking--taking up or sticking up for him, so.
Speaker 1: What kind of games did you play back then?
Speaker 2: Jump rope, hopscotch, and we lived in a--not too far from a--there was a huge field and we used to catch insects, you know, and kind of dissect 'em and, you know, doing the little scientist bit.  And oddly enough, the--Dr. Benjamin Carson [doctor/professor] and I grew up together.  As a matter of fact, we used to play in the sandbox. And I laugh--I tease today, saying, "My God, he was the nerd with the coke bottles."  All the stories that he tells, you know, are so true.  And I laughed and said, you know, "If I would have known--if I know now what I knew then, he probably would have been my husband."  But, but, you know, knowing again, you know, we're all in that nurturing environment.
Story_ID: 5596
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up in your--within your family, special occasions, things that your parents [Alfred Gibson and Vivian Gibson] taught you, either overtly or implicitly and the way they did things in their lives?
Speaker 2: Sense of family, sense of responsibility, the sense of caring, and, you know what I--and my parents--for us, I grew up in a colorless environment, even though my parents, certainly during that era, you know, grew up between--with the, the, the overt racism and, and different acts that they encountered, you know, growing up in the South. They pretty much kept us removed from that. You know, they kept us balanced into humanity and caring for people as people.  And I think that really helped shape my character early on where even things that were either done to me directly or indirectly, I absolutely rose above because I, you know, I didn't get caught up. So I think that, that--a lot of that, and again that sense of family and the fact that the, the fish fries and then the cabarets--my parents used to love to go to cabarets back in the day, and music, you know.  We used to love and--we loved--we loved to dance and put on talent shows on Saturdays when my parents would be--we'd go over to the grocery store doing their errands, we'd do, we'd do--we'd have talent shows, my siblings [Harold, Joanne and Patrick Henry Gibson]. And, you know, and it just, it transferred into, you know, what my--when our cousins would come over and--or come up from down South. So I think those were--those are some of the things that certainly a sense of--a sense of--a sense of family, but a sense of responsibility.  Those are both--they were subtle as well as insisted upon.
Story_ID: 5597
Speaker 1: Was the church an important part--,
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Of your life during that time--in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: Burnette Baptist Church [Detroit, Michigan]. Absolutely I remember Burnette Baptist Church, and again both Mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] and Dad [Alfred Gibson] and growing up in the church, that was a sound part of our upbringing.  As a matter of fact, there was a rule, you could not, you know, you couldn't go to the movies on--unless you--if you hadn't--didn't go to church, there was no other extracurricular activities.  So  they were very strong and we were very strong in our faith. And, and always my parents played a major role, whether my father--to this day, although his health has been impacted, but to this day, you know, he is head of the deacon board, and, you know, my mom, you know, head of auxiliary and all of that.
Story_ID: 5598
Speaker 1: I would always do, giving church welcomes [at Burnette Baptist Church, Detroit Michigan], you know, so--.
Speaker 2: You delivered the announcements--that kind of thing?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Announcements, oh, yeah, yeah, that was me, front and center.
Speaker 2: And you said you were an usher as opposed to being in the choir?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: This is Junior Usher Board?
Speaker 1: Junior Usher Board, right.  Exactly, my brother who had a fabulous voice, he was in the choir.  So that probably intimidated me.  I didn't really have a--I had an okay voice, but--.  And then, you know, then you had to do the rehearsals, and I had other things I wanted to do with my time.  So, you know, it was less rehearsal time doing the usher than it was being in the choir.
Story_ID: 5599
Speaker 1: What were the kinds of things that you enjoy doing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think for the most part, for me, I wanted to be able to have my--I, I ran track, you know, when I was from middle school up. And so, running track, I--you know, I was a tomboy, so I loved sports.  And so I wanted to have my free time to really be able to do that.
Story_ID: 5600
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: You know, I told Malcolm [Berkley, interview observer] to this day, I, I meant to call my mother [Vivian Laverne Gibson] before this interview 'cause I can't remember my elementary school.  I can see it.  I know exactly where it's pictured--I cannot remember my elementary school.  I know, it's embarrassing.  And that was the one thing, and Malcolm said, "Did you finish application"--I said, "Malcolm, I couldn't remember my elementary school."  I remember my middle school or junior high is what we called it then.  It was Hunter [Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], and then I remember the Southwestern [Commerce High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I just, to this day, can't remember my elementary school.
Story_ID: 5601
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers, any that really impressed you, that stick out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Mrs. Shifflett, and, you know, she used to wear these big ugly shoes.  She had big feet, but I realize now--I didn't know then, is because she had feet problems.  You know, you had those big shoes, and so that's why she wore those shoes.  But I remember Mrs. Shifflett because Mrs. Shifflett was mean, but, but she also, she insisted on quality work.  And I think that's what I remember, Mrs. Shifflett that helped probably mold me.  But I think the other one, and which wasn't in, in junior [Hunter Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], it wasn't in elementary, but it was in high school [Southwestern/Commerce High School, Detroit, Michigan], and that was Mrs. Fike.  Mrs. Fike was the cutest little thing, and she was smart, and she was the head of the cheerleaders.  And she was just a great role model for us.  And I, I, to this day, I remember Mrs. Fike.  And when I went to my twentieth, twentieth, twentieth year class reunion, Mrs. Fike looked as young then as she did back in the day.  So, it was Mrs. Fike.
Speaker 1: And the other teacher you mentioned, Mrs. Shifflett?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What did she teach?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Shifflett taught English.
Speaker 1: Was that, perhaps, where the--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Early for me?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think so. I think a combination of that and always being, you know, my mother insisted upon diction and, and things of that nature.  So I think early on it kind of helped, shaped my direction because, you know, speaking, and I have a love for journalism, so you couldn't do one really without the other.
Story_ID: 5602
Speaker 1: And when did you become interested in running track?  How did that start?
Speaker 2: You know, I--growing up, because, you know, the boys we--the streets, they'd shut down the streets and we'd do relay races.  And so I would say then, early on, and, and then it carried on when I into Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] because I ran relays.  And [Herbert] Herb Washington at the time, at the time, he was the fastest---at that time, he was the fastest man in the, in the U.S., and we used to do sprints together.  And so, could have been just being a tomboy shaped me.
Story_ID: 5603
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the time of unrest in the '60s [1960s]?  Does anything come to mind in terms of how you and your family dealt with all that was going on?
Speaker 2: You know, it's another--it's like we were there, but we weren't there.  I mean we were impacted, you know, by the surrounding, by the riots and where we could go and not go, but it really did not personally impact me or us as a family, and probably because of where we lived.  And because we were somewhat removed, but I think that probably it impacted us just in terms of seeing what was going on in the city, you know, the relationships and, and things of that nature, the struggles.  So I would say, I would say that.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the city has truly recovered from that period of unrest, and one of the reasons I say that was the first time that I went to Detroit, I was--I enjoyed Belle Isle [Detroit, Michigan] Model Day, but was struck by the fact of the, at that point, destruction, the aftermath was still around.
Speaker 2: This--they have not recovered.  You know, unlike many other cities that have taken, as you know, have really taken, that would take advantage of their waterfront and the property.  They haven't, you know. They, they're, there are isolated pockets, but I think a combination of leadership having their own agendas, you know, Coleman, [Detroit] Mayor Coleman Young went--I don't know, he had I don't know how many offices.  How many times you can hold office?  Eight times, whatever it was, you know, he took it to its, to its, to its, to its limit.  And I think the other thing too, you know, Detroit being a, a blue collar, automobile town, that you didn't have as much--there was not as much opportunity, I would think, in terms of role models for being entrepreneurs.  I mean unlike, unlike the South where you have a different type of leadership that led by example, you--Detroit was more your automobiles and, and, you know, what, what, what living they could make, you know, off of the waterfront.  But, no, I would say that there wasn't like a--I don't recall any serious role models that really looked to--as they call it, you know, they call Detroit the 'Renaissance City'.  To this day, I'm trying to figure out they got that, how they got that--how they named it the Renaissance City--maybe in hopes of being the Renaissance City.  There were many plans.  You know, you had the [Detroit] Tiger [professional baseball] Stadium, and just recently, you know, they built the Comerica [Bank] Park [professional baseball stadium], but, you know, it's still centered around, to me, short-term thinking.  You've got the, the gambling and the casinos that are there, and you've got the people that really didn't have the money to spend, but the--if you go into those areas, that's who's spending the money.  So, and to me, there's got to be some encouragement to have more mixed-income living.  And Detroit is slowly getting to that, but it isn't there yet.  So until they really have a solid economic development plan to do that, they'll struggle behind.  When you go in, my God, even the infrastructure, the streets--to this day, you can lose your car in one of the potholes.  So, I mean all of that, and the taxpayer dollars--and you can tell the difference when you come into the Detroit City property--I mean proper versus when you go out into the suburbs.  It's like night and day.  So I also think it's about level of acceptance.
Story_ID: 5604
Speaker 1: Before we totally leave your childhood, what sights, sounds, smells remind you of your childhood, and why?
Speaker 2: Baking, my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] used to love to bake, and she was a fabulous cook.  So I would say the smells of cakes and pies and roasts.  But probably that.  Sounds, crickets, you know, crickets, I think, you know, even in, even in the South on the farm, and then even crickets were in Detroit [Michigan].  I remember the sounds of crickets.  We certainly weren't by any water, but I would say crickets.
Speaker 1: And sights?
Speaker 2: The Great Lakes.  I mean when you did go there, because, you know, Michigan, Detroit is known for its Great Lakes.  So I would say the depth of the surrounding waters would be the sounds, being able to look cross--look across the water and see Canada, and, you know, not thinking it's a whole 'nother country.  So I would say, the water.  And the Ambassador Bridge [between Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, Canada], you know, that was leaving from one to the other.  So I would say probably the water.  And I remember the, also the time, they call it the Penobscot Building, which was the tallest building in Detroit, and, you know, didn't nearly, you know, begin to touch the, the--what do you call it, the World Trade Center [New York, New York].  And, you know, there were some nice--Woodward Avenue [Detroit, Michigan], I mean that was the main drag, you know, I think back in the day where you had, in the downtown area, that had [F. W.] Woolworth's [discount store] and the Anna's Furs and things of that nature.  So, those--and you would get to those, you know, in some cases going, you know, to the waterfront.  So I would say the water.
Story_ID: 5605
Speaker 1: Through your high school years [at Southwestern/Commerce High School, Detroit, Michigan], you mentioned earlier that your love of writing, reading, speaking developed pretty early actually.  During your high schools years, how were those interests developed in--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Speech class, I mentioned cheerleader, you know, writing cheers and, and I always, I always wrote poetry, you know, I loved to write poetry.  And every opportunity that, that was presented to me that I could hone in on my skill sets, you know, I would.  I would always, always volunteered for, to be in plays, you know.  Outside of acting out the part, I would always like to, to, to get my, you know, rewrite history, so to speak.  So I think, you know, early on.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was my way to escape too, you know.  I think that--because I always, I mentioned about church.  You know, my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] would always wonder, and, just, I loved reading.  I loved books, I absolutely loved books.  And, you know, that's how I think for that reason.  And then I would probably envision some of the things that I wanted to do, and, you know, I loved powerful, leadership books even then.
Story_ID: 5606
Speaker 1: How did you envision your life and a future at that point, as a young, a teenager?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, again, I, my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] was a leader at--she led by example. So for that reason, you know, I was always that--and she said, she never worried about me. Somehow, as she--I would always land on my feet.  And I would always take the leadership role.  I was not a very good follower, not--and if I was following someone, you know, sooner or later, I'd step on top of their feet 'cause they were too slow.  You know, I was always one of those fast-moving, fast-moving, fast-moving women.  So, because my mother also taught me that I needed to be strong.  I needed to build character.  I can think of some incidents when I was in Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] and calling my mom.  It was just before I was getting ready to graduate.  I was at--was taking a [Geoffrey] Chaucer class.  And I had needed that to graduate, and I had a professor--and I just knew this professor, I mean he just, he had it in for me.  I was the only black child, I was the only black person in that class.  And I remember befriending--this young lady and I were friends, we were really great friends, a white young lady.  And we set up a little, we set up a little test.  And she turned in my paper, and I turned in hers.  And, now, mind you, she was always one that got great grades.  She got a, she got an A on my paper, and, and consequently, I got an F.  And, you know, when we brought to the attention, and it went so far as we took it to ombudsman, and I recall during that incident crying.  And I called home to my mother, you know, expecting that she was gonna empathize with me.  My mother, very stern said, "Let me tell you something, and I'm sure you've probably heard this before."  She said, "You need to stop crying cause if you don't stop crying," she said, "One thing that you need to remember, and I think we--that, the fact that, you've got two strikes against you already.  You're a woman and you're black.  So it means you have to stay two steps ahead, just to stay even."  And she said, "No daughter of mine,"--and she said, "If you don't get that right," she said, "You're not a daughter of mine," and hung the phone up.
Speaker 1: How did you respond?
Speaker 2: I was like (expression of surprise), I'm like, "No, no, she didn't."  I hung up the phone--I knew my mother was serious, okay, 'cause my mom gave all the whuppings when we were growing up.  Dad [Alfred Gibson], he never gave--my mother--never gave, Dad never gave the whuppings.  I sucked it in, and I said, "Well." I followed through with the ombudsman.  I ended up, actually having to go to--I graduated.  I walked across the stage, but I ended up having to go to summer school to make up that grade.  But you can guess what, when he came back, I pursued that.  I absolutely pursued that, and I--and, and what's ironic too, I recall--and he used to wear these boat shoes.  I'll never forget, you know, these boat tennis shoes with a suit, you know, what?  I could not--and one day, I saw him on, on the main drag in East Lansing [Michigan] during the summer.  This is after I went to summer school and after I graduated, and I went to approach him.  I was so angry, but I knew then that I would probably get myself in trouble.  But I vowed that if God was my witness, I'm gonna see, I was gonna see that he would not do that to another person.  And so he was reprimanded for it.  I'll never forget that to this day.  So, I think it was at that point for my mom--it was a reality check for me.  It was a absolute reality check that, you know, every day, no matter how far you think you get, you look in the mirror, you're still black.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Were there any supportive professors?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, absolutely, that was probably, you know, that was the only one thing that derailed the entire time I was there.  All the professors were supportive, and, you know, you always run up to--into one individual at some point in time.  You know, my classmates--everyone knew what was going on.  Absolutely everybody knew what was going on.  So, no, I was extremely supported.  And I loved Michigan State. I loved the environment, and, you know, it's the largest land-grant college, and, you know, at that time, you know, I had some of my, you know, my, my classmates, I mean, [Dr. Benjamin] Ben Carson went there.  Timothy, so, no, I absolutely loved Michigan State and I loved the professors.  And it was a, it was a good environment, unlike--but I had nothing else to compare it to.  You know, I tease, I listen now, and how, you know, like Malcolm [Berkley, interview observer] went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and, you know, I realize now that I, that was an experience that I wish I had had, you know, it was a different and nurturing environment to be able to go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or, you know, to have the culture.  But I think what it did do, being part of that whole Big Ten [Intercollegiate Conference], that environment, it made me a stronger person.  It made me ready for the challenges and the obstacles and the opportunities that I would face in life going up.  And it made me get wax on my back, so to speak, you know, to be able to--to, to go on to that next level.
Story_ID: 5607
Speaker 1: You mentioned [Dr. Benjamin] Ben Carson again.  So you knew him as a baby, a toddler?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, we went, we went all the way through--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) All the way through--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went all the way through Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] together.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me a little bit more about him, and Ben Carson, who he is?
Speaker 2: He--oh, okay.  He is the neurological surgeon that separated the first Siamese [conjoined] twins, and we call him 'Benji,' you know.  And--but you knew then, I mean you know character, you know, who--you know what kids had it going on and what kids didn't.  And, you know, his mom was one, you know, he was raised by a single parent.  His mom was one that, you know, instilled the same values.  I think that was the, that was probably the glue.  We all kind of grew up in that same community with a sense of purpose.  We all were charted the sense of purpose in life.  And to this day, most of my classmates are doing something good in life, you know, those that haven't died or didn't succumb to, to the environment.  And then you always have a handful that's still there doing the same thing they were doing when you left.
Story_ID: 5608
Speaker 1: Were there any African American professors that you encountered in your coursework [English/journalism] at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: None that I can--well, let me put it this way, none that I can absolutely recall, you know.  Maybe it was the classes I took (laughs).  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And was your focus news editorial journalism or--,
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes) Pretty much, yeah.
Speaker 1: Any experiences, internships or newspapers?
Speaker 2: You know, not really because I--well, I had one experience I think when I went on an intern--I did go as an exchange student, Toronto [Ontario], Canada.  That was one of the experiences that I recall being probably most memorable. And I was the only kid, most everyone spoke French there.  And I was there during the, the time of, the death of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr., April 4, 1968].  And I recall, again, being one of--you know, I've always seemed to been one of these family of firsts, you know, first child, you know, one of the, number of first in one of my classes.  But--and at that time, I was the only black child, exchange student, in the school.  And I recall their sympathy and empathy--apathy for what had, for what had happened.  Did I say Martin Luther King? And so I think that, that, in and of itself, had a significant impact.  I, you know, I was thinking, cause there were two times in my life between Martin Luther King and [President] John F. Kennedy that I was involved in a couple internships.  But that one probably shaped my life, and, you know, just gave me an opportunity to live in a different culture and exist in a different culture for a semester.  And, you know, and that was good.  It's, it's ironic though, I never took French.  I always thought it was a beautiful language.  It was probably hard.  I took--I took Spanish.
Speaker 1: You said, everyone around you spoke French?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Oh, yeah, I--isn't that amazing, how you communicate.  Yeah, and the same--the same way illiterate people communicate today, you do it by association (laughs).  So, and, of course, I was in a family now that, you know, that spoke English, and there--that was--I mean had the young lady that was my age because, you know, we did exchange students.  So I mean, I, I learned enough just to get by of what they were--what she was sharing with me, and they taught me.  I never--it never stuck with me.
Story_ID: 5609
Speaker 1: And in your senior year of college [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], what did you envision your future being like when you graduated--?  What was your objective?
Speaker 2: You know, my objective was to, to be a, a leader.  And I wasn't so sure what type of leader, but there just seemed to be a sense of purpose and responsibility instilled upon me.  I can't, I can't put it into words, but it's just the environment around me encouraged that.  The people around me encouraged that.  You know, and, and I think back that, it being fate, fate and circumstances.  And it was the sense of purpose on why I was placed in this life and in this world.  And it began to take shape then.
Speaker 1: What do you do after college?
Speaker 2: Well, ironically enough, after college, I became--that's when I went into teaching.  And I really didn't seek my first teaching job.  I knew by the time I finished college that I didn't really really--my goal at that time was to be a school teacher--English and journalism--but I thought, you know, I really want--during my student teaching, it kind of turned me off.  You know, I was in a junior high school, then it was fighting, it was ruckus.  And I said, "My God, this is, this is really not what I signed up for."  And, but due to the fact that, you know, I had had scholarships up through about my junior year, and then my senior year, I had to get some loans and grants.  And so part of it, as you have to teach, in you know, in the inner-city school.  So that was a reason where--when I was sought to, to interview for a teaching job, I thought okay, this is my opportunity to go in, pay down some of these, you know, be able to, only have to responsible for certain parts of the loan.  And hence, I started my, my teaching.  I recall, right after college, and I looked just like, I looked young enough that I was just like one of the students.  And I recall walking across, walking past the senior lockers.  And, and I remember one of the guys saying, "Hey, baby, hey, baby".  And, you know, I ignored him.  To this day, I, I can remember as it was yesterday.  I then, when we'd come up, "Stuck up, bitch," exactly.  Well, third class, third class, guess who walked into my classroom?  You could have bought that kid for a nickel.  He immediately got out of my class (laughs).  I guess he figured all bets are off.  He wouldn't win anything in there.  So, so needless to say, I had an experience during my, my first year, but, you know, in most cases, the young ladies could teach me more about life, you know, than I could.  And I--but I also taught in an environment--remember you, if you recall, I told you I was, had to be bussed, you know, when I went to Southwestern [Commerce High School, Detroit, Michigan] and all those schools.  But, you know, even the same kind of held true when I taught at Denby [Technical/Preparatory] High School [Detroit, Michigan].  And, you know, again, being a minority versus a majority. And in many cases, I had the challenges where some of the, the parents would always show up, and they'd challenge me, you know, on everything in terms of teaching, teaching of their kids.  And finally, I said "Listen, I'm not, I'm not going to try and teach you and your kid too.  It's just as simple as that.  You know, I have the same level of expertise," so--and I, you know, went to the principal at that time to say, you know, "This is absolutely ridiculous."  So I had those challenges in, in, and also in trying to teach as well.  But in the meantime, I, I--I think I surfaced as a role model, you know, for the young girls then.
Speaker 1: Great, you said that in many ways the young girls who were in your classes taught you a great deal. In what way?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, they did, and that was more so, really, believe it or not, it was more so, as I reflect back on the, the ninth grade young ladies because they knew more about life, you know, than I did, 'cause you had some of these kids that were being bused, they were being bused from the inner city, just like I had been bused.  So the experiences and the, the, the strength of character and the sense of purpose that these young ladies had, just made me be even stronger.
Speaker 1: Can you think of an example of one student in particular that really sticks out in your mind?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember one, one student, in particular.  You know, they--you know how you can, you can see their faces, but not recall their names?  You just kind of remember some of the things that they, they stood for.
Story_ID: 5610
Speaker 1: I'd like to begin our discussion of your career at UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.].  You were a high school teacher [at Denby Technical and Preparatory High School], teaching English in Detroit [Michigan].  How do you go from teaching high school to a corporate environment like UPS?
Speaker 2: Well, as I've said, a little while ago, I knew before I got into teaching that ultimately, that was just going to be an initial stepping stone for me.  You know, I wanted to, to do something bigger.  I wanted to be a college professor, and I also had other goals in life.  So I got married at the time, and relocated and had to give up my teaching job, and relocated to East Lansing, Michigan then, with my husband.  And that was back, obviously, at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  And I did not want to substitute teach, so I was going back to further my education and work on my masters.  And I actually went to UPS--a girlfriend of mine worked there.  And I went to UPS for a part-time job, a part-time job that thirty years later turned into a gratifying career.  I had no intentions, I was just passing through--right time, right place.  And I think it, and also at the time, as you well understand, thirty years ago, there were very few people that looked like me, both in ethnicity and gender.  But UPS, at that time, was also looking to embrace diversity, not only in terms of its gender and its, and its workforce, but also it--from a more educated employee group.  I'm finding that out later.  But--because when I first applied, they had told me, can you, can you imagine this, that I was too educated.  And I kind of laughed--I laugh now, I didn't laugh then.  But I was pretty persistent, and it wasn't until I was there for a while--it wasn't that I was too educated, it's that I had been a teacher.  And teachers were prone to unionize and I was getting ready to go into a part-time clerical workforce that they'd had some unrest so they probably figured, oh, wow, this is great.  She--this is the last thing we want or need, and she has a little paper behind her too.  So, but I think from there about, the rest is history.  I--my husband, ex-husband now, but my husband got accepted into law school in California just about the time that I began to see some opportunities because they were, they were telling me that there were some opportunities for me and really--excuse me--were encouraging me to take on more responsibility and challenging me as a part-time employee.  Long story short, he got accepted into law school, and I recall going in boo-hooing to my boss.  And he said to me, he said, "You know, Evern, don't worry about it."  And he says, "You know, we really value you as a, as a person and an individual," and keep in mind, you know, UPS back in that day were nothing but a bunch of truck drivers.  So I think that, like I said earlier, right place, right time.  We relocated to California.  I had a small break in service, and they actually rehired me, because they were opening up a phone center there, and I was able to take my experience and skill sets.  Shortly, after being there, you know, going in now for a full-time job, and shortly after that, I would say--this is three years later, I traded my Brooks Brothers [clothing brand] suit for a brown uniform.  And at that time went driving because that was one of the prerequisites in order to go into management.  You had to learn the business from the bottom up.  And to this day, I would not have traded that experience for anything in the world because it gave me the credibility and the respect of the organization.  And I learned the organization from the bottom up, and I also realized that it was the fate and circumstances that brought me to UPS.  But it was the values, the integrity--the core values and the integrity that the company stands for that kept me there.  It was a partnership, and UPS is a sense of family, the same sense of family that I grew up with.  You know, through my career, through my different opportunities and experiences, both personally and professionally, the company was there for me.  And I would not trade that, but I think also too, here again, the sense in being another first, you know.  I found myself, once again, another first, but in a different environment.  And I can recall my first, my first job in, with a, a young--a gentleman, a Hispanic guy.  And Effie was hired off the street because of his fast, his fast talking.  But he did not, he could not drive, but he had everyone thinking--he was a, I called him a hustler.  He would actually have people be, who would drive for him, and he would do their hard work and their--all of this and things of that nature.  But so it was through the course of that--that was in California.  And then from there, different opportunities. You know, I think, given the fact of my, my training in English and journalism, I was able to take on numerous training and development jobs and, as well as, you know, just non-traditional type.  And also at the same time, not take things personal because again, here I was a female, and it wasn't so much my color, but I was a female in a male-dominated environment. So that I earned the respect of my peers and consequently, was rewarded as I began to move up the ladder.  And I think after a while, it became stubbornness because I wanted to be a role model, but I also wanted to make and pave the path for others, again, going back to that sense of purpose of in life.
Story_ID: 5611
Speaker 1: Well, how long were you actually in the field, so to speak, a driver--wearing brown?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, gosh, I--you know, actually, it was during that time that we caught a peak.  It was at Christmas, you know, where I would have to go back like for almost two, three--each, like two or three years, going back during the Christmastime.  I wasn't a full-fledged driver so to speak.  So I would spend in, a couple of months at a time.  Oh my God, I remember the first time going out there, there were bones that ached in my body I never thought I had.  And then also you had your challenges because, you know, the, the, the loading, the, the folks in the shipping area would come out and say, "Oh, where's the UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.] man?"  And then, you know, there, you're standing there.  And there were times that, you know, they would--at that time they didn't always help you, you know.  It's like, "You got this job, then you do this job."  And, and I was convinced that I was gonna do that job too.  So, and it was shortly after--and then after that I end up going into--you know, I was actually in management.  I was one of those management trainee, type of--I end up going into management while I was still driving.  So it was a, a dual type of experience.  And, you know, went into, at that time, we called it sales, you know, and a number of different assignments along the way.  My career took me from, from California to, to Arizona, with a change of, with a new, a new area of expertise.  One thing about UPS, it's like anything else.  You can come with, you can come with skill sets, but you'll be trained, you know, obviously, in the manner to do certain jobs and with the work ethics and the value that the company instilled, those skill sets will be transferable to whatever responsibilities that you were given or provided.  So, I--you know, I traveled around the country, reported to the corporate office, just have a number of different exposures, not realizing then that it was succession planning for me taking on bigger and more responsibilities.  It's, it's like demonstrating value.
Speaker 1: And what specifically were some of those early jobs?
Speaker 2: Well, I had what's called--at that time, we called them delivery information manager and, where you, where you go and when a package was delivered, and, you know, when you get it signed for, well I ran the operation where the clerical workforce would have to--when, when someone had to locate or inquire about a package, we had the responsibility for tracing the packages and also paying the claims.  And then from there, I became what's called a, a loss prevention or security manager.  And that for, for the sake of, I mean it's like the cops for UPS.  And I actually had a couple off-duty police officers that were part of my workforce.  And, you know, we did the you know, and that, and during that time, I went through investigative-type training.  And again, because UPS, looking to have a female work into all, and get the skill--get the training in all of those areas so that it would make you more valuable as you moved up the ladder.  And then I was part of a national audit team and where we went around the country and identified service challenges and offered recommendations for improvement for our services to our customers.  And I had what you call a hub representative, where I worked, where they actually sorted the packages and worked to supervise the workforce sorting the packages.  And there were times that I, and, and during that time I worked probably the hours of, I did the graveyard shift, you know, from midnight to, to beginning of day.  So, you name it, pretty much had an opportunity to experience all of the staff-level type of jobs.
Story_ID: 5612
Speaker 1: And how did you come to Atlanta [Georgia]?  When did you come?
Speaker 2: Well, I came to Atlanta by way, when our corporate headquarters [United Parcel Service, Inc.] moved from Greenwich, Connecticut to Atlanta.  At that time, I was--I thought I was going to go on and become, be what we called a business development, a customer service manager and take another move somewhere.  Again, I guess, right place, right time.  I landed in Atlanta.  And at that time, I was part of the corporate staff, and I recall being called in--I was on a business development planning team, you know, because I was instrumental in being part of some of our first--when we first started thinking about going into the air business, I was responsible--I was with, part of that team to help develop our first territory, serve guides and training materials, again, drawing back on my skill sets.  But, and so--I lost my train of thought (laughs).
Speaker 1: The job by, in Atlanta, when your first job--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, so then, then coming to Atlanta and after being part of the business development team, looking to do further business acquisitions, I--my manager called me in and said, "Evern, you've been asked to interview for a job in the [UPS] Foundation."  I said, "The Foundation?  What's the Foundation?"  And I'm thinking, "Oh, great, okay, here's another derailment."  So I go in and I interview for the job, for, it was the number two job, an associate director.  And, and I had been, pretty much that first year, kind of volunteering, getting involved in the community, because I was like, oh, wow, having been in--I had been Phoenix, Arizona.  I had been, I lived in Stamford, Connecticut.  I traveled all the time, so this was, I felt--all of a sudden, I was back in black Mecca, I'm thinking in a community, I'm like, wow.  So I got I engrossed in, in community activity and really got caught up into what [Dr.] Johnetta Cole [former President of Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] said, you know, "The price you pay for living on this earth is giving back."  So I actually got caught up in it, and you never know when you're being watched.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: You never know.  So when I was interviewed, and I think a combination of my community involvement, but more importantly, my skill sets, because at the time, the company was just beginning to change, getting into more programmatic type of charitable giving.  And the two major initiatives were the area of adult literacy and hunger.  After all these years, I got a chance to take my skill sets and apply them into the, into the field of literacy.  And I--that's when, that's how I ended up in the Foundation, and having--at the time we had some twelve programs.  We now have more than three hundred programs in, in four hundred-plus communities.  And we, you know, even though the challenges--and we've, in, in having the opportunity to help transcend our support from adult literacy to workplace and family literacy and then growing our different programs.  And I served in that number two role, and at the time, the, my two--both the number one and the number two persons were getting ready to retire.  So I had a very fast learning curve.
Speaker 1: When did you assume the job initially?  What year was this?
Speaker 2: In 1998.  Yes, 1998. And then, so I, I started in that role, and I have to, I'm thinking about the years, and I took over--was it 1998?  No, I take that back, because we moved here in '89 [1989], so I probably took the number two position in the early '90s [1990s], and I took over as the President and Executive Director in 1998.  So I worked in the number two capacity in a, in a succession planning mode for about four years, and then I took over as the president.  And being, the--again, being blessed to be a number, another first because it--in our fifty-three year history, the Foundation being nearly fifty-three years old, I am the first, out of the four heads of the Foundation, I am the first female and the first minority.
Speaker 1: Wonderful, wonderful.  And in terms of the time frame here, you took your first job with UPS in what year?  It was in the '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Seventy-four, 1974.  And from there, California--?
Speaker 2: California, actually from Detroit [Michigan], well, actually, it was, it was East Lansing, East Lansing, Michigan.  So from East Lansing to California to Arizona to Connecticut, and now to Atlanta. A gratifying--a part-time job that turned into a gratifying career.  And, you know, I never--you never know where fate takes you.  To end up being in the Foundation--first a job that I never sought because I didn't know any, I didn't any--I didn't even know it existed.  And to be able to be placed in a position, in a role to do good for others, that same, that same sense of purpose that was instilled to me early on, it was that fate that I knew--you know when something's right?  I knew this is what God meant for me.
Story_ID: 5613
Speaker 1: What do you feel is your greatest contribution in the role [President, UPS Foundation] that you are in now, here, at UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I think my greatest contribution in my role at UPS is that of what is our third major initiative, and that's our--that's in the area of volunteer management.  And, because it, it has, and it is through--I'm a firm believer that there is no single entity, whether civic, non-profit, or any corporation that will be able to address the issues that are facing our country and our society today.  And you can throw all the money in the world at a problem and an issue--it is the people that will bring life into it.  And to me, you know, volunteerism is--gives philanthropy a heartbeat.  So be it--to be able to be a catalyst on growing a movement specifically that's targeted to the non-profit industry, non-profit sector, to help them build the capacity and retention for the volunteers, individuals like you and me, that will help them deliver their services into--to this, into the communities where we live and work.  I like to call it "Just in time philanthropy."  But to be part of, to see a vision go from paper to reality has--I--sometimes I pinch myself to--because I am a firm believer that our work and our effort in this involvement, we've--today, over ten million dollars and, and countless volunteers, has enabled non-profit organizations to fulfill, at that time, their America's promise, if you recall, when they were challenged to be able to have a nurturing environment, a safe environment for youth to grow up in.  Well, our initiative enabled many non-profits to fulfill that promise.  And just as we were building these net--these best practices through these organizations, in order to be able to share them, not only for the sector, but for the communities and for other corporations to emulate, what happened?  September 11th [2001, terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.].  To this day, I am convinced that September 11 was not the defining moment of 2001.  It was the defining moment of our lifetime.  I knew then the sense of purpose and the importance of this volunteer impact initiative because the world, we realized that this country was not poised to deal with spontaneous volunteers.  But I think also, you're dealing with the total differences of humanity in terms of, you know, all the lessons learned and all the experiences that we had, we had gathered through the work of our non-profits and really learning how to experience and appreciate differences, to come together on common bonds and share an interest to make the world a better place.  Our work and, could never have been more timely.  So for me, I just--it's that humanity deal.  It's kind of like, "Okay, God, I, I think I got it.  I think I got it."  To be able to lead, lead by example and to have a, and to work for an organization that gets it.  It doesn't get too much better than that.  You know, and between that and to realize your purpose in life is about divine order, I get emotional when I think about it. I really do. Biological, as a woman, and as a family, it's huge.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, it is.
Speaker 2: It's certainly huge, and I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, no problem, no problem.
Speaker 2: So if I do anything, you know, it's what we call legacy leadership.  It's not about the leader.  It's not about who he or she leads.  It's about who he or she leaves.  I have been blessed within this organization and within the communities to have been touched by a number of leaders, and if I do nothing in life, to be able to, just be able to share what has been shared with me, I would leave here knowing it's a job well done.
Speaker 1: Yes, you exemplify I think what a man named Robert Greenleaf [essayist] called the 'Servant leader'.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One whose objective is not solely to, to be in charge of people, but to lead people to a--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) A better place.
Speaker 1: --better place.
Story_ID: 5614
Speaker 1: Out of all my experiences, I've had a, been blessed to do, I think one of the, one of them that really even transcends into the work we're doing now, is my experience, having an opportunity to go to Israel [in 2000] and being part of a--called Project Exchange.  And it's a non-profit, non-political group that is funded by individuals and foundations.  And, you know, it--where the whole, the whole issue was to be able to go over to Israel and to see the challenges of trying to live a secure life in an unsecure environment.  To see the co-existence of the Arabs and the Jews, to realize that Zionism is not just a religion, but a way of life.  But to also see that fifty years of struggle really dated back to before Christ, I can't--that changed my life.  And I also realized, to me, that, as my brother said when I got back, he said, "You know, that experience to you was afforded to you for a reason."  And to be with a group of women of all, non-Jewish faith, but between Hispanic, between Indian, between Asian, and that we could--and African American, to think about our experiences and see the experience--and, but the real issues were about the women issues.  The issues for women in terms of specifically religion and the rights that they had or did not have.  I think that, in and of itself, made me have even a more profound sense purpose that, as a woman, of what else I needed to do collectively--because I am a firm believer, if this world will ever see peace, it will, because of the collective efforts of women--because women can transcend across ethnicity, across, you name it, you know.  Women have a common bond when it comes to that.  And so that, collected with all the work and the efforts and experiences with our work in the area of the non-profit, the volunteer sector, you know, that coupled into what happened with September 11 [2001, terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, D.C.] and realizing, you know, were, we, ourselves are finding ourselves in a world, in a, trying to have a secure life in an unsecure environment.  You don't have to be in Israel and Palestine.  You don't have to because we're living it today.  And I realized that the world needs leaders that can be able to see that and help take us to another whole level.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's where I see myself ultimately in life.
Story_ID: 5615
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to add, anything I haven't asked you that you feel is important for people to know about you?
Speaker 2: You know what, I think that the fact that I am an ordinary woman that has been blessed to do extraordinary things by the grace of God and from the upbringing of a solid family and a remarkable company.
Story_ID: 5616
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I'm living my legacy.  I'm living my legacy.
Speaker 1: Yes, you are.
Speaker 2: So if anything, it's to pass on that legacy of leadership so that the next generation of leaders can move us forward because at some point, I don't know that I'll see peace in my lifetime.  But I would like to think that I put collectively a notch on that gun.  That will probably be my legacy.
Story_ID: 5617
Speaker 1: Life for women and girls outside this country, in many cases, is dismal.  As a matter of fact, the United Nations and others have shown that the rights and freedoms of women are directly tied to the economies in where they live and work.  So a lot of the research that we're doing in terms of the global philanthropy--the one thing about the UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.] Foundation, our efforts and our work is to be able to address emerging issues that face our society.  Now as we have grown as a global company, it's now that affects the world.  So be able to transcend those best practices and those successes that we've had as a good philanthropist and a well-managed company globally.  And I am so excited about our, after fifty-three years of being primarily a domestic company, with less than 1 percent of our philanthropy internationally, we now are growing that.  And I have a strategic plan that from now through 2007, which will match our centennial year as a company, and also mirror our plan of, as an organization, our philanthropy will grow globally as well.  I am so excited about that, extremely excited.  So if there's a legacy--a, a legacy that I hope to leave from a company perspective and a legacy as a senior manager of this organization, that would be one.  And also that will continue to well position our Foundation as a thought leader and as a significant player in addressing the issues that face our world.  You know, we realize that we take our living from the communities and where we live and work.  We take very serious our ability to be able to give back.  If there's anything that I've learned as, as UPSers, it's, we know that we're legacy leaders and we are fortunate that we have--it's one thing that keeps us that way as a culture.  And the same culture that brought me here and kept me here, and, and it's that same culture that we hope to breed globally.  And we're seeing it, you know.  When you're part of the Brown [UPS's] family, it becomes infectious.  It absolutely does.
Story_ID: 5618
Speaker 1: What message would you give to young people, specifically young African American girls and boys who want to go into the corporate world, what advice would you give them?
Speaker 2: I would certainly advise them to, don't take things personal, you know.  There are times that either actions or words--young people have a tendency to take them personally.  When you're in a corporate environment, and many times, it's just business.  But you also have to have wax on your back and realize that every day, you gotta have your game face on, every day.  And I think most importantly too is that you get wax on your back, and that you do not--don't let anyone minimize your existence.  And above all, when all--make sure that you keep your faith first.  And if you don't have it, you better get some 'cause you're gonna need it.
Story_ID: 5619
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important, this project, why is it important for people to know the history of African American people, in particular?
Speaker 2: You know what, because our history really isn't written.  It's not written by us.  It was written by other people, going back to my point, where we let others define our existence.  If you look at--take for example, the Jewish people.  They certainly have made a mark in terms of holding the country, holding the world accountable what happened to them during the Holocaust.  We're still asking for, "Where is our forty acres and a mule?"  I like to say, you know, we get wrapped up into the minutiae.  That's why, you know, in many cases, collectively, we haven't gotten too far as a race.  There've been individual pockets, and we've had tremendous leadership that have led by example, to lead by example. But somewhere along the line, we've lost some momentum.  And we need to get it back, and we're only gonna do that by hearing about stories.  I can tell you, what has encouraged me to, to continue my, my effort is those legacy leaders, the, Dr. Johnetta Cole, the Dr. Dorothy Height, you know, to be able to sit down and have conversations.  And, even with some of my own peers, you know, I have--we call them the divas, you know, to be able to sit down with the Monica Kaufmans, the Ingrid Saunders Jones, the Alexis Scott Reeves, and, you know, to be able to see what we can do collectively and be able to be able to give a hand up because we're in a position to be able to do that for the young men and women that are coming on.  Leading by example.  The Malcolm Berkleys [interview observer], you know, the other young men and women that are coming up within our organization that have all of the skill sets in the world, but you know today, it takes more than technical knowledge.  It takes more than technical expertise.
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 2: So it's being able--what HistoryMakers are doing is to be able to pass along, more than just the written word, but the spoken word.  And when you capture in ways that never have been done before, that truly, of itself, will make, begin to make a mark for us, for others to do even more so.  Because you've got the underground rail--we can name a number of things that are around, but how much has been documented.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So I think the HistoryMakers will make history.
Story_ID: 5620
Speaker 1: That's my father Alfred [Gibson].  And that was taken when he was about seventeen years old, just before--right when he and my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] got married.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper's father, Alfred Gibson, at age seventeen, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5621
Speaker 1: That's my mother.  Doesn't she look--don't I look like her (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear).
Speaker 1: If you see her in person, yeah.  But my mother, Vivian Gibson, and it's again, she was seventeen.  At that time, she was Vivian Phillips, I believe, just before they got married.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper's mother, Vivian Gibson,  at age seventeen, ca. 1949.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5622
Speaker 1: That's my parents and I, Mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] and Dad [Alfred Gibson], when I lived in Connecticut.  And we had went on a little excursion into New York [New York].  You can actually see the Statue of Liberty behind me.  And they were coming--my parents always managed to visit me wherever I was relocated, to get me settled.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (middle) with her mother, Vivian Gibson and father, Alfred Gibson in New York, New York, ca. 1980s.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5623
Speaker 1: Hillary Rodham Clinton, and this is actually when she was, I think--she might have been still First Lady [of the United States] then.  And that's when she was still First Lady, and there was an event that she was a keynote speaker of, and, and we got to spend some time together.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (left) attends an event with First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton as keynote speaker, ca. 1993-2001.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5624
Speaker 1: That's Reverend Jesse Jackson.  We were at, here, its, actually, he was here in Atlanta [Georgia] and I believe I was being honored at a, either honored or speaking at a church here in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (left) with Reverend Jesse Jackson at a church event, Atlanta, Georgia, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5625
Speaker 1: That's Colin Powell.  And we were again at an event up in Michigan.  And he was actually the keynote speaker.  And I was there with, so--he was the keynote speaker at Hillside College [Hillside, Michigan], and which is a college that, that UPS [United Parcel Service, Inc.], or the [UPS] Foundation had supported.  And I was there with some of the students.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (right) with Colin Powell at an event at Hillside College, Hillside, Michigan, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5626
Speaker 1: In the blue, from left to right, that is Vicki Palmer.  She is a senior executive for Coca-Cola Enterprises [Inc.], and next to Vicki is myself, Evern Cooper, and then next to me is our mayor, Shirley Franklin of Atlanta [Georgia], and next to Mayor Franklin is Ingrid Saunders Jones, who is the Senior Vice President for the Coca-Cola Company, and seated in front of us with that lovely hat and her signature, is the President Emeritus, Dr. Dorothy Height, for the National Council of Negro Women [Inc.].
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper with others at an event for the National Council of Negro Women, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 2002-2004; (L. to R.): Coca-Cola executive, Vicki Palmer, Evern Cooper; Mayor Shirley Franklin of Atlanta, Georgia, Coca-Cola executive Ingrid Saunders Jones, and President Emeritus of the National Council of Negro Women, Dr. Dorothy Height.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5627
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, Evern, and on one of the little Easter Sundays, and my parents [Vivian Gibson and Alfred Gibson] had dressed me up and, prior to going to church, my little patent leather high tops, you can't see 'em, and my little braids that my mom would always put on top of my head.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper as a child, dressed for Easter Sunday, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5628
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my sister [Joanne Gibson] and I, with our Easter bonnets on one Easter, getting ready to be, headed out to church with our cute little bags.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you're on the?
Speaker 2: I am, I am on the--I'm the darkest one (laughter), I mean, I'm the one with the bangs.
Speaker 1: [Evern Cooper with her sister, Joanne Gibson, on Easter Sunday, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5629
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, my grandfather, my Grandaddy Roberts.  And that was taken, I think I was probably about fourteen then, thirteen, fourteen.  And that was taken in Clarendon, excuse me, in Roe, Arkansas in a part of their front yard.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper at age fourteen with her grandfather, Granddaddy Roberts, Roe, Arkansas, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5630
Speaker 1: That is my, my husband-to-be, my fianc, Elze Epps and that's me in the middle, Evern Cooper, and my God, this the late [Atlanta, Georgia Mayor] Maynard Jackson, the role model, mentor and a friend and just a great individual.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper with her fiancee (left), Elze Epps, and former Atlanta, Georgia Mayor Maynard Jackson (right).  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5631
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my mom [Vivian Laverne Gibson] and dad [Alfred Gibson] on their fiftieth anniversary.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year that was?
Speaker 1: Three years ago [2001].
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper's parents, Alfred and Vivian Laverne Gibson, at their fiftieth anniversary, 2001.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5632
Speaker 1: This is picture of me and my siblings, starting with, up on the top with the white shirt, that's my oldest brother, Harold [Gibson].  And next to him is my baby brother, Patrick [Henry Gibson], and Patrick has his hands on my only sister, Joanne [Gibson].
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (front row, left) with her three siblings, Harold, Patrick Henry and Joanne Gibson, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5633
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Billye Aaron, Hank Aaron's wife, myself in the middle and [U.S.] President [William 'Bill'] Clinton.  And this was actually at Hank Aaron's sixty-fifth birthday party, which was five years ago [1999].
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (center) with [U.S.] President Bill Clinton (left) and Hank Aaron's wife, Billye (right) at Hank Aaron's sixty-fifth birthday celebration, 1999.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5634
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, a former CEO [Chief Executive Officer of United Parcel Service, Inc., Kent C.] 'Oz' Nelson and in the middle is myself, and, of course, the other individual is [Archibishop] Desmond Tutu.  And we were co-chairing an awards, a Golden Apple Awards together.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (center), UPS executive 'Oz' Nelson (left) and Archbishop Desmond Tutu (right) at a Golden Apple Awards function, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5635
Speaker 1: [U.S.] President [William 'Bill'] Clinton and this was at a education summit that I participated in.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (right) with U.S. President Bill Clinton at an education summit at the White House, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5636
Speaker 1: Former President [George H.W.] Bush, number forty-one, and we're actually, I think we were in Florida, yeah, at that time, at an event.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (right) with former U.S. President George H. W. Bush at an event in Florida, not dated, from the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5637
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Project Exchange group that the leadership women's group that I went to Israel with.
Speaker 2: What year, the date?
Speaker 1: 2000.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (sixth from right) with other women leaders on a visit to Israel, 2000.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5638
Speaker 1: That was actually last year, and that's my fianc Elze, and this was actually taken in Ocean Reef [Myrtle Beach, South Carolina].  We had been on, where he likes to go to bone fish, and we were playing golf.  And he even noticed the fact that, that my golf had gotten, you just never know again, when you're being watched.  He actually noticed that my golf game had gotten better.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper (left) with her fiance, Elze Epps (right), and former U.S. President George H.W. Bush, Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, 2003.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
Story_ID: 5639
Speaker 1: That was a, at one of the holy, you know, holy churches in Israel and going through a ceremony of lighting candles for peace.
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the 2000 trip [with Project Exchange]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [Evern Cooper lights a candle for peace at a church in Israel, 2000.  From the collection of Evern Cooper.]
